1518th

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING

Friday, 19 May 1967,
at 4.30 p.m.

Official Records
FIFTH SPECIAL SESSION

CONTENTS

In favour: Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sudan, Syria, Thai­
land, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic of
Tanzania, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina,
Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Costa Rica, Cyprus,
Dahomey, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Ivory
Coast.

Page

Agenda item 7:
Question of South West Africa (continued) ...

NEW YORK

1

President; M r . A b d u l R a h m a n P A Z H W A K
(Afghanistan).

AGENDA ITEM 7
Question of South West Africa (continued)

1. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly has exhausted
the list of speakers in explanation of vote before
the voting. Since no new proposals have been received
and since there are no other representatives who
wish to speak before the voting, we shall proceed to
the vote.

Against: Portugal, South Africa
Abstaining: Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Mongolia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Romania,
Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland, France, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy.

2. The only proposal formally before the Assembly
is that contained in document A/L.516/Rev.l. Members
are aware that the representative of Ethiopia proposed
this morning [1517th meeting], on behalf of the sponsors
of that draft resolution, that the United Nations
council for South West Africa, as mentioned in
section II, paragraph 1, of the draft resolution,
should comprise eleven Member States.
3. Before the vote is taken, I wish to remind the
General Assembly of the note prepared by the
Secretary-General [A/6653], in accordance with rule
154 of the rules of procedure, on the financial implica­
tions of the draft resolution.

The draft resolution was adopted by 85 votes to 2,
with 30 abstentions.
6. The PRESIDENT: Section II, paragraph 1 of the
resolution just adopted provides that the United Nations
Council for South West Africa, comprising eleven
Member States, should be elected during this session.
Unless I hear any suggestion to the contrary, I shall
put this matter before the Assembly not later than
Tuesday afternoon, 23 May.

4. Before putting to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document A/L.516/Rev.l—and a roll-call
vote has been requested—I should like to request the
Under-Secretary for General Assembly Affairs to
explain the voting procedure to the Members of the
Assembly.

7. I shall now give the floor to representatives who
wish to explain their votes.

5. Mr. NARASIMHAN (Under-Secretary for General
Assembly Affairs): In respect of the roll-call vote
on this item, may I request representatives to be
kind enough, at the same time as they call off their
votes when their names are called—and not before—to
press the corresponding button in the small panel
on their desks: the green button, at the extreme
left, for "Yes"; the red button, at the extreme right,
for "No"; and the amber button, in the centre, for
"Abstention". May I again request representatives,
at the same time as they press the corresponding
button, to call their votes orally.

8. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I wish to make
a short statement in explanation of my abstention
from the vote on the resolution. My statement can
be short because twice on this issue I have made
the position and policy of my Government clear in
this Assembly.
9. My delegation did not vote for resolution 2145
(XXI), for reasons which I have already fully explained.
We have constantly in mind our obligation not only
to the people of South West Africa, but also to the
United Nations itself. We have consistently argued
that we have an obligation not to raise false hopes,
not to deceive ourselves or anyone else, and not to
believe that we can overcome real barriers by words

A vote was taken by roll-call.
Jamaica, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.

1

A/PV.1518

2

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

alone. We were convinced that resolution 2145 (XXI)
was likely to lead not to advance but to dissension
and deadlock. But that did not mean that we were
negative; far from it. We stated and advocated the
practical and constructive course which we considered
the right one. Let me state again the aim we set,
the decision we took, and the method we proposed.
10. The aim was to enable all the people of South
West Africa to proceed to free andfull self-determina­
tion and independence. The conclusion which I stated
last October in the General Assembly was that the
South African Government had forfeited the right
to administer the Mandate over South West Africa.
As to method, our contention throughout has been that,
having reached that vital conclusion, we should
together thoroughly study all questions relevant to
the advance which we wish to achieve and then act,
not by words alone but by considered and deliberate
action within our clear capacity.
11. We greatly regret that the pledge we gave to
play a full and constructive part in considering
methods and means and working out tactics and
strategy and examining all legal and other aspects
of the problem was not welcomed and accepted by
others, and that the possibility of going forward in
full agreement was therefore lost.
12. We were moreover prepared to support the practi­
cal action proposed in the Ad Hoc Committee by a
number of countries, including Canada, Italy and the
United States [A/6640, para. 84]. And again it is a
matter for regret to us that the practical proposals
then put forward were not accepted.
13. Two courses were proposed. We believe that the
course we advocated could have opened the way to
effective progress. We cannot see that resolution
2145 (XXI) and the resolution now adopted will do so.
So, in abstaining from the vote today, I reaffirm
the aim and the decision and the method which we
have throughout consistently supported.
14. Mr. CSATOBDAY (Hungary): The Hungarian dele­
gation has participated in the general debate on the
question of South West Africa with the sincere
intention to add its useful contribution to the cause of
the freedom and independence of the people of South
West Africa. We were guided by the same purpose
in the course of the consultations which took place
among different groups of Member States before
the voting.
15. My delegation would like to express its apprecia­
tion for the kind words used by several delegations
in commenting in the general debate, and privately as
well, on the positive contribution of the socialist
countries to the struggle against colonialism and
imperialism in general and against the minority racist
regime of South Africa in particular.
16. This special session of the General Assembly
has just adopted a resolution on South West Africa
sponsored by seventy-nine Member States. My delega­
tion, as is known, abstained from the vote. We
consider it most unfortunate that a situation should
have arisen in the United Nations in which my delega­
tion, acting on the basis of principle, has found it
impossible to vote in favour of a draft aiming at the
liquidation of colonial rule in Africa. I should like

to explain briefly the reasons for my delegation's
attitude.
17. First, we firmly maintain that every people has
the right to self-determination and independence.
We understand self-determination to mean that every
people should decide itself everything concerning its
internal matters; these should not be decided from
the outside. Thus, an indigenous population should
exercise the power within the borders of its own
country. In dealing with the problem of South West
Africa our guideline has been the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. In paragraph 5 of that historic resolution
the General Assembly declared:
"Immediate steps shall be taken, in Trust and
Non-Self-Governing Territories or all other terri­
tories which have not yet attained independence, to
transfer all powers to the peoples of those terri­
tories, without any conditions or reservations, in
accordance with their freely expressed will and
desire, without any distinction as to race, creed or
colour, in order to enable them to enjoy complete
independence and freedom."
18. Many speeches, resolutions, exhortations have
been voiced in this hall. I do not wish to repeat them,
but we think that this passage in the Declaration
says clearly that immediate steps should be taken.
"Steps" mean concrete measures to achieve the aimthat is, independence for the people of South West
Africa; and "immediate" means that we should not
postpone in any way a decision or the taking or these
steps. In requesting immediate independence for South
West Africa we are acting in full observance of the
Declaration contained in resolution 1514 (XV).
19. Secondly, many delegations have called attention
to the present realities of the situation in South
West Africa. In discussing the realities, we cannot
ignore the most important aspect of the problem; the
political, economic and strategic reasons for the close
co-operation of the NATO Powers with the white
minority rSgime in South Africa. Unfortunately, no
reference was made in the resolution to this stumbl­
ing-block on the road leading to the independence of
South West Africa. Instead, tact, politeness and a
deference to the interests of those Powers and to
their opinions have been expressed.
20. My delegation maintains that without putting an
end to this heinous and criminal co-operation, carried
out in spite of many United Nations resolutions, we
cannot effectively help the people of South West
Africa to gain genuine independence. How long will
those Powers abuse our patience and, above all, abuse
the patience of the people of South West Africa? It
would seem to be a mere illusion to expect the major
NATO Powers to co-operate in deeds in achieving
that goal. The aggressive activities of the United
States in South-East Asia, among others, clearly
indicate the true nature of imperialism and coloni­
alism. It uses force to oppress the freedom-loving
people of Viet-Nam, in spite of the mounting indigna­
tion of world public opinion, and is prepared to commit
similar crimes elsewhere if its vested interests or
ambitions for power meet opposition.

1518th meeting — 19 May 1967

21. Thirdly, during the existence of our Organization
every year tremendous efforts have been made to
persuade the racist minority rggime of South Africa
to abandon its illegal occupation of the Territory of
South West Africa and its cruel policy of apartheid.
Considering the aggressive attitude of the minority
racist regime of South Africa, on what basis can
we count on the co-operation of that regime in the
future? That reasonable question is still waiting to
be answered. Why is a dialogue needed? On what
grounds and how is it to be carried out? We had an
opportunity of hearing an anser from representatives
of South Africa. They have been present in our hall,
not only their Ambassador but also special emis­
saries from that rSgime—high officials. Did they
have any contacts with the African people or with
delegations that are interested in solving the problem
of independence for South West Africa? Did they
express any intention to satisfy the rightful demands
and to execute the resolutions adopted by our Organiza­
tion? We have only heard one word from them during
this session of the General Assembly, and that is the
word they spoke during the voting: "No". That is their
answer to the whole resolution and to all the attempts
for a dialogue for the settlement and solution of this
problem. Thus, in the view of my delegation, any
attempt to create contacts with them or to start a
dialogue with them is only delaying the independence of
South West Africa. Instead of raising false hopes, we
ought to condemn that regime for its illegal occupation
of the Territory, which as a result of the acceptance
of resolution 2145 (XXI) came under the direct
responsibility of the United Nations.
22. Fourthly, in the view of the Hungarian delegation,
no outside administration should be imposed on any
territory in the world, on any people that is striving
for independence. Any such outside administration has
inherent dangers of abuse of power. It would have
danger that the situation might get out of the hands
of the Organization, that a bureaucracy might be
established and that the problem might not be properly
settled. It might give an opportunity for personal
ambitions and not promote the true interests of the
local people. We have already in the past had very
bitter and bad experiences. We cannot delay the
independence of the Territory by making experiments,
especially in a situation where uncertainty prevails
over the outcome of the experiments.
23. Fifthly, by the assumption of administrative
functions, such power is given to the proposed
council that it calls for the utmost precaution. I am
referring to the power to promulgate laws, decrees
and administrative regulations up to the time of the
establishment of the legislative assembly and the
taking of necessary measures for the maintenance
of law and order. We cannot ignore the fact that in
such a council the members might have different
approaches to the solution of the same problems.
Each member might differ according to his background
and interests, and these conflicting interests might
result in bad resolutions and not in promoting the
genuine interests of the local population. Besides,
such a council would need an administrative staff
which would also be composed of foreigners. They
would constitute a link between the council and the
action in the field, and through this particular means

3

they might even modify or change the meaning of
correct decisions, as has happened on other occasions.
In our view, these powers must be exercised by the
representatives of the indigenous peoples. The func­
tions of the United Nations in this respect should be
restricted solely to promoting activities of this
kind by the local government of the people.
24. Sixthly, according to section V of the resolution,
the Council is to report to the General Assembly at
intervals not exceeding three months on its administra­
tion, and there is no provision for the control and
direction of the Council in the period of time between
the sessions of the General Assembly. I think that
even the sponsors of the draft resolution did not
have the intention to establish a self-governing body,
in the form of this Council in the Territory, whose
activities would be very difficult to control.
25. During the consultations no explanation was given
regarding the situation that would arise when an
urgent consideration of a particular problem would be
necessary in order to decide how to guarantee the
best interests of the South West African people. The
Council might very frequently meet such a situation
when advice and direction would be needed. Judging
the problem of South West Africa objectively, the
chances for the co-operation of the minority white
regime in the implementation of the United Nations
resolution on South West Africa are not greater now
than they were before; that is, they are practically nil.
The resolution does not give a clear answer regard­
ing that very possible outcome. Thus we are again
losing valuable months without bringing nearer the
independence of the Territory. In order to avoid such
a development, the socialist countries, including
Hungary, have suggested giving an organic role to the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Inplementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and to the Organization of African Unity in the
carrying out of tne provisions of this resolution.
26. This proposal was prompted by the experience
that in recent years that Committee has proved its
efficiency in handling colonial issues, including the
question of South West Africa. Also well known is
the extent to which the Organization of African Unity,
by its resolutions on different colonial issues and by'
other practical means, has contributed to the solution
of many problems at the United Nations.
27. The involvement of the Committee of Twenty-four
and the Organization of African Unity in the implemen­
tation of the present resolution, therefore, would not
lessen the responsibility of the United Nations, but
would raise it to a higher level, would increase its
control and efficiency, and would at the same time
accelerate the process of decolonization in South
West Africa. I am still wondering why this aspect
of the problem was not given the necessary attention
by the sponsors.
28. Seventhly, turning to the financial implications of
the implementation of the resolution, my delegation
maintains that the United Nations should hold responsi­
ble the colonial and other Powers which are usurping
the human and material resources of the territory.
They should cover such expenditures. The United

4

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

Nations should in no way contribute to their continuing
role. Otherwise, we would create a very dangerous
precedent which would rather encourage than dis­
courage the colonial Powers to continue the exploita­
tion of the remaining colonies, including South West
Africa. To independent South West Africa, on the other
hand, my country will gladly render economic and
other assistance in a selfless way.
29. My delegation has always paid very significant
attention to the struggle of peoples for self-determina­
tion and independence. The Hungarian Government, in
accordance with its modest possibilities, has extended
and is extending political, economic and all other
assistance to peoples fighting against imperialism
and colonialism.
30. We appreciate very much the endeavours of the
Afro-Asian and Latin American countries to find a
solution for the independence of South West Africa
by the presentation of the resolution on South West
Africa. Although my delegation has expressed some
reservations in connexion with certain parts of the
resolution, I should like to assure the co-sponsors
that in the genuine efforts and positive steps they
undertake for the independence of South West Africa
and to help the people of South West Africa to over­
come the nefarious attempts of the colonialist and
neo-colonialist Powers, and in intervention to prevent
this development, they can always count on the co­
operation of my delegation and my country.
31. Mr. HAMBRO (Norway): When General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI) was adopted last year, the
majority in favour of that resolution was impressive.
But, still, concern was felt because two permanent
members of the Security Council were unable to vote
for the resolution and two other members made
their affirmative votes contingent upon various verbal
reservations.
32. It seems to us that the experience of the inter­
vening months has proved that this concern was not
unfounded and that the General Assembly should
proceed with the greatest caution in subsequent
efforts to implement the resolution.
33. The resolution changed the status of South West
Africa within this Organization. The South African
presence in the Territory is no longer based legally
on the Mandate, but forms a purely factual situation
without any basis in the law of the United Nations.
This factual situation is henceforth in conflict with
the law of the Organization, and must therefore
be changed. It is the task of the Organization to
make the actual circumstances conform to the legal
situation and to spare no effort which could realisti­
cally be made to bring this about.
34. It is true that support of the major Powers was
important last year, when the General Assembly
settled some basic principles with regard to South
West Africa, and it is even more true today that the
support of the major Powers is absolutely essential
for the implementation of that resolution.
35. Before the vote was taken today, it was quite
clear that the resolution could not command the
kind of majority which was obtained in favour of the
resolution of last year. Of particular importance,

to our mind, is the fact that two of the permanent
members of the Security Council who voted in favour
of the resolution last year found themselves forced
to abstain this year. Yet, it is quite clear that,
in the last resort, the Security Council may be asked
for enforcement measures. It is open to doubt whether
the permanent members will uphold in the Council
what they have been unable to support in the General
Assembly.
36. Furthermore, it seems to our delegation that the
resolution goes beyond what is justified by political
realities, in so far as it envisages an immediate
presence in the Territory is no longer based legally
opposed—without in any way indicating how this pres­
ence will come about. Nor are we convinced that the
provisions for a United Nations administration for
the Territory, as set out in the resolution, represent
the most practical solution to the problems that
would follow the withdrawal of the present de facto
administration. The United Nations would be faced
with organizational difficulties of unprecedented
magnitude in attempting to discharge a responsibility
which would cover all governmental activity in the
Territory. We believe that this enormous task would
require, in addition to universal support, much more
study and planning than has so far taken place.
37. It seems to us, therefore, that the adoption
of this resolution will raise false hopes and indicate
to the peoples of the world that the Organization
is able to take steps which at present are not possible.
38. If this resolution does not achieve its goals,
it may weaken the Organization without having helped
the people of South West Africa. Therefore, the
Norwegian delegation was not able to vote in favour
of the resolution which was just adopted. This does
not mean that we have changed our position of
last year. We voted in favour of resolution 2145
(XXI), which was a resolution of principle, and my
Government is ready to vote for new resolutions
implementing that resolution, provided they have a
reasonable chance of being executed and will bring
effective help towards the freedom of South West
Africa.
39. Mr. TOMOROWICZ (Poland): If I take the floor
at this late stage of the proceedings on the present
point on our agenda, it is because I deem it my
duty to explain as briefly as possible the motives
which prompted my delegation to abstain from voting
on resolution A/L.516/Rev.l, much as we wished to
be together with our Afro-Asian friends also in this
procedural act. I can be brief—indeed I feel compelled
to be brief—in explaining our position on this matter
because elaboration at this stage would tend to be
repetitious, especially since I trust that, on the basis
of our statements in the general debate, and in the
bilateral and multilateral discussions we had the
opportunity to have, there can be no room now for
any doubts whatsoever as to our firmness and devotion
to the struggle for the full implementation of the
important aims given to all of us by resolution 2145
(XXI). I am pleased to say that we have also had
here ample testimony of the full understanding of
our position in that respect, in the interventions of
a number of important African representatives.

1518th meeting — 19 May 1967

40. My delegation is deeply convinced that the
resolution contained in A/L.516/Rev.l should have
contained such provisions as would enable fulfilment
in practice of all the basic aims of resolution 2145
(XXI), and we wanted to see those provisions made
effective to eliminate all loss of time and to make
use of all ways and means available to our Organiza­
tion in that respect.
41. I trust that here we are in full agreement
with the Afro-Asian group. Where we differed in
our discussions was in the realm of methods to be
adopted.
42. With all regrets and hesitation, after making
a thorough and honest analysis of the resolution
which has just been adopted, we have to admit that
we have serious doubts about whether it will lead
to a speedy fulfilment of the aforementioned aims.
43. To make the resolution effective, we wanted
it to leave no doubt whatsoever as to our total
condemnation of the position taken by the Government
of South Africa, to exercise pressure upon all those
Members which have important economic, political
and diplomatic relations with South Africa to discon­
tinue all their activities in those fields—activities
which, in the final analysis, have strengthened the
position of the Pretoria r§gime—and to make them
use their weight to crush the obstinacy of the South
Africans. We believe that it is for this Organization
to collaborate fully with the African States to help
the people of South West Africa to enter directly into
the administration of their own territory, and not to
be a replacement for their administration, which
may only slow down the process of the emancipation
and liberation of the people of South West Africa.
44. May I take this opportunity to look for a moment
into the future, which in this respect, we trust, is
most important, and once again to reiterate our full
readiness and resolution to continue to co-operate
with our Afro-Asian friends in the struggle for a
free, independent and sovereign South West Africa.
45. Mr. PATRICIO (Portugal): Mr. President, as this
is the first time I have had the opportunity to speak
from this rostrum, I wish, in the name of the Portu­
guese delegation, to offer our felicitations on your
election to preside over the deliberations of the
fifth special session of the General Assembly.
46. When on 27 October 1966, the General Assembly,
at its twenty-first session, adopted resolution 2145
(XXI) on the question of South West Africa, the
Portuguese delegation made clear the reasons, which
were mainly juridical, why we could not support
its provisions. The present resolution [A/L.516/Rev.l]
is intended to implement those provisions. Con­
sequently, the Portuguese delegation could not do
anything other than assume the same position as
last year and cast a negative vote this time also.
We may add that the misgivings which we had
reason to voice on the former occasion remain and
that no new elements have arisen to alter that
basic position.
47. Mr. DE BEUS (Netherlands): When my delegation
voted for resolution 2145 (XXI) on South West Africa
during the twenty-first session of the General As­

5

sembly, it made it clear that it considered the decision
to terminate the Mandate exercised by South Africa
entirely justified in view of the non-comuliance by
that country with the provisions of the Mandate
Agreement. At the same time, my delegation made
equally clear its reluctance for the United Nations
to assume immediately a direct responsibility for
the administration of the Territory, convinced as it
was that that provision not be carried out in practice.
Mr. Rossides (Cyprus), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
48. On 27 October 1966 my delegation stated:
"My delegation has, from the beginning, however,
been reluctant to accept a resolution or a stipulation
which cannot be carried out in practice in the fore­
seeable future. Accepting resolutions which we know
in advance cannot be implemented devalues the
resolutions of the General Assembly which can
be only to the ultimate harm of the United Nations
and to all of its Members. It is for that reason
that my delegation still harbours a reservation
with regard to ... the final provision of operative
paragraph 4 of the resolution
Under the present
wording of this section of paragraph 4, the United
Nations would be obliged to assume immediately
a direct responsibility itself for the administration
of the Territory. Such a stipulation could, in our
opinion, not be carried out in practice..." [1454th
meeting, para. 98].
49. Nevertheless, my delegation stated that, while
maintaining its reservation with regard to operative
paragraph 4, it did not wish to withhold its support
from the resolution as a whole.
50. Since then, nearly half a year has elapsed and
no progress has in fact been made on the way to
the assumption of the direct responsibility for the
Territory which the United Nations then undertook.
The Ad Hoc Committee for South West Africa,
notwithstanding valiant efforts by its members, has
been unable to come to a common recommendation
for the "practical means" by which that should be done
according to resolution 2145 (XXI).
51. The vote which has just been taken on the
latest resolution concerning South West Africa has
brought no change in the basic attitude of my delegation,
nor has it decreased our misgivings about adopting
resolutions when we know that they cannot be imple­
mented in the foreseeable future. And we do know
that the resolution just adopted can neither be imple­
mented nor enforced without the active participation
and support of those who have the power to do so. The
adoption of a decision without their support, as has
just been done, means merely adding another paper
resolution to the long list of unexecuted resolutions
regarding South West Africa. In the view of my
delegation, it was not wise to take a further step on
the road towards the creation on paper of an adminis­
tration for South West Africa without first trying to
secure implementation of the first and most vital
part of the resolution of October 1966, namely to
obtain access to South West Africa.
52. For somewhat less than half a century South
Africa has been the administering Power over South

6

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

West Africa, and its administration there continues.
That is contrary to resolution 2145 (XXI), but no
purpose is served by ignoring the fact. Having termi­
nated the Mandate, the United Nations should, in our
opinion, now concentrate its efforts on the first
practical steps to carry this decision into practice,
rather than formulating new and more far-reaching
decisions which cannot be carried out for the moment.
The first step should, we believe, be to obtain a
United Nations presence in South West Africa. It is
that step that was central in the proposal made earlier
by Canada, Italy and the United States, which my
delegation would have been able to support because
it would, in our view, have been a realistic attempt
to implement resolution 2145 (XXI).
53. It would be idle to suppose, in the circumstances
as they present themselves, that practical means
to assume responsibility over South West Africa
will be easily found. But it would be even less
realistic to suppose that a resolution of a more
stringent nature than resolution 2145 (XXI) will bring
a solution merely by the force of its language. Instead
of furthering the implementation of resolution 2145
-(XXI), the newly adopted resolution will—we are
reluctantly forced to state—create new and vaster
problems for the near future.
54. The resolution that has now been adopted foresees
that possibility, true enough, by requesting the Security
Council to take "appropriate measures" to make
possible the assumption of United Nations administra­
tion in South West Africa. This reference to the
Security Council implies that some time in the
near future the Council may be asked to address itself
to the matter in order to enforce the relevant
decision of the Assembly. It is our feeling that
the provisions of the Charter concerning enforcement
action, which were designed with a view to enabling
the Council to restore peace once it had been dis­
turbed, were not intended to cover a situation such
as that now prevailing in South West Africa.
55. The resolution that the Assembly has adopted
today will—we fear—remain a dead letter and will,
in addition, break the near-unanimity that prevailed
seven months ago.
56. For those reasons my delegation was not able to
vote for this resolution.
57. Mr. WALDHEIM (Austria): In its intervention
before the General Assembly on 27 October 1966
[1453rd meeting], the Austrian delegation made clear
its position on the question of South West Africa.
Our attitude on this burning problem is therefore
well known to this Assembly. Resolution 2145 (XXI),
which was supported by my delegation, opened a new
chapter in the history of this Organization and paved
the way for the solution of one of the most urgent
problems of our time. It established special responsi­
bilities for the United Nations which now have to
be discharged.
58. Our attitude on the question of South West
Africa has not changed since last October. We
were and we are firm supporters of the principle
of self-determination and of the right of colonial
countries to decide freely on their future and to
accede of their own free will to full independence.

We now have to give evidence that we are willing
to carry out what we eloquently idealize. We must,
therefore, find ways to discharge the responsibility
we have taken upon ourselves under resolution 2145
(XXI) of the twenty-first session of the General
Assembly, however difficult that might be. Although
there has been general agreement on the final aim,
the suggestions for action by the United Nations
made in this Assembly are, as you all know, widely
different.
59. The draft resolution originally submitted by the
Afro-Asian delegations [A/L.516] called for an
administrative body to proceed to South West Africa
to take over the administration of the territory;
in the original proposal by the Latin America delega­
tions [A/6640, para. 93], the council to be created
was to enter into contact with South Africa; in the
proposal by Canada, Italy and the United States
[A/6642, para. 84], the council was to have no
administrative function, but to co-operate with a
special representative, who was to establish the
necessary contacts with all representative elements
in the Territory.
60. Whereas it was possible, after a series of con­
sultations between the sponsors of the Afro-Asian
and the Latin American draft resolutions, to work
out a common text, it was unfortunately not possible
to reconcile the proposals contained in this document
with the suggestions made by the delegations of Italy,
Canada and the United States. We have to note that
the complexity of the problem prevented the Assembly
from reaching unanimous agreement. That was indeed
regrettable.
61. The Austrian delegation is fully aware of the
difficulties that stand in the way of achieving the
goal set out in last year's resolution. We have
reason to fear that it cannot be achieved in the time
in which we should like to see it achieved. Shocking
as it may be, the present reality cannot be overlooked.
In our approach to the question of replacing the
de facto administration by a new administration which
draws its legitimacy from the decision of the United
Nations, we have to take this reality into consideration.
62. There is wide agreement that contact has to be
established with the de facto administrator in order
to lay down the procedure for transferring the
Territory with the least possible upheaval. This
attempt, in the opinion of my delegation, has to be
made in order to explore all the possibilities for
a peaceful solution and to set the stage for further
actions of the United Nations. Considerable progress
was made in this respect during the consultations
which took place between the sponsors of the original
draft resolutions and which led to the introduction
of document A/L.516/Rev.l.
63. I should like to express to the sponsors of this
resolution our appreciation for their tireless efforts,
for their patience and perseverance in trying to work
out through mutual concessions a compromise text
which should serve as a basis for further actions
of this Assembly. We had hoped that those efforts
would lead to a draft resolution acceptable to all.
We are sorry to note that this could not be achieved.
The historic resolution 2145 (XXI) is followed by a
resolution enjoying less support. It does not have

1518th meeting — 19 May 1967

the backing of the permanent members of the Security
Council. We sincerely believe that only a resolution
which has the full and active support of those Powers
also can enable the United Nations to achieve, without
delay, the goal set out in resolution 2145 (XXI).
64. We have to continue on the road of last year's
decision, which found such broad agreement in the
General Assembly. The fact that the resolution just
adopted does not have the full support of the member­
ship, especially of the permanent members of the
Security Council, leads us to doubt the practical
possibility of implementing the decision just taken.
I do not want to elaborate in this context on the
provisions setting up the council for South West
Africa and giving its terms of reference, nor on the
question of how to define the tasks of the Security
Council in this connexion. I wish to stress, however,
that we fully recognize the need for adequate and
efficient machinery to implement last year's decision.
Any action of this kind would, in the view of my delega­
tion, require the support of the permanent members
of the Security Council.
65. What we have to avoid under all circumstances
is a split in our approach to this problem. What we
need under all circumstances is unity. If we are
unable to achieve this unity, we run the risk of doing
harm not only to the people of South West Africa
but also to our Organization.
66. We sincerely hope that this unity can be reached
in the course of our further efforts, and I wish to
assure this Assembly that my delegation is ready to
co-operate fully to this end.
67. It was in the light of those considerations that the
Austrian delegation cast its vote on the resolution
just adopted.
68. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): In explaining the
abstention of my delegation in the vote on the resolu­
tion which has just been adopted by the General
Assembly, I wish to recall what I said in my statement
at the beginning of this debate on 25 April [1503rd
meeting]. I expressed the hope of my delegation
that a determined effort would be made to maintain
the grand coalition of nations that had supported the
historic decision of the twenty-first session of the
General Assembly on the future of South West Africa.
Of course, maintaining that coalition could not be an
end in itself. It was the view of my delegation from
the outset that any decision taken by this special
session not only would have to be based on resolution
2145 (XXI), which irrevocably terminated the Mandate
of South Africa over South West Africa, but also
would have to carry us forward from that point and
represent a real advance towards the goal of enabling
the people of South West Africa to achieve self-deter­
mination and independence.
69. We all know that a determined effort was in
fact made to find a solution that would combine
the two qualities I just mentioned: maintaining the
near unanimity achieved last October and carrying
us forward to the goal that we set for ourselves. It
is now clear that such a solution could not be found.
The sponsors of the resolution just adopted obviously
came to the conclusion that any further concessions
on their part for the sake of maintaining the coalition

7

of last October would have defeated the purpose to
which, in their view, all those who voted for resolution
2145 (XXI) were committed. At the same time, those
delegations that could not support the resolution, for
a variety of reasons, felt that it failed to pass the test
of what in present circumstances was practicable.
70. The fact that the majority of last October has
now fallen apart—a fact that so many speakers have
deeply regretted—is not due to any lack of effort
or time. The patient and persistent negotiations
carried out between different groups—and no one could
have more sincerely or ably striven for genuine
compromise than the spokesman of the sponsors,
the representative of Nigeria—clearly demonstrated
that there is at present an irreconcilable difference
over the means by which the purpose of resolution
2145 (XXI) can be carried into effect. It is not a
difference that could be resolved by a form of words.
It reflects a real difference of interests and convic­
tions. This fact, though regrettable, must be faced.
71. As far as my delegation is concerned, we stated
in the Ad Hoc Committee on South West Africa that,
in our view, the logic of resolution 2145 (XXI)
establishing direct United Nations responsibility for
South West Africa pointed to the desirability of a
direct United Nations administration for the Territory.
Unfortunately, the logic of the resolution on which
we have voted does not correspond to the prevailing
facts of power. The course of action mapped out in
the resolution requires the co-operation of the great
Powers, which alone have the means and the responsi­
bility for carrying it to a successful conclusion. Yet
the great Powers, the permanent members of the
Security Council, each for different reasons, have
withheld their support.
72. In these circumstances, my delegation regretfully
came to the conclusion that it could not vote for the
resolution, which, while it is an impressive expression
of the convictions of a great majority of the General
Assembly, could not in practice be carried out. This
should not be taken to imply any weakening of our
commitment to the aims and purposes of resolution
2145 (XXI). The United Nations has assumed direct
responsibility for South West Africa and must continue
its efforts to find ways of discharging that respon­
sibility.
73. Mr. ASTROM (Sweden): The Swedish delegation,
acting on instructions of the Swedish Government,
abstained from voting on the resolution just adopted.
The reason we did so was not that we waver in our
determination to work on the basis of last year's
historic decision or to continue on the road indicated
by that decision. Nor was the reason that we hesitate
to support the legitimate demands of the people of
South West Africa for self-determination and national
independence. In fact, several leaders of the liberation
movement are honoured guests of Sweden. We were
compelled, to our deep regret, to abstain from voting
because we did not feel that the various provisions
of the resolution, taken in their totality, would consti­
tute at this stage "the concrete and constructive deci­
sions for a just and peaceful solution of the problem"
of which the Swedish delegation spoke in the debate
[1507th meeting, para. 12].

8

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

74. In arriving at this conclusion, the Swedish
Government was guided by two interrelated considera­
tions. The first was that a new resolution, in order
to contribute effectively to the solution of the problem,
had to obtain the same kind of support that was
forthcoming for last year's resolution. We knew that
this would not be the case and that many countries
whose collaboration was essential for the successful
realization of the objectives of the United Nations,
as determined by last year's resolution, including
four of the permanent members of the Security Council,
would not find it possible to vote for the resolution.
75. The second consideration, which, as I said, is
closely related to the first one, was that we had
doubts whether the various elements of the resolution
were balanced in such a way as to provide a firm
basis for further United Nations action. The Swedish
delegation, for its part, has not taken the position
that the possibility of a provisional United Nations
administration should be excluded; nor are we opposed
to the idea of an appeal or a request to the Security
Council using language at least as strong as the
corresponding provision in last year's resolution. We
also favour the suggestion to establish contact with
the South African Government, while continuing to
hold strongly that the terms of last year's resolution
are not negotiable.
76. The manner, however, in which these three
essential elements have been combined in the new
resolution makes us doubt whether the resolution will
in fact carry the question forward and increase
the influence that world opinion, as expressed in the
United Nations, could exercise towards the liberation
of the people of South West Africa and towards the
replacement of the de facto administration by a
new administration which draws its legitimacy from
the decisions of the General Assembly and from the
demonstrated support of the people of South West
Africa.
77. The Swedish delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to the various delegations and groups
of delegations with which it has been privileged to
consult on this important matter. We have not given
up hope that through continued consultations and
co-operative efforts amongst Member States it will
prove possible to bring the great task undertaken by
the United Nations to a successful conclusion.
78. Mr. BANZAR (Mongolia) (translated from Rus­
sian); As everyone knows, the Mongolian People's
Republic, which has been consistently pursuing a
policy of supporting the struggle of colonial and
dependent peoples for their freedom and national
independence, and which is a member of the AfroAsian Group, has always supported the Group's
wise proposals aimed at eliminating the shameful
system of colonialism in all its forms and manifesta­
tions.
79. Our delegation has repeatedly stated in the
General Assembly its position on the question of
South West Africa.
80. We continue to advocate the immediate granting
of independence to the people of South West Africa.
At the twenty-first session of the General Assembly,
my delegation co-sponsored resolution 2145 (XXI),

by which the General Assembly took away from the
Republic of South Africa the Mandate for South
West Africa and placed the Territory under the
direct authority of the United Nations.
81. Nevertheless, my delegation abstained in the
vote on draft resolution A/L.516/Rev.l.
82. In our opinion, the prime prerequisite for the
exercise by the people of South West Africa of its
right to self-determination is the removal of the
South African armed and police forces and the
South African administration from the Territory.
The resolution should have severely condemned the
Government of the Republic of South Africa, which
has been so obdurately refusing to comply with
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), and should
have insisted on an unconditional withdrawal of all
its armed and police forces.
83. The resolution should also have contained an
appeal to all States, and primarily to those countries
which have important economic and financial interests
in the Republic of South Africa and which for that
reason encourage the racists as a matter of policy,
to end their collaboration with that country and to
take effective measures against it in order to make
it release its hold on the Territory.
84. So long as the racist authorities of the Republic
of South Africa continue to remain in the Territory,
my delegation doubts that the creation of various
supplementary organs, including the Council which
is mentioned in the resolution, can serve any useful
purpose.
85. Being guided by these fundamental considerations
my delegation, to its regret, was unable to support
the resolution just adopted by the General Assembly.
86. In conclusion, my delegation would like to empha­
size that the Mongolian People's Republic will in the
future continue to give strong support to the just
struggle of the people of South West Africa for its
right to self-determination and will do all it can to
help that people to achieve complete freedom and
national independence as soon as possible.
87. Mr. BOUATTOURA (Algeria) (translated from
French); During the discussion of the report of the
Ad Hoc Committee for South West Africa [A/6640],
the Algerian delegation had occasion [1505th meeting]
to remind the Assembly of its position on paragraph 6
of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI). It will
be remembered that Algeria abstained in the vote
on that paragraph as it considered that the setting
up of an Ad Hoc Committee would in no way bring us
nearer to a solution of the problem before us.
88. The nature and the conclusions of the Ad Hoc
Committee's report have, we believe, confirmed our
misgivings. Despite the need to find an appropriate
solution, certain measures likely to strengthen the
position of the South Africa authorities have been
included while means of bringing pressure to bear on
Pretoria have been left out. On the one hand, talks
with Pretoria are recommended, although, to be sure,
it is stated that such contacts are to be limited in
scope and duration. In this connexion, my delegation
would have preferred part V of the resolution we
have just adopted to be more explicit and to specify

1518th meeting — 19 May 1967

clearly the time-limit for such contacts. On the
other hand, no provision is made for the measures
needed to achieve the objectives we all agreed upon
in resolution 2145 (XXI). The reasons given for
this do not seem convincing to us, for it is obvious,
and has been obvious for a long time, that only
by vigorous action will we be able to overcome the
stubborn resolve of the South African authorities,
which continue to ignore the decisions of the United
Nations,
89. However, the Algerian delegation voted in favour
of the draft which was submitted by a very large
number of African, Asian and Latin American delega­
tions. We did so in a spirit of solidarity, but we con­
tinue to believe that the measures set forth in it are
an adequate response neither to the actual state of
affairs nor to the known attitude of Pretoria.
90. Algeria's position, however, is certainly that of
the sponsors of the resolution we have adopted. It
was not without some hesitation that Algeria finally
decided to vote in favour of that resolution despite
its reservations with regard to the provisions of part
IV, paragraph 2. We can see two possibilities: either
South Africa accepts the terms of resolution 2145
(XXI), and there is a sound basis for a dialogue, or
South Africa refuses—as is actually the case—to
recognize the legality of that resolution or to imple­
ment either it or the resolution we have just adopted.
In that case, what is the use of this recommendation
to the Council? The importance of part IV, paragraph 2,
is obvious. It defines and describes the executive
duties of the United Nations Council. We voted in
favour of the resolution out of feelings of natural
solidarity which rightly take precedence over a judge­
ment which we regard as fundamental.
91. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): My delegation supported
and stands by the provisions of resolution 2145 (XXI)
on South West Africa.
92. We read the report of the Ad Hoc Committee
and followed the subsequent debate on that report
with the care merited by this serious question, and
bearing constantly in mind our obligations to the
United Nations.
93. Until the very end, we entertained hopes that
the lengthy consultations between the various groups
would result in a formula which could command the
support of the vast majority of the Members of the
United Nations, including the permanent members of
the Security Council. Our hopes, and a modest, lastminute effort on our part to bridge the gap, were
unavailing.
94. We fear that the resolution which has just been
adopted harms the United Nations more than it helps
the people of South West Africa, and it could not
therefore command our support. In view of the present
international climate and the actualities of the situation
in South West Africa, we are not convinced that
other more practical approaches towards a solution
of the problem were fully explored. It is evident
that what is and what is not practical must be seen
against the background of the general international
situation and the views of the major Powers.
95. We are seriously concerned at the adverse
consequences which the unlikelihood of the imple­

9

mentation of this resolution will have on the prestige
of the United Nations and hence on its capability
to effect peaceful change. This lack of capability
for practical action will, in turn, gravely affect the
interests of small countries which, in the United
Nations, have a forum where their voices and influence
are out of proportion to their real power in the world.
96. Mr. LIATIS (Greece): In casting its vote in
favour of the draft resolution submitted jointly by
the Afro-Asian and Latin American groups, the
Greek delegation has acted in accordance with the
general line of policy followed all along by Greece
on the question of South West Africa.
97. We would, of course, have very much preferred
a resolution which, as we earnestly hoped and wished,
also commanded the support of Powers whose co­
operation would be necessary in a matter which in
the last resort may require appropriate action by the
Security Council.
98. In thepresent circumstances, however, we thought
it essential that a clear and positive step forward in
relation to resolution 2145 (XXI) should be taken by
this special session of the General Assembly as a
result of the work of the Ad Hoc Committee for South
West Africa and of our deliberations on this problem,
long pending before the United Nations.
99. May I also stress that my delegation has not
been unheedful of the counsels and exhortations for
caution and prudence and diligence in dealing with
this delicate and difficult matter which we heard
from many quarters, especially those coming from
some of our closest and best friends in this Assembly.
100. Nevertheless, thanks to the fruitful co-operation
of the initiators of the resolution with our Latin
American friends, we feel that those elements of
caution and prudence and diligence were instilled in
the original Afro-Asian draft. As a matter of fact,
the text we have just approved duly opens ways and
provides for possibilities of contacts with the South
African authorities with a view to reaching a peaceful
solution of the problem in conformity with the funda­
mental principles and tenets of the Charter, as we
all most ardently hope and strive for.
101. It is in this spirit that my delegation welcomes
the outcome of the vote taken this afternoon in this
Assembly, and we feel confident that it will mark
another milestone in the progress our Organization
has to make in the discharge of its duties and responsi­
bilities on behalf of the people of South West Africa.
102. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): We
of the United States were heartened last October
when the General Assembly achieved, in the adoption
of resolution 2145 (XXI) by the overwhelming vote
of 114 to 2, an auspicious unity of action on this
most difficult issue. In spite of wide differences
in initial approach, we managed to unite in a
historic decision that South Africa had forfeited its
right to administer South West Africa, that South
Africa's Mandate over the Territory was at an end,
that Territory was now under the direct responsi­
bility of the United Nations, and that an Ad Hoc
Committee should recommend practical means by
which the Territory should be administered so as to

10

General Assembly — Fifth Special Session — Plenary Meetings

enable its people to exercise their right to selfdetermination and to achieve independence.
103. My country served on that Ad Hoc Committee.
Throughout its meetings, and again at this special
session of the Assembly, we laboured long and hard
with all schools of thought in search of a common
approach. Our hope was to achieve agreement on a
resolution which would carry resolution 2145 (XXI)
a further step forward, perhaps not as big a step
as we might wish, but at all events a step which
would be taken with the unanimity necessary to make
it solid and effective.
104. Now, for the time being, we must candidly
accept the fact that our efforts have not succeeded.
The draft resolution, just voted upon, for reasons
which we made clear to the sponsors from the outset,
could not be supported by my Government. I have
no desire whatever to engage in long explanations,
and certainly not in recriminations. I entirely respect
the motives of those who put forward the draft
resolution and I wish to express appreciation for
the attentive consideration which was given to the
views of my delegation during our common attempts
to reconcile our different approaches.
105. Lest there be any misunderstanding, and because
the issue, regrettably, is still a long way from being
resolved, I wish to restate at this time as succinctly
as possible my country's position concerning South
West Africa.
106. First, we continue our full support of resolution
2145 (XXI). This historic resolution stands as the
virtually unanimous decision of the United Nations
on this issue.
107. Secondly, we shall continue to support the
United Nations in its search for practical means

Litho in U.N.

by which its responsibility with respect to South West
Africa, pursuant to resolution 2145 (XXI), can be
discharged.
108. Thirdly, we believe that further progress in
this matter will inevitably require a good faith effort
to advance the purposes of resolution 2145 (XXI)
through a dialogue with the Government of South
Africa, which still remains in physical control of
the territory.
109. Despite our differences, let us not forget how
wide our agreement has been and still remains on
this important issue. We are agreed in our abhorrence
of apartheid and racism. We are agreed in our
determination to see the people of South West Africa
enjoy their full rights under the Charter. And we are
agreed in our affirmation of the responsibilities of
the United Nations in this regard.
110. In resolution 2145 (XXI), not quite seven months
ago, we closed the door on a chapter of history
nearly fifty years in duration, the chapter of South
Africa's rights in South West Africa under the
Mandate. The next chapter is still being written.
Although we were unable to support the resolution
which has been adopted today, we nevertheless pledge
that the United States, faithful to its vote in support
of resolution 2145 (XXI), will do whatever it can,
by all appropriate and peaceful means, to implement
the terms and purposes of that resolution. My country's
tradition concerning universal freedom is such that
wherever any people come forward to claim it as
their equal birthright, the United States must and
will support them. We shall, therefore, faithfully
support the people of South West Africa in their
just aspirations by every effective and peaceful
means until those aspirations have been attained.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

77005—October 1970-2,175
