S/PRST/2004/3

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 February 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4915th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 February 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, recalling its previous decisions concerning the
situation in Somalia, in particular the statement of its President of 11
November 2003 (S/PRST/2003/19) and welcoming the report of the SecretaryGeneral of February 2004 (S/2004/115), reaffirms its commitment to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia, and its
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and
unity of the country, consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
“The Security Council reiterates its firm support for the Somali national
reconciliation process and the ongoing Somali National Reconciliation
Conference in Kenya, launched under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD).
“The Security Council commends President Mwai Kibaki of Kenya,
President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, other leaders of IGAD, and
international supporters of the Somali National Reconciliation Conference for
their perseverance to help Somalis reach national reconciliation.
“The Security Council welcomes the signing, on 29 January 2004, of the
Declaration on the Harmonization of the Various Issues by the Somali
Delegates at the Somali Consultative Meetings, held from 9 to 29 January
2004 in Nairobi, as an important step towards lasting peace and reconciliation
in Somalia, and urges all signatories to the agreement to fully abide by their
commitment to take forward the peace process.
“The Security Council calls upon the Somali parties to build on the
progress achieved and swiftly conclude the Somali National Reconciliation
Conference with a durable and inclusive solution to the conflict in Somalia by
establishing a viable transitional government.
“The Security Council reiterates that the Somali parties should abide by
and implement expeditiously the Eldoret Declaration of 27 October 2002 on
cessation of hostilities, and calls on the Somali parties to continue working
towards a comprehensive security arrangement for Somalia.
04-25022 (E)

250204

*
0
4
2
5
0
2
2
*

S/PRST/2004/3

“The Security Council stresses the urgent need for a comprehensive
ceasefire throughout Somalia, and that the Somali parties themselves bear the
responsibility of achieving it. The Council calls on the Somali parties to fully
implement the ceasefire, to ensure security, and to resolve their differences
through peaceful means.
“The Security Council condemns those who obstruct the peace process,
and stresses that those who persist on the path of confrontation and conflict
will be held accountable. The Council will continue to monitor the situation
closely.
“The Security Council calls upon all neighbouring states to continue their
endeavour to participate fully and constructively for the success of the Somali
National Reconciliation Process and the attainment of peace in the region.
“The Security Council welcomes the commitment and preparation of the
African Union to deploy a military observer mission to Somalia, and calls
upon the international community to support the African Union’s efforts to
improve the security situation in Somalia.
“The Security Council calls on the international community to continue
its efforts to support IGAD in its facilitation of the Somali National
Reconciliation Conference, and calls on the donor countries to contribute to
the Conference, the United Nations Trust Fund for Peace-building in Somalia
and the United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for Somalia.
“The Security Council expresses serious concern regarding the
humanitarian situation in Somalia, and calls on the Somalia leaders to facilitate
the delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance and to assure the safety
of all international and national aid workers.
“The Security Council reiterates its concern over the continued flow of
weapons and ammunition supplies to Somalia, welcomes the establishment of
the Monitoring Group pursuant to resolution 1519 (2003) of 16 December
2003, and calls on relevant states and entities to comply scrupulously with the
arms embargo and to cooperate with the Monitoring Group.
“The Security Council welcomes the readiness of the Secretary-General
to enhance the attention of the United Nations to developments in Somalia
within existing resources. The Council reiterates that a comprehensive peacebuilding programme with special emphasis on disarmament, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration will be important to post-conflict Somalia as
stipulated in the statement of its President of 28 March 2002 (S/PRST/2002/8).
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to consider and to
suggest in his next report ways to develop the role of the United Nations in
support of the IGAD facilitated Somali reconciliation process.
“The Security Council reiterates its readiness to assist the Somali parties
and support IGAD in implementation of the agreements reached in the Somalia
National Reconciliation Conference.”

2
