UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/7
15 February 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3632nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 February 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Sierra Leone", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the results of the meeting of the
National Consultative Conference on 12 February 1996 that overwhelmingly
supported the decision to maintain 26 February 1996 as the date of the
elections. The Council also welcomes the renewed promise of the Government
of Sierra Leone, through the Chairman of the National Provisional Ruling
Council, to abide by the will of the people expressed through the
Conference to hold the elections as scheduled. The Council notes that the
Chairman of the Interim National Electoral Commission has confirmed that
all the necessary technical arrangements are in place for elections to
proceed.
"The Security Council reiterates its belief that the holding of free
and fair elections as scheduled is of critical importance to Sierra Leone’s
transition to democratic constitutional rule. Any delay in the elections
or interruption in this process is likely to erode international donor
support for Sierra Leone. It is also likely to greatly increase the
potential for further instability and violence, with devastating
consequences for the people of Sierra Leone.
"The Security Council cautions all groups and individuals in Sierra
Leone not to attempt to disrupt through violence or intimidation the
electoral process which the great majority of the people of Sierra Leone
support. The Council calls upon the Government to fulfil its undertaking
to ensure a safe and free environment for the elections.
"The Security Council urges all parties to end the violence in Sierra
Leone. The Council welcomes the initial contacts between the Government
and the Revolutionary United Front and calls upon the Revolutionary United
Front to renew its cease-fire and to enter into a full dialogue for peace
without any conditions.

96-03699 (E)

150295

/...

S/PRST/1996/7
English
Page 2

"The Security Council expresses its continued concern about the
humanitarian situation and suffering of the people resulting from the
conflict in Sierra Leone. The Council calls on Member States to continue
to provide humanitarian assistance to address this problem.
"The Security Council commends the efforts of the Secretary-General to
assist the conduct of the elections, and in particular the establishment of
the Joint International Observer Group. It also commends the work of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to support the democratic transition
and to facilitate peace negotiations between the Government of Sierra Leone
and the Revolutionary United Front. The Council appreciates the important
role of the Organization of African Unity and others, including States
neighbouring Sierra Leone, in attempting to bring peace to that country.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
monitor the situation in Sierra Leone and to keep the Council informed of
all significant developments."

-----
