Resolutions adopted on the report, of the Third Committee

Alarmed by the evidence of gross and systematic
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
in South Africa, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia,
Considering that the Governments and the illegal
racist minority regimes in southern Africa continue to
enjoy political, commercial, military, economic and
cultural relations with many States, in disregard of
previous resolutions of the General Assembly and
specifically of paragraphs 5 and 6 of Assembly resolution 2439 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968,
Further considering that the existence of such relations contributes to the perpetuation and intensification
of the barbarous policies of apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism in southern Africa,
Convinced that the gross and systematic violations
of human rights and fundamental freedoms in southern
Africa are of serious international concern and require
urgent and effective action by the United Nations,
l. Endorses the recommendations 18 of the Special
Rapporteur; 19
2. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
repeal the various discriminatory laws cited in paragraph 529 of the Special Rapporteur's report20 and to
assist the United Nations in restoring the human rights
of the inhabitants of Namibia by immediately putting
an end to its illegal occupation of Namibia;
3. Condemns the racist Government of South Africa
for its perpetuation and further intensification of the
inhuman policy of apartheid in complete and flagrant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and for its continuing affront and insult to the human conscience;
4. Condemns the Government of South Africa for
enacting the Development of Self-Government for
Native Nations in South West Africa Act, 1968, and
the Library Ordinance, section 19;
5. Further condemns the racist Government of
South Africa for intensifying the policy of apartheid in
Namibia, a Territory under United Nations administration and illegally occupied by that Government;
6. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
rescind immediately the "banning orders" issued under
the Suppression of Communism Act against the opponents of apartheid;
7. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the administering Power in Southern Rhodesia, to repeal the
illegal legislation referred to in paragraph 529 of the
Special Rapporteur's report and enacted by the illegal
racist minority regimf:: in Southern Rhodesia;
8. Deplores the refusal of the Government of the
United Kingdom to suppress the illegal racist minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia and thus to restore the
fundamental human rights of the people of Zimbabwe;
9. Regrets the fact that the relevant United Nations
resolutions regarding the termination of diplomatic,
commercial, military, cultural and other relations with
the racist Government of South Africa and the illegal
racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia are still
not being observed by several Member States;
10. Calls upon all those Governments which still
maintain diplomatic, commercial, military, cultural and
1s E/CN.4/979/ Add.5.
19 Appointed by the Commission on Human Rights under its

resolutions 7 (XXIII) and 3 (XXIV).
20 E/CN.4/979 and Add.I and Add.1/Corr.l and Add.2-8.

57

other relations with the racist Government of South
Africa and with the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia to terminate such relations immediately in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to set up a unit
of United Nations Radio in Africa to produce and
broadcast radio programmes to the peoples of southern
Africa;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to bring to the
knowledge of competent organs of the United Nations
as soon as possible the proposal to establish a judicial
committee for Namibia;21
13. Requests the Secretary-General to seek and
circulate the views of Member States on the establishment of a judicial committee for Namibia;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to take steps
to give the widest possible publicity to the evils of these
policies and to the actions of the racist Government
of South Africa, of the illegal racist regime established
in Namibia and of the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia, through the non-governmental
organizations, trade unions, religious institutions and
student and other organizations as well as libraries
and schools;
15. Urges Member States to give extensive and
continuing publicity to the report and to the above
policies and practices through their national publicity
media;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session on the
implementation of the present resolution, in particular
on the action taken by the racist Government of South
Africa and the Government of the United Kingdom
to give effect to paragraphs 2, 6 and 7 above;
17. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session
on the implementation of paragraph 11 above.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.

2582 (XXIV).

United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Having considered the section of the report of the
Economic and Social Council dealing with the United
Nations Children's Fund,22
Sharing with the Executive Board of the United
Nations Children's Fund its sense of urgency regarding
the large unmet health, nutrition, education and social
welfare needs of the approximately one thousand million children under fifteen years of age living in developing countries,
Bearing in mind that assistance in the physical and
mental development of these children is not only a
matter for immediate humanitarian concern, but is
also of central importance to the whole process of
development,
Noting with appreciation the close co-operation
existing between the United Nations Children's Fund
and other ~rganizati~ns of the United Nations system,
both at their respective headquarters and in the field,
21 E/CN.4/979/ Add.3.
22 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Twenty-fourth
Sess.ion, Supplement No. 3 (A/7603 and Corr.I), chapter XI,
section B.

58

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

in the planning, implementation and evaluation of programmes and projects,
Noting with satisfaction that the United Nations
Children's Fund continues to remain alert and responsive to the emergency needs of children and mothers,
1. Recognizes the important role that the United
Nations Children's Fund is in a position to play in
helping to achieve the objectives of the Second United
Nations Development Decade, having regard to the
decisive contribution that the present generation of
children could make towards the future achievement
of the economic, social and cultural progress of the
developing countries;
2. Endorses the policies and programmes of the
United Nations Children's Fund to aid countries to
protect and prepare the younger generation within the
larger context of national development;
3. Commends, in this connexion:
(a) The emphasis that the United Nations Children's Fund is placing on the "country approach",
whereby aid is given on the basis of the priorities of
the developing countries concerned;
( b) The increased attention being given by the
United Nations Children's Fund to the promotion of
integrated services for children within comprehensive
social and economic development schemes;
( c) The growing support being provided by the
United Nations Children's Fund in the training of national personnel of the developing countries, particularly within their own environment and at the middle
and lower levels;
4. Recognizes that the United Nations Children's
Fund would be in a position to meet more of the vast
unsatisfied needs of children and young people if more
resources were available to it;
5. Appeals to States Members of the United Nations
and other donors to make every effort to increase their
contributions to the United Nations Children's Fund.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2583 (XXIV). Question of the punishment of
war criminals and of persons who have
committed crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3 (I) of 13 February 1946
and 170 (II) of 31 October 1947 on the extradition
and punishment of war criminals, its resolution 95 (I)
of 11 December 1946 affirming the principles of international law recognized by the Charter of the International Military Tribunal, Nuremberg, and the judgement of the Tribunal, and its resolutions 2338 (XXII)
of 18 December 1967 and 2391 (XXIII) of 26 November 1968 on the punishment of war criminals and
of persons who have committed crimes against humanity,
Recalling also the Declarations of 13 January 194223
and 30 October 1943,24 and the 1948 Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, providing for the extradition and punishment of
28 British and Foreign State Papers, vol. 144 (1952), p. 1072
(Declaration of St. James's).
24 U.S. Department of State Bulletin (Washington, D.C.),
vol. IX, No. 228, p. 310 (Moscow Declaration on German
Atrocities).

war criminals and of persons who have committed
crimes against humanity,
_Convinced that the thorough investigation of war
cnmes and crimes against humanity, and the detection,
arrest, extradition and punishment of persons responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity,
constitute an important element in the prevention of
such crimes, the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, the encouragement of confidence, the
furtherance of co-operation among peoples and the
promotion of international peace and security,
Noting that a number of States have already signed
the Convention on the Non-Applicability of Statutory
!-,imitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity,

1. Calls upon all the States concerned to take the
necessa_ry measures for the thorough investigation of
war cnmes and crimes against humanity, as defined
in article I of the Convention on the Non-Applicability
of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes
against Humanity, and for the detection, arrest, extradit_ion and p~nishmen_t of all war criminals and persons
gmlty of cnmes agamst humanity who have not yet
been brought to trial or punished;
2. Invites States concerned which have not yet
signed or ratified the Convention to do so as soon as
possible;
3. Expresses the hope that States which were unable to vote for the adoption of the Convention will
refrain from action running counter to its main purposes;
4. Again calls upon States which have not yet
become parties to the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide to do
so as soon as possible;
5. Draws attention to the special need for internati~:mal action in order to ensure the prosecution and
pumshment of persons guilty of war crimes and crimes
against humanity;
6. Requests all States Members of the United
Nations or members of specialized agencies to submit
to the Secretary-General information on the measures
taken by them in implementation of the present resolution;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session a progress
report on the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to give priority at its twenty-fifth session to the question of further measures to ensure the
extradition and punishment of war criminals and of
persons who have committed cri::nes against humanity.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2584 (XXIV). Adoption of an international in•
strument for the control of psychotropic
substances not yet under international control

The General Assembly,
Considering the responsibilities exercised by the
United Nations in regard to the prohibition of the use
of narcotic drugs and similar substances by virtue of
Chapter IX of the Charter of the United Nations,
Deeply concerned at the increasing and improper
use of psychotropic substances not yet under inter-
