UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3295
19 October 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY-FIFTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Tuesday, 19 October 1993, at 12.30 p.m.

President:

(Brazil)

Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. JESUS
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. DORANI
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. SNOUSSI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. KHAN
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. PEDAUYE

Members:

Mr. SARDENBERG

Sir David HANNAY
Mr. WALKER
Mr. TAYLHARDAT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-86921 (E)

S/PV.3295
2
The meeting was called to order at 12.30 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN GEORGIA
LETTER DATED 13 OCTOBER 1993 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
OF GEORGIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF
THE SECURITY COUNCIL (S/26576)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received a letter from the representative of Georgia, in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the usual

practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
that representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chikvaidze (Georgia),
took a place at the Council table.
The PRESIDENT:

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the

Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia, Mr. Alexander Chikvoidze.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in response to the request
contained in a letter dated 13 October 1993 from the Permanent
Representative of Georgia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/26576).
Members of the Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia,
contained in document S/26551.

S/PV.3295
3
(The President)
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26592,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the following other documents:

S/26487 and S/26528,

letters dated 24 September 1993 and 4 October 1993, respectively,
from the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (S/26592) before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft resolution
to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,
Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution 876 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Mr. WALKER (United States of America):

The United States

supported this resolution because it underlines once again what
must be done to bring peace to Georgia.

The Abkhaz side must bear

the responsibility for its unilateral violation of the cease-fire
agreement of 27 July 1993 to which it voluntarily assented.

The

painful results of that aggression are written in the suffering and
misery of the tens of thousands of innocent civilians who have been

S/PV.3295
4
(Mr. Walker, United States)
uprooted from their homes in the region.

Along with the rest of

the international community, we shall study carefully the report of
the Secretary-General’s fact-finding mission, in particular its
findings on the subject of alleged acts of "ethnic cleansing".
International condemnation of the Abkhaz side is a consequence
of its unjustified use of force.
is clear:

The way to rectify the situation

engagement in good faith in a political process that the

Secretary-General and his Special Envoy are attempting to set in
motion, in keeping with the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Georgia.
My Government calls upon the Abkhaz side to engage immediately
in that process in order to bring peace to this troubled part of
the world and to avoid further action by the international
community.
Mr. MERIMEE (France) (interpretation from French):

My

Government is gravely concerned at the deterioration of the
situation in Georgia that followed by the breaking by the Abkhaz
side of the cease-fire agreement of 27 July.
The withdrawal of Georgian forces and authorities from the
Abkhaz region has resulted in numerous violations of human rights,
and there have also been alarming reports of atrocities and acts of
"ethnic cleansing".

Finally, tens of thousands of refugees have

fled Abkhazia and are now suffering grave deprivation.
In those circumstances, my delegation welcomes the resolution
adopted by our Council today.

From a humanitarian standpoint, it

supports the Secretary-General’s decision to send a fact-finding
mission to look into those violations of human rights.

In the

resolution the Council calls upon the parties to facilitate the
return of refugees and displaced persons to their homes and urges

S/PV.3295
5
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
Member States to contribute towards the humanitarian-assistance
efforts already provided.
Furthermore - and this is an essential point - all States are
called upon to prevent the provision of any assistance other than
humanitarian assistance to the Abkhaz side, in particular the
supply of weapons and munitions, which so far it has not been
lacking.
Turning to substance, I wish to say that my Government says
particular attention to every effort which could lead to a
comprehensive political settlement.

The deployment of the first

observers of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG), decided upon last August, was a primary condition for
this, because there can be no settlement without a lasting
cease-fire.
The situation created in Abkhazia, however, raises questions
about the future of UNOMIG.

We approve, in this regard, the

holding measures taken by the Secretary-General and hope that he
will soon report to us on any new measures he intends to propose.
Conversations undertaken with the parties separately in Geneva
last week by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General represent a
first element of hope for the establishment of talks.

My

delegation welcomes in this regard the support given by the Council
to the continuation of the efforts of Ambassador Brunner in
cooperation with the Chairman-in-Office of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe.

We very much hope, from this

standpoint, that the conditions will very soon be spelled out for
holding a conference under the auspices of the United Nations, or
according to any other formula which would win the consent of the
parties.

S/PV.3295
6
(Mr. Mérimée, France)
My delegation awaits with interest the forthcoming report of
the Secretary-General on the future of UNOMIG and on the political
aspects of the role which the United Nations could play.
Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom):

The vote which I have

just cast in favour of this resolution reflects among other things
the support of the British Government, in political terms, for the
Government of Georgia in its hour of travail and need today, and
for Mr. Shevardnadze, who has been elected as Head of the
Parliament by the members of the Parliament.

Our support was

reflected as recently as last week in a visit to Tbilisi by the
Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office,
Mr. Douglas Hogg.
We are deeply concerned at the events that have followed the
abrogation by Abkhaz separatists of the cease-fire that had been
negotiated.

Not only have the immediate and direct effects of that

abrogation, which is condemned in the resolution, been extremely
serious, but the knock-on effects on the stability of the whole of
Georgia have also been detrimental in the extreme, and that is the
significance of the reference in the resolution to the peace and
stability of the region, which we believe to be seriously
threatened by these events.

We believe there is a need for

restraint by all sides and for serious action to be taken to
prevent military supplies reaching the separatists if this problem
is not to become even worse than it is already.
We welcome the dispatch by the Secretary-General of a Mission
to look into the human-rights situation in Georgia, where we fear
many breaches of international humanitarian law have taken place in
recent days and terrible suffering has been caused thereby.
Finally, we ourselves have contributed to the humanitarian
efforts to relieve the suffering of the people of Georgia, and we

S/PV.3295
7
(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom)
would address an appeal to all other Members of the United Nations
to make a contribution now to the work of the international
humanitarian agencies, both governmental and non-governmental.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian):

First, I should like to welcome here at the table of the

Security Council the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Georgia, Aleksandr Davidovich Chikvaidze.

His participation in

the work of the Council will give the resolution we have just
adopted a special importance.
The Russian Federation attaches enormous importance to the
prompt settlement of the Abkhaz conflict.

In Russia, deep concern

was felt at the violation by the Abkhazian side of the Sochi ceasefire agreement, dated 27 July 1993, and at the continuing widespread violence in Abkhazia.

The Government of the Russian

Federation, in the firmest possible way, called on the Abkhazian
side to bring to a halt its flouting of human rights and its
massive "ethnic cleansing", to cease its looting and banditry and
to return to the Sochi agreements.

If this is not done, we can in

no way consider the lifting of our Russian sanctions against
Abkhazia.
The Russian Federation, which has made its own contribution to
bringing about the Sochi agreement is prepared to cooperate in the
future with the United Nations in making energetic efforts to help
to launch forthwith an effective machinery for international
monitoring of the cease-fire.

We feel that in this respect the

fact that the Security Council has adopted this resolution is
extremely important.
At their meeting in Moscow on 8 October, the Heads of the
States of Russia, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan reaffirmed the
necessity of the United Nations and other international

S/PV.3295
8
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
organizations making an effective contribution to peacemaking
operations and the attainment of a peaceful political settlement of
the conflicts in the Trans-Caucasus, and they also supported the
efforts of Russia in this direction.
We attach tremendous importance to the beginning of a
political dialogue, under the auspices of the United Nations, and
with Russia acting as a facilitator, aimed at reaching a
comprehensive settlement of this conflict.

In this connection, we

welcome the intention of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations on Georgia, Ambassador Edouard Brunner, to
continue to help bring about a firm agreement between the parties
to the conflict for its peaceful settlement.

We believe that, in

view of the complexity of this problem, only a smooth pooling of
the efforts of the United Nations, the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe and other parties involved, and their close
interaction, will make it possible to ensure that the peace process
is not reversed.
Mr. ERDÖS (Hungary) (interpretation from French):

I am

very pleased, first, at the presence in our midst today of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia, Mr. Chikvaidze.

His

presence underscores even further the seriousness of the problems
that have come up in the Abkhaz territories of the Republic of
Georgia.
Hungary voted in favour of resolution 876 (1993).

The

violation by the Abkhaz side of the Sochi cease-fire agreement, the
violations of international humanitarian law, the reported cases of
"ethnic cleansing" and the continuation of armed actions aimed at
undermining the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Georgia are all deeply disturbing and reprehensible.
They are, furthermore, the manifestation of a dangerous tendency,

S/PV.3295
9
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
emerging in several hotbeds of tension in the world to believe that
by blithely disregarding obligations assumed and by resorting to
brutal acts contrary to the most fundamental norms of international
law, certain objectives can be attained with impunity - by fire and
sword, if necessary - because of the passivity or even the
complaisance of the international community.

Hungary is convinced

that everything must be done to stem the spread of such beliefs and
attitudes.
The unanimous adoption of the resolution today confirms once
again that the international community rejects the use of violence
to settle problems which could be resolved by political means.

It

shows the international will to resist the unleashing of
nationalist emotions and passions of all kinds, manifested by,
inter alia, the acquisition of territory by force and "ethnic
cleansing".

We expect all parties to be fully prepared to

cooperate with the Mission which the United Nations is to send to
Georgia, which will be a fact-finding Mission regarding violations
of international humanitarian law.

The importance of the help of

the Russian Federation as a mediator in halting the hostilities and
in efforts to bring about a peaceful solution to existing problems
should not be underestimated.
Hungary attaches great importance to cooperation with the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) in dealing
with the crisis in Georgia.

We believe that the activities of the

United Nations and the CSCE should in the future be more
efficiently coordinated.

The activities of the two organizations

must complement each other and the exchange of information between
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the
representatives of the Chairman-in-Office of the CSCE should be an
integral part of international activities in Georgia from now on.

S/PV.3295
10
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
The forthcoming trip to that country by the representative of the
Chairman-in-Office of the CSCE, in order to prepare for the visit
by the Chairman, and the detailed report he has been asked to
submit on the situation in Abkhazia will undoubtedly be valuable
contributions to the efforts to bring about an overall settlement
of the conflict in Georgia, in all its aspects.

Hungary fully

supports the efforts along these lines being made by the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy, Ambassador Brunner.

We hope that

peace and stability will soon be restored to all parts of this
country of the Caucasus.
Mr. HATANO (Japan):

Japan is gravely concerned about the

turmoil in Abkhazia and the western part of Georgia.

There is an

urgent need to achieve a peaceful settlement within the framework
of the Sochi agreement and the previous resolutions of the Council.
I believe that by adopting another resolution today we have once
again clearly demonstrated the Council’s position.
It is hoped that the Council will in due course examine the
future role of UNOMIG and the United Nations.

We should pay

particular attention to the question of humanitarian relief and the
suppression of grave violations of humanitarian law.

There are a

number of alarming reports regarding the humanitarian situation.
Violations of basic humanitarian rights and the practice of "ethnic
cleansing" can never be justified.

Moreover, it is hoped that the

Council will be kept informed of the situation as it develops,
including the possible involvement of regional organizations.

But

the prerequisite to all our efforts is the political will of the
leadership concerned to re-establish a cease-fire and reach a
comprehensive political settlement.

In this context, Japan

strongly supports the efforts of the Special Envoy of the

S/PV.3295
11
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
Secretary-General and appeals to all those concerned to assure him
of their full cooperation.
In addition, as was stated by the Head of State,
Mr. Shevardnadze, on 18 April, the efforts of the member countries
of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) will be highly
relevant and important.

In particular, we hope that the Russian

Federation will continue to assume a constructive role and that it
will exhaust every appropriate means.

Japan, for its part, is

ready to continue to provide humanitarian assistance, including
medicine and fuels.
Mr. PEDAUYE (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish): The
Spanish delegation is profoundly concerned about the deterioration
of the situation in Abkhazia.

We regret that the hard-won Sochi

agreement has not been respected, and we believe it is necessary to
reaffirm once again that the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Georgia must be formally and clearly respected.
I think we are still witnessing the threat to peace and
stability in the region to which the Council referred in its
previous resolution, 858 (1993) of 24 August.
The Spanish delegation appeals to all the parties to the
conflict to refrain from any violation of the norms of
international humanitarian law.

In this regard, we are very

concerned at the grave violations that are taking place - even
including cases of the abominable practice known as "ethnic
cleansing" - which, basically, seem to be committed by the Abkhaz
side.
We await the results of the fact-finding mission the
Secretary-General will be sending to the Republic of Georgia to
investigate these violations and to shed light on the cases of
"ethnic cleansing".

We firmly believe that all States are obliged

S/PV.3295
12
(Mr. Pedauye, Spain)
to see to it that no type of assistance whatsoever, with the
exception of humanitarian assistance, is given from their
territories to the Abkhaz side of the conflict.
The Spanish authorities firmly and decidedly support he
Secretary-General’s efforts, in cooperation with the Security
Council and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
and backed up by the mediation of the Russian Federation, to carry
forward the peace process with a view to achieving the much-hopedfor overall political settlement of the conflict in the Republic of
Georgia.
Before concluding, I should like to welcome the presence here
today among us of the Minister for Foreign Relations of Georgia
and, through him, to convey a very special message of solidarity
and encouragement from the Spanish authorities to the Government he
represents and to President Shevardnadze.

The unanimous vote on

the resolution we have adopted today clearly demonstrates the
support of the international community represented in this Council.
The PRESIDENT:
speakers.

There are no other names on the list of

The Security Council has thus concluded the present

stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1 p.m.
