Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

5. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify, in
consultation with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, the wide dissemination of information about conditions in the Territory;
6. Requests the Special Committee to follow developments in the Territory .and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session.
1831st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.
2590 (XXIV). Question of Papua and the Trust
Territory of New Guinea

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960,
Recalling further its resolutions 2227 (XXI) of
20 December 1966, 2348 (XXII) of 19 December
1967 and 2427 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968,
Having considered the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 20 June 1968 to
19 June 196923 and the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 24
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the administering Power, 26
Taking into account the observations of the Special
Committee and the Trusteeship Council regarding developments in Papua and the Trust Territory of New
Guinea,
Taking into account the views expressed by the
Special Committee urging the administering Power to
reconsider its position concerning visiting missions and
allow a sub-committee to visit Papua and the Trust
Territory of New Guinea,
Mindful of the responsibilities of the United Nations
to render all help to the people of Papua and the Trust
Territory of New Guinea in their efforts freely to decide
their own future,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the
Trusteeship Agreement of 13 December 1946;
2. Reaffirms further its previous resolutions regarding Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea;
3. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
necessary steps to transfer full powers in the executive
and legislative branches of government to elected representatives of the people, in accordance with the freely
expressed wishes of the peoples of the Territories;
4. Requests the administering Power to intensify
and accelerate the education and technical and administrative training of the indigenous peoples of the Territories;
28 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/7604).
24 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/7623/Rev.1), chapter XX.
25 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 1859th

meeting.

73

5. Requests the Trusteeship Council to include in
its periodic visiting missions to the Trust Territory of
New Guinea non-members of the Trusteeship Council,
in consultation with the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the Administering
Authority, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations;
6. Calls upon the Administering Authority to cooperate fully with the visiting mission and to provide
it with all the necessary facilities and assistance in the
performance of its tasks;
7. Requests the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee to continue to examine this question
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session.
1835th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
2591 (XXIV). Question of Spanish Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of. the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of the so-called Spanish Sahara,211
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also the decision concerning the Territories under Spanish administration taken by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its third ordinary
session, held at Addis Ababa from 5 to 9 November
1966,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965, 2229 (XXI) of 20 December 1966,
2354 (XXII) of 19 December 1967 and 2428 (XXIII)
of 18 December 1968,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoJ:)le of
the so-called Spanish Sahara to self-determination in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);

2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Peclaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territory of the so-called Spanish Sahara;
3. , Regrets that it has not yet been possible for the
consultations to take place which the administering
Power was to conduct in connexion with the holding of
a referendum in the so-called Spanish Sahara;
4. Again invites the administering Power to determine at the earliest possible date, in conformity with
the aspirations of the indigenous people of the so-called
Spanish Sahara and in consultation with the Governments of Mauritania and Morocco and any other interested party, the procedures for the holding of a
referendum under United Nations auspices with a view
to enabling the indigenous population of the Territory
to exercise freely its right to self-determination and,
to this end:
26 [bid., Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (Al
7623/Rev.1), chapter X.

Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

74

(a) To create a favourable climate for the referendum. to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic
and impartial basis by permitting, inter alia, the return
of exiles to the Territory;
(b) To take all the necessary steps to ensure that
only the indigenous people of the Territory participate
in the referendum;
( c) To comply with the resolutions of the General
Assembly on the activities of foreign economic and
other interests operating in colonial countries and
Territories and to refrain from any action likely to
delay the process of the decolonization of the so-called
Spanish Sahara;
( d) To provide all the necessary facilities to a
United Nations mission so that it may be able to participate actively in the organization and holding of the
referendum;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Special Committee, to appoint immediately the special mission
provided for in paragraph 5 of General Assembly
resolution 2229 (XXI) and to expedite its dispatch
to the so-called Spanish Sahara for the purpose of
recommending practical steps for the full implementation of the relevant General Assembly resolutions, and
in particular for determining the extent of United
Nations participation in the preparation and supervision
of the referendum and submitting a report to the Secretary-General for transmission to the General Assembly
at its twenty-filth session;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territory of the
so-called Spanish Sahara and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-filth session.

1835th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
2592 (XXIV). Question of American Samoa, An•
tigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Brunei, Cayman Islands, Cocos
(Keeling) Islands, Dominica, Gilbert and
Elliee Islands, Grenada, Guam, Montserrat,
New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St, Helena,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vin•
cent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau
Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands and the
United States Vii-gin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Brunei, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Niue, Pitcairn, St. Helena,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands, Turks and
Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories, 27
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
27 Ibid., chapters IX, XV to XVIII, XX, XXI and XXIII to
XXX.

Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
other relevant resolutions,
Deeply concerned at the policy of some of the administering Powers in establishing and maintaining
military bases in some of the Territories under their
administration, in contravention of the relevant General Assembly resolutions,
Deploring the attitude of those administering Powers
which continue to refuse to allow United Nations visiting missions to visit the Territories under their administration,
Reaffirming the vital importance of visiting missions
as a means of securing adequate and first-hand information regarding political, economic and social conditions in the Territories and the views, wishes and
aspirations of the people in those Territories,
Conscious that these Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and in
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of these Territories,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
these Territories to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
3. Calls upon the administering Powers to implement without delay the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
4. Expresses its conviction that the questions of
territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources should in no way delay the implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples with respect to these
Territories;
5. Reiterates its declaration that any attempt aimed
at the partial or total disruption of the national unity
and the territorial integrity of colonial Territories and
the establishment of military bases and installations in
these Territories is incompatible with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Strongly urges the administering Powers to reconsider their attitude towards the receiving of visiting
missions to the above-mentioned Territories and to permit access by such visiting missions to Territories under
their administration;
7. Decides that the United Nations should render
all help to the peoples of these Territories in their
efforts freely to decide their future status;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
pay special attention to these Territories and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-filth session on
the implementation of the present resolution.
1835th plenary meeting,
16 December 1969.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
