S/PV.8398

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8398th meeting

Wednesday, 14 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Amde
Mr. Michon
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 7 November 2018 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2018/1002)
Letter dated 7 November 2018 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2018/1003)
.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-37725 (E)
*1837725*

S/PV.8398

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 7 November 2018 from the Chair
of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2018/1002)

The President (spoke in Chinese): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2444 (2018).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

Letter dated 7 November 2018 from the Chair
of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2018/1003)

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I welcome our
colleagues from Djibouti, Eritrea and Somalia.

The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Djibouti,
Eritrea and Somalia to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2018/1010, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/1002, which contains a letter dated
7 November 2018 from the Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed to
the President of the Security Council. I wish to also
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2018/1003, which contains a letter dated 7 November
2018 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
2/13

14/11/2018

I should like to thank Council members for their
unanimous support for resolution 2444 (2018). It lifts
sanctions on Eritrea. It sets out the Council’s continued
support for efforts to improve peace and security
in Somalia.
The agreement to lift sanctions on Eritrea
recognizes the improvements in regional peace and
security and the positive steps Eritrea has taken to meet
the demands of the Security Council, and it is right
that in the light of such developments we reconsider
the measures. It is also right that we continue to urge
dialogue between Eritrea and Djibouti on the Djiboutian
combatants missing in action and on the resolution of
their border dispute. We look forward to continued
efforts to normalize relations between both countries
and we stand ready to assist.
Turning to Somalia, we condemn in the strongest
terms the horrific attacks in Mogadishu on Friday. It is
clear that Al-Shabaab continues to pose a serious threat
to the peace and stability of Somalia and the region.
This resolution underlines our full support for the
Somali authorities in their efforts to combat this threat.
In this context, we welcome the progress made to date
on security reform. Further progress is now essential
to implementing the national security architecture and
make full use of integrated regional Somali forces to
deliver a successful transition to Somali-led security.
Coordinated international engagement will remain key.
We also look forward to further cooperation between
the Somali authorities and the reconstituted Panel of
Experts on the implementation of the arms embargo.
18-37725

14/11/2018

The situation in Somalia

I think that the countries concerned and the region
deserve to be congratulated on the important steps
forward that they have taken, which have made this
resolution possible today. Not only is it a very important
step for the countries of the region, but I think it
also sends a helpful wider signal to the international
community that if the right steps are taken, sanctions
can be lifted. The United Kingdom has the pleasure
to continue to offer its full support to the Somali
authorities, the Djiboutian and Eritrean authorities, the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and the Panel
of Experts in their efforts to support peace and stability.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): At the outset, I would like to
welcome Ambassador Abukar Dahir Osman, Permanent
Representative of Somalia, Ambassador Mohamed Siad
Doualeh, Permanent Representative of Djibouti, and
Mr. Amanuel Giorgio, Chargé d’affaires of Eritrea.
I welcome unreservedly the adoption of resolution
2444 (2018). We greatly appreciate the United
Kingdom for its efforts as penholder in facilitating
the negotiations on resolution 2444 (2018) and all
Security Council members for voting in favour of the
resolution. We fully support the resolution drafted by
the United Kingdom, which we believe is balanced and
the result of a consensus made in the negotiations over
the last couple of days. We commend the role played
by the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea and
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea, which has done great work in supporting peace
and security in the Horn of Africa.
The whole trajectory of future development in our
subregion has changed fundamentally in recent months.
Countries of the region have opened a new chapter of
normalizing relations, resulting in relations that truly
reflect the long-standing historical ties among our
peoples. This has already had enormous implications
for the work of the Committee and the sanctions regime
as a whole. It also has great significance for regional
and international peace and stability.
We have adopted this resolution today at a time
when a major historic development is unfolding in
the Horn of Africa. The breakthrough arising from
the rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea is
already producing unprecedented and far-reaching
positive consequences and is significantly changing the
political landscape of the Horn of Africa and beyond.

S/PV. 8398

It is highly appropriate for the Security Council to take
this decisive decision at the time when countries of the
region are turning a new page in their relations.
The Horn of Africa has tremendous potential for
shared development and prosperity, provided that there
is durable peace and stability. The Council decision
today will help to capitalize on the opportunities we
are now creating to transform the region into a zone
of peace and prosperity and usher in a new era of
friendship among all the countries of the region. It is
with this conviction that, last July, my Prime Minister
formally submitted a request to the United Nations
to lift the sanctions imposed on Eritrea. Therefore,
today, we are very pleased that the Council responded
positively by lifting the sanctions on Eritrea.
For our part, we are fully committed to forging
ever closer political, economic, social and security
cooperation with all the peoples and Governments of
the Horn of Africa. This will serve and advance the
interests of our peoples and ensure regional peace,
development and cooperation.
A lifting of the sanctions regime on Eritrea
does not, of course, mean that the region is free of
challenges. We still face problems that require effort
and determination to resolve. We still need the help and
serious support of the international community. But, for
our part, we are determined to accelerate efforts being
taken to create a region where peace, development and
democracy prevail in harmony. We are confident that
the international community will stand in solidarity
to support us as we continue to move forward towards
greater peace, stability and economic integration in the
Horn of Africa.
It is also encouraging to note how far Somalia has
come in recent years. At the same time, the rebuilding
and reconstruction of the country still requires sustained
engagement and support. Somalia has indeed reached an
important phase in consolidating its State institutions,
but Al-Shabaab remains the greatest challenge, as it is
capable of creating destruction in Somalia and beyond.
The security situation remains volatile, and
Al-Shabaab continues to present a serious danger to the
peace and security of Somalia and the region as a whole.
The string of deadly bomb attacks last Friday claimed
the lives of over 50 innocent civilians and injured many
more. It was a reflection of the continuous threat being
posed by the group. It underlined the importance of
doing everything possible to minimize Al-Shabaab’s

18-377253/13

S/PV.8398

The situation in Somalia

acquisition of arms and funds, as well as the necessity
to control its activities.
It is particularly important at this critical juncture
not to divert attention from the current process as the
Government prepares for the very important transition
towards elections in 2020. The Council must continue
to provide the fullest possible assistance to sustaining
the Government and the transition. We must avoid the
risk of seeing the gains achieved so far reversed; these
are gains that were made with enormous sacrifices by
the Somalis and others in the region.
Finally, Ethiopia will continue to be involved
closely, constructively and in a principled manner,
in all efforts aimed at settling outstanding issues in
good faith.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We welcome the adoption of
resolution 2444 (2018) this morning.
The historic the historic and significant
developments in the Horn of Africa that we have
witnessed over the past year, triggered by the EritreanEthiopian reconciliation, have dramatically changed
the dynamics in the region and open a new chapter of
peace and cooperation. The basis for the restrictive
measures against Eritrea adopted almost a decade ago
is no longer in place, which is why we supported the
resolution. It is imperative that the Security Council
continues to support the courageous decisions taken
by the leaders in the region, as these developments
will have far-reaching and positive consequences for
the greater Horn of Africa region and beyond. As the
Secretary General said in his address to the General
Assembly, despite the chaos and confusion in our
world, there are also winds of hope blowing around the
globe (see A/73/PV.6).
The developments in the Horn of Africa represent
a unique opportunity that promises to bring not only
stability to the region but also allows its countries and
peoples to reap the benefits of the political, economic
and social cooperation that will follow. It shows how
regional cooperation can turn the page on war and
conflict. There is still hard work ahead to secure
the full potential of the peace dividends. We need
to offer our full support in seizing the opportunities
and addressing remaining concerns. In this regard,
we welcome the Secretary-General’s recent decision
to expand the mandate of the Special Envoy to the
Sudan and South Sudan to include the entire Horn of
Africa. It will give the United Nations greater ability to
4/13

14/11/2018

support and facilitate further positive developments in
terms of peace and security, human rights, stability and
ultimately development, economic growth and welfare.
Turning to Somalia, the sanctions regime in
place continues to play a critical role in supporting
the international effort to defeat Al-Shabaab, through
averting the flow of illicit arms and preventing the
group from raising funds, while at the same time
allowing the important build-up of the Somalia national
forces, as Somalia is preparing to take greater charge
of its own security. Our continued strong support to
the State-building and peacebuilding processes in the
Somali region will be crucial, and we must stay the
course together with the Somali people in keeping
up the momentum and build on what has already
been achieved.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): First, we would
like to thank the delegation of United Kingdom for
drafting today’s very important resolution (resolution
2444 (2018)). We also welcome the representatives of
Somalia, Eritrea and Djibouti in the Chamber.
We would like to highlight that this year has been
marked by unprecedented positive and very welcome
developments in the Horn of Africa. In the last few
months, we have witnessed the historic rapprochement
among countries of the region, led by the great vision
and determined political will of their leaders. Today we
see the fruitful results of courageous choices made by
the States of the region to close an era of long-protracted
tensions, conflict and competition, and which have
instead paved the way for a new era of peaceful and
mutually-beneficial cooperation.
We join the international community in recognizing
and commending the efforts of Ethiopia’s new
leadership to initiate and promote a constructive and
forward-looking dynamism at the regional level, aimed
at enabling the nations of the region to advance towards
a long-awaited, peaceful and prosperous future. The
countries of the Horn of Africa have demonstrated a
resolute capacity and commitment to finding solutions
to regional problems. While we commend the fast
progress that has been made, we are mindful of the
perils as well as the challenges and impediments that
lie ahead in the work of creating durable peace and
prosperity in the region.
It is important that the United Nations and its States
Members and international organizations meaningfully
support the momentous changes that are rapidly
18-37725

14/11/2018

The situation in Somalia

unfolding. They unquestionably have far-reaching
implications for the security and prosperity of the
broader region, and we must ensure that these gains are
consolidated. In that regard, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s decision to expand the mandate of the Special
Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan to cover the Horn of
Africa as well. Closer collaboration between the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development will enable us to build on the
recent strides that have been made towards peace and
security and enhance subregional strategies to address
security and development issues. Diplomacy, mediation,
confidence-building and dialogue, together with
development investments, are the sure ways to resolve
the existing disputes between countries. We welcome
the engagement between Djibouti and Eritrea and
encourage them to engage in further efforts to resolve
the remaining challenges in their bilateral relationship.
With regard to Somalia, we strongly condemn the
9 November terrorist attack in Mogadishu and express
our deepest sympathy and condolences to the families
of the victims and to the people and the Government
of Somalia. That horrific act of violence reminds us
of the fragility of Somalia’s security situation and the
importance of making every effort to preserve its hardearned stability. Along with that, we are very pleased
to be able to recognize the Federal Government’s
achievements in its efforts to rebuild its conflict-torn
nation. We commend and support the comprehensive
reform agenda and vision for development of Somalia’s
leadership. We would like to stress the importance of the
sustained and coordinated support of the international
community for the recovery and stabilization processes
in Somalia, including by addressing the root causes of
the crisis.
Kazakhstan has added its voice in support of
today’s adoption of resolution 2444 (2018), based on
its own resolve and conviction with regard to peace
and prosperity in Africa. As Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea, Kazakhstan was
privileged to be a part of the positive outcome of today’s
Council meeting, and particularly happy to contribute
to the peaceful process in the Horn of Africa. We
strongly believe that the recent progress in the Horn of
Africa could serve as an example regarding conflicts in
other parts of Africa and the rest of the world.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to congratulate both

S/PV. 8398

the leadership and the people of Eritrea on the lifting
of the Security Council’s sanctions. We have long said
that the international restrictions against Eritrea were
irrelevant. Over all these years no convincing evidence
has been produced for Asmara’s support to destructive
forces in the region, and in the wake of the changes that
have occurred in the Horn of Africa, the classification
of the dispute between Djibouti and Eritrea as a threat
to international peace and security was also outdated.
We hope that the Council’s adoption today of resolution
2444 (2018) will be a significant milestone in the
work of strengthening friendly and good-neighbourly
relations in the region. It would not be an exaggeration
to say that the Council is indebted to Ethiopia and its
Prime Minister, Mr. Abiy Ahmed, whose brave and
decisive actions did a great deal to ensure the outcome
of today’s vote.
Of course, the resolution will not deal with all
of the region’s chronic issues in one fell swoop, to
coin a phrase. We hope in particular that it will be a
stimulus for promoting the normalization of relations
between Eritrea and Djibouti. At the same time,
however, we believe that the work of settling all the
issues outstanding between the two countries belongs
to bilateral diplomacy. If necessary, the parties can use
the good offices of mediators and other purpose-built
international mechanisms. In that regard, we consider
that the regular and, what is most surprising, the
indefinite reporting imposed by a group of countries
looks like an outrageously excessive demand.
We regret the fact that the authors of the resolution
included provisions affirming sexual and gender-based
violence as a separate criterion for the imposition
of sanctions, despite the fact that such behaviour is
covered under the existing listing criteria. I want to
remind the Council once again that issues pertaining
to sanctions are clearly regulated under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, which is about the
presence of threats to international peace and security.
Any broader interpretation of that position runs the risk
of a loss of sanctions instruments’ effectiveness and,
what is worse, their relevance. With regard to other
countries subject to sanctions we have explained many
times the negative consequences of such moves for the
Council’s work. Let me emphasize once again that this
issue is not part of our direct remit. If we want to discuss
such issues, we have the Human Rights Council and
the Commission on the Status of Women. We should
respect the appropriate division of labour in that regard.

18-377255/13

S/PV.8398

The situation in Somalia

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The United
States welcomes Eritrea’s rapprochement with its
neighbours. We are encouraged by its stated commitment
to re-engaging in an effort to establish enduring peace
and regional cooperation and to opening the door to
its reintegration. This is a historic moment and a great
opportunity for the Horn of Africa. But there is much
more to do, particularly in addressing the questions
regarding the disposition of missing Djiboutian troops
and the final status of the Djibouti-Eritrea border.
We believe that the recent engagement between
the two countries strongly suggests that their political
will and intent are strong enough to reach a solution
with the support of the international community.
We are satisfied with the Council’s agreement on
resolution 2444 (2018), which pays particular attention
to the importance of ensuring that Eritrea and Djibouti
follow through on their commitments to resolving
these matters, and we continue to call on all parties
to cooperate in order to reach a satisfactory outcome.
The United States predicates its support for lifting
the United Nations sanctions on Eritrea on the current
lack of evidence connecting Eritrea to Al-Shabaab.
We appreciate the efforts of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, and of the Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea, to carry out their mandates in
that regard.
We strongly support the renewal of the Sanctions
Committee’s mandate to focus on Somalia. There is no
doubt that Somalia has made significant progress over
the past decade, due in large part to the support of its
regional partners and the international community as a
whole. However, Somali capacity, including regarding
the implementation of the remaining arms restrictions
and the ban on the trade of Somali charcoal, remains
limited owing to the country’s security conditions,
corruption and uneven progress in governance. We are
confident that the Panel of Experts on Somalia will
remain diligent in faithfully fulfilling its mandate,
especially as it relates to comprehensive investigations
and reporting.
The United States will continue to support Somalia
in its efforts to stabilize the country for its people,
including by ensuring that the international community
takes all appropriate measures to maintain the integrity
of the sanctions regime.
6/13

14/11/2018

Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): France
takes note of the Council’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2444 (2018). From the outset France has given
unwavering support to the ongoing rapprochement
process in the Horn of Africa. This is a historic
development, creating unprecedented opportunities
for stabilization and development in the region. France
would therefore like to commend the courageous
decision of Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed of Ethiopia,
without whom these developments would not have
been possible.
It is the Security Council’s responsibility to support
these developments in the Horn of Africa, including by
lifting the sanctions on Eritrea. Nevertheless, we believe
that the Security Council still has legitimate demands
with regard to Eritrea. First and foremost, the Eritrean
authorities must cooperate with the Council, given that
the Panel of Experts on Somalia has not been able visit
Eritrea since 2011. Above all, Eritrea must give concrete
signs that it wants to work with Djibouti to settle the
issues of the border dispute between the two countries
and of the Djibouti prisoners of war, in accordance
with the provisions of resolution 2385 (2017). Those
two issues continue to be unresolved, as the resolution
that we have adopted today acknowledges. In that
context, while France welcomed the meeting in Jeddah
in September between the Presidents of Djibouti and
Eritrea, we now expect that meeting to lead to concrete
progress on the ground and a commitment to moving
forward together.
In that regard, we believe it is crucial to ensure that
no country in the region is left on the sidelines during
the evolving situation in the Horn of Africa. France
therefore welcomes the fact that with this resolution,
the Security Council commits to regular monitoring
of developments in the relationship between Eritrea
and Djibouti in order to support peace, stabilization
and reconciliation in the Horn of Africa. We are of
course ready to work in coordination with all of the
stakeholders in the region to contribute to strengthening
this regional dynamic.
With regard to Somalia, France is of the view that
the sanctions regime remains crucial to combating illicit
trafficking in arms and Somali charcoal, which fuels
the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, still the main threat to
Somalia’s security. In that regard, I would like to express
France’s condolences to the Somali authorities and to the
families of the victims of the terrible terrorist attacks
on Mogadishu on Friday, 9 November. I would also like
18-37725

14/11/2018

The situation in Somalia

to point out that the Somalia sanctions regime is aimed
mainly at supporting the Somali Federal Government
in their fight against terrorism. The exemptions from
the arms embargo that the sanctions regime provides
for enable them to acquire the equipment they need
to combat terrorist groups, with the support of their
international partners. It is therefore in the interests
of the Somali Federal Government to pursue effective
cooperation with the Panel of Experts on Somalia.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Poland welcomes the
Council’s adoption of resolution 2444 (2018), renewing
the measures on Somalia for one year and lifting the
sanctions regime on Eritrea. We would like to thank
the United Kingdom for its constructive and efficient
conduct of the negotiations on the document.
We acknowledge the importance of the sanctions
regime in the case of Somalia, where the Federal
Government is in the process of taking over full
responsibility for the country’s security and where
Al-Shabaab continues to pose a serious threat to
stability. We hope that the renewed measures will help
to limit Al-Shabaab’s access to arms and financing and
strengthen the Government’s State-building efforts.
To reiterate what we have stated on numerous
occasions in recent months: Poland welcomes the
developments in the Horn of Africa, especially the
rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea and
the positive dynamic between Eritrea and Djibouti.
We believe that sanctions are not a punishment but a
policy tool, and that they should be subject to regular
review and adjusted to the realities on the ground. In
line with that approach, we have supported the lifting
of the sanctions regime on Eritrea. We hope that
recent encouraging events will enable durable peace to
be achieved across the region. At the same time, we
believe that the Security Council should closely follow
the normalization between Eritrea and Djibouti and
stand ready to support the two countries’ efforts to
peacefully resolve their differences.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would first
like to welcome our colleagues from Djibouti, Somalia
and Eritrea to the Council.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands has a long-standing
and strong commitment to peace and development in
the Horn of Africa. That is why we voted in favour of
resolution 2444 (2018) today. We see our decision as
a tribute to the positive developments that have taken
place in the region.

S/PV. 8398

The peace agreement between Ethiopia and
Eritrea represents a historic step. It paves the way
for improved bilateral relations and stronger regional
peace and stability. We welcome Eritrea’s decision to
start engaging with the international community and
working to consolidate the peace agreement. Those
are important steps, and we encourage Eritrea to
build on that momentum to give impulse to domestic
governance reforms, including reform of the economy,
the national service, democratization and human rights.
In particular, we call on Eritrea to cooperate better with
international mechanisms, especially those related to
human rights.
The positive developments in the Horn of Africa do
not relieve the Council of its responsibility to monitor
progress closely. In particular, we underline the need
for concrete steps in the normalization of relations
between Eritrea and Djibouti. That is why we welcome
the Council’s decision to remain seized of the matter by
asking for regular reporting on this important issue. We
also emphasize that the Council’s other decisions and
demands regarding Eritrea remain valid. That includes
its decision, stated in resolution 2023 (2011), by which
Eritrea must cease using illicit means to collect taxes
outside Eritrea.
Finally, we welcome the renewal of the Somalia
sanctions measures as essential support to the Somali
Government in its efforts to deliver stability and
security in Somalia. We especially welcome the
addition of stand-alone sanctions criteria for sexual and
gender-based violence. Those who commit such heinous
acts should know that today the Council showed its
commitment to responding to such practices.
In conclusion, as others have done, we condemn
in the strongest terms the horrific terrorist attacks in
Mogadishu last Friday.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, we would like to thank the
United Kingdom for drafting resolution 2444 (2018).
We also welcome the representatives of Djibouti,
Eritrea and Somalia.
The delegation of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
voted in favour of resolution 2444 (2018) in view of the
fresh dynamic that has emerged in the Horn of Africa,
with the exception of the continued threats and potential
atrocities from the terrorist organization Al-Shabaab,
which the resolution also takes into account. My
delegation has been closely following events in the Horn

18-377257/13

S/PV.8398

The situation in Somalia

of Africa since the current six-month period began.
They mark the beginning of a new reality in the relations
between countries in the region. Ethiopia and Eritrea
have shown that reconciliation is possible, and that it
produces many more benefits between neighbouring
countries than confrontation does. They have reached
significant agreements resolving a long-standing issue
between their States, thereby defusing one of the most
chronic and protracted conflicts in Africa.
Somalia and Eritrea have re-established diplomatic
ties after a long period of rupture, which is a very
significant step forward in their efforts to resolve their
differences. The normalization of relations between
Djibouti and Eritrea began when the Foreign Ministers
of Ethiopia, Somalia and Eritrea travelled to Djibouti,
a commitment that was subsequently confirmed in a
meeting between the Presidents of Eritrea and Djibouti
in Saudi Arabia in September. We realize that the region
must be able to optimize its undeniable potential, and
it is therefore important that the countries of the region
unite their efforts to avoid their common threats,
particularly Al-Shabaab. We ask that outstanding issues
such as those pertaining to prisoners of war and border
matters be tackled in the positive spirit of today’s
resolution, and here we are specifically referring to
Eritrea and Djibouti.
In conclusion, peaceful, brotherly coexistence
between States is a crucial factor that must prevail in the
international political arena. It is vital to guaranteeing
the peaceful coexistence in the region that all countries
should foster with a view to ensuring their States’
successful development. That is the new dynamic that
the countries of the Horn of Africa have decided to
embrace under the leadership of Ethiopia and its Prime
Minister, Abiy Ahmed, and that is the spirit of the
resolution we have just adopted.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to express
its gratitude for the work of the delegation of the United
Kingdom in drafting of resolution 2444 (2018), which
we just adopted unanimously. We also welcome the
representatives of Djibouti, Eritrea and Somalia to this
very important Security Council meeting.
Bolivia has been closely following the development
of the events in the Horn of Africa. We reiterate our
appreciation of the new approach of understanding
and liaising undertaken by the countries of the
subregion, which is beginning a renewed phase of
8/13

14/11/2018

peace and friendship that we are confident will promote
cooperation in fundamental areas such as the economy,
social and cultural affairs and, of course, security. In
this regard, we believe that the progress made to date in
the region must be reflected through commitments to
confidence-building measures among States. We also
believe that the important developments occurring in the
Horn of Africa highlight the importance of leadership
and the primacy of policy, as well as the need for dialogue
and the support of the international community.
My delegation has reiterated on many occasions
that sanctions are not an end in themselves. The Charter
of the United Nations sanctions should be assessed in
the light of the evolving situation and the context on the
ground. This was a special case in which the necessity
of lifting sanctions was, of course, imperative.
With regard to the situation in Somalia, my
delegation also categorically condemns the recent
terrorist attack that took place in Mogadishu. We
express our concern about the risks that come with the
continued presence of Al-Shabaab in Somalia and in the
subregion, in addition to the threat posed by the presence
of factions of Da’esh, the use of sophisticated techniques
and asymmetric attacks. In that regard, we believe that
the Council and the international community in general
must continue to support an inclusive political process
of peace and reconciliation that is guided and owned by
the Somali people themselves.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We also wish to express our appreciation for the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2444 (2018) lifting
the sanctions against Eritrea, which bears witness to
the positive progress being made towards establishing
a dialogue between Eritrea and its neighbours and
the general easing of tensions in the Horn of Africa
region as a whole. However, we wish to underline that
it is important to resolve such pending issues as those
concerning the disappeared soldiers and the border
between Djibouti and Eritrea. The role of Ethiopia in
all of the positive developments in the region must be
highlighted and acknowledged by the Council.
There are still major challenges that exist, such
as Al-Shabaab’s terrorism in Somalia and the need
to make swift progress in the development of the
region and in improving the living standards of its
populations. Therefore, it was very important for the
Council and the international community in general to
recognize and adopt decisions that will encourage the
18-37725

14/11/2018

The situation in Somalia

region to continue on the path towards achieving peace,
reconciliation and development.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, I would like to express our sincere
condolences to the Government and people of the
brotherly nation of Somalia with respect to the victims
of the terrorist attacks in Mogadishu last Friday.
The States in the Horn of Africa have seen
significant positive political developments in recent
times. That enabled the Governments and the peoples
of the region to override their differences and to turn a
page in the painful history of many generations. That
has generated hope to achieving security and stability to
which the region aspires. We commend the efforts made
by the leaders of Ethiopia, Eritrea, Somalia and Djibouti
which led to a historic achievement at the Horn of Africa
summit with the signing of the Jeddah Agreement on
Peace, Friendship and Comprehensive Cooperation.
We welcome today’s adoption of resolution 2444
(2018) for which Kuwait voted in favour. That came out
of Kuwait’s established and firm position to achieve a
just and lasting peace by peaceful means. We believe
in taking the opportunity of the historic reconciliation
in the Horn of Africa region in order to achieve the
desired peace. We also hope to reach a consensual
formula which leads to the best interests of the peoples
in the region and takes into consideration the rights of
the States that they belong to.
Based on that, Kuwait supported the decision of
the Security Council to lift sanctions against Eritrea
in order to let it play a fruitful role in establishing
stability in the region along with its neighbours, and
especially in resolving its pending differences with
Djibouti. In that regard, we look forward to achieving
tangible developments by 15 February 2019, the date of
submitting the next report of the Secretary-General on
this matter.
We should not forget also to lift the sanctions
against Somalia, which is one of the main objectives
of our joint efforts in order to help and support that
country to confront the challenges it is facing. On
top of those challenges is the serious threat posed by
Al-Shabaab.
Sanctions are an important tool in the hands of
the Security Council. Lifting the sanctions represents
a message sent to the international community that
they are not imposed for ever. They are not a tool to

S/PV. 8398

punish States and peoples. The message also is that the
Council responds to positive developments and lifts
the sanctions when the reasons for which they were
imposed do not exist anymore. In such cases, there
would be no justification for the Security Council which
maintains international peace and security, pursuant to
the Charter, to keep the sanctions imposed.
In conclusion, we would like to thank the delegation
of the United Kingdom which is the penholder for its
transparent work during the negotiations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
First of all, China condemns the terrorist attack
that occurred last Friday. We express our condolences
and sympathy over the deaths and casualties resulting
from the attack.
This morning, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2444 (2018), lifting the sanctions
on Eritrea and extending the mandate of the Panel
of Experts of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 751 (1992). In the past few months, we
have witnessed positive changes in the situation in
the Horn of Africa and a continued improvement
of relations among the countries of the region. The
Council’s lifting of sanctions on Eritrea is conducive
to the efforts of the countries of the region to achieve
peace and development and to maintain the current
positive development momentum in the region, which
China welcomes.
Meanwhile, the Horn of Africa still faces challenges.
The Council and, indeed, the international community
should continue to provide constructive assistance in
the light of the needs of the countries in the region.
We hope that the countries concerned in the region
will actively take the current favourable opportunity
to increase dialogue and consultations and meet each
other halfway to properly solve the issues. I hope that
the international community will continue to help the
Somali Government focus on the threat of Al-Shabaab
and make progress in Somalia’s national reconciliation
process. China is ready to continue to work with the
international community in playing a constructive role
in the attainment of peace, stability and development in
the countries of the Horn of Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

18-377259/13

S/PV.8398

The situation in Somalia

I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council this month.
We are confident in your leadership and wish you
every success in fulfilling your duties. I would also
like to commend your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
for his excellent leadership in guiding the work of the
Council last month.
We warmly congratulate the people of Eritrea for
withstanding the hardship endured under the sanctions
regime. We welcome the lifting of the sanctions on
Eritrea, while acknowledging the efforts spearheaded
by President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo
with regard to the normalization of the relationship
between Eritrea and Djibouti. We hope that the two
Governments will engage in good faith to settle all
outstanding issues in accordance with international law.
Forty-six years ago, my country, Somalia, and
its leaders were uncompromising in their hard work
to achieve sustainable peace, particularly in Africa.
My country successfully promoted and ensured the
peace negotiations during the crisis between Tanzania
and Uganda.
That having been said, the Federal Government of
Somalia looks forward to the beginning of a new chapter
of cooperation and partnership with all the countries in
the Horn of Africa. Together we will strengthen the ties
that have been forged among the peoples of the region.
Since 1992, the Federal Government of Somalia has
been publicly seeking the lifting of sanctions imposed
on our country. Accordingly, I would like to raise the
following points.
First, the outdated sanctions against Somalia
constitute one of the longest-standing United Nations
sanctions regimes ever imposed and one with the
broadest mandate as well. Not only did the sanctions
violate Somalia’s national unity, but it also thwarted the
Federal Government’s policy goal of building a standing
Somali national army. For example, sub-paragraph (a)
of paragraph 11 and sub-paragraph (c) of paragraph
10 of the sanctions regime allow countries to provide
weapons and ammunition to Somali regional authorities
without the Federal Government being notified, thereby
circumventing our approval of these weapons transfers
and impeding the management of end users of such
weapons and ammunition.
10/13

14/11/2018

Despite our belief that sanctions are flawed in
principle, they continued to be imposed on Somalia
without proper assessment of their effectiveness for the
attainment of the Council’s desired end goal. We once
again stress the importance of having clearly defined
benchmarks to monitor the complete lifting of sanctions
on Somalia. If no specific, clear and verifiable steps
are set forth, the incentives to comply with Council’s
demands will be undercut and the effectiveness of the
ending the sanctions regime will drastically diminish.
Secondly, terrorist groups like Al-Shabaab and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant remain a serious
threat to Somalia’s peace and stability. A year ago,
on 14 October 2017, we witnessed one of the largest
and deadliest attack ever to take place in Somalia.
Yet, sadly, the Somali people are receiving messages
of condolences and sympathy anew from our friends
and partners, following the deadly attack on Mogadishu
on 9 November, which claimed the lives of more than
50 people and injured more than 100. We believe that
Security Council sanctions should target such terrorist
groups as Al-Shabaab, which continue to receive
weapons and resources from abroad. In its report, the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea concluded
that, with regard to the 14 October attack,
“While there is no evidence to suggest that
the … improvised explosive device contained
home-made explosives, constructing a 1,200
kg bomb by traditional harvesting of explosive
remnants of war would entail a major logistical
operation; for example, Al-Shabaab would have
had to harvest approximately 6,000 60-mm mortars
or 190 TM-57 anti-tank mines” (S/2018/1002, para.
74).
Terrorists groups like Al-Shabaab do not go through
the official import channels. Consequently, our fight
against terrorism is all the more challenging since large
quantities of weapons and resources continue to flow
into Somalia despite the embargo. Terrorist groups in
Somalia have made use of the existing trade networks
and the short distance to Somalia from across the Gulf
of Aden. The impact on Somalia of the war in Yemen
has been particularly acute, since we are incapable of
securing remote areas along our coastline and borders.
The flow of illegal weapons and resources into the
country can only be curbed by targeting and destroying
the networks that provide them. We ask our partners
to help us improve our capacity in air surveillance,
borders, customs, and law enforcement to control land
18-37725

14/11/2018

The situation in Somalia

borders and other sea and air access points. It is the
responsibility of the Federal Government of Somalia to
monitor and safeguard its borders.
Thirdly, the construction of the military base in
Berbera clearly defies Council resolutions, and serves to
undermine Somalia’s unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity. Two years in a row, the Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea has noted that the establishment
of the military base in Berbera is a clear violation of
the arms embargo imposed on Somalia. However, the
foreign base continues to be built, with a reported
completion date of 2019, and military equipment
continues to be transferred. We ask Council members
what the purpose of a sanctions regime is if violations
of that regime by Member States are ignored by the
Security Council. We wonder what the value of Council
resolutions is if Somalia’s sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity are continually and openly violated.
Over the last quarter century, the Council has issued
a large number of statements on the issue, but that it
is time now to back up those words with appropriate
action pursuant to its primary responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security.
Fourthly,
subject-matter
expertise
and
evidence-based reporting are the best practices to
be used in the monitoring of a United Nations arms
embargo. However, those practices seem not to be
worthy of consideration today. Since the adoption of
its mandate, the Monitoring Group, unlike most Panels
of Experts on sanctions, which are present on the
ground in the countries they monitor, has been based
in Nairobi, Kenya, far from Somalia. As a result, the
Group devotes only 20 per cent of its time to being
present in Somalia to monitor, analyse and investigate
events in the country. Although the number of experts
makes the Somalia group one of the largest United
Nations sanctions regimes, the quality of its reports has
been mixed owing to the Group’s minimal time spent
on site, as well as to the questionable level of technical
and regional expertise.
Furthermore, the Monitoring Group identifies
those working for reform as the primary targets of
the investigation. False accusations, claims based on
weak evidence, gossip and political grievances have
all been used to undermine Somali efforts. The Federal
Government of Somalia will not tolerate Somali
individuals, institutions and organizations being named
in the report with little or no evidence to back up the

S/PV. 8398

reports’ assertions. Many individuals and entities
trying to invest in and rebuild Somalia have seen their
reputations irresponsibly damaged or at least called
into question before the international community based
solely on rumour and speculation.
Accordingly, we welcome the name change of the
Panel of Experts. We also recommend that the Panel
be relocated to better perform its mandated tasks.
Moreover, we recommend drawing experts from a
pool of individuals with a higher level of technical
and regional expertise than previously when the Panel
undertakes future investigations in Somalia.
In conclusion, we thank the Security Council for
its continued support of Somalia’s unity and progress.
Terrorism is not only a Somali fight; it is also a
regional and a global fight, in which we are all united
so as to be able to counter its ever-changing threat. We
encourage the Council to look beyond the borders of
Somalia and support us in our regional approach to the
threats we are facing. That is the only way that we can
comprehensively defeat terrorism and build a lasting
peace in Somalia and throughout the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
wishes to express is profound gratitude to the members
of the Security Council for the opportunity to offer its
views on the unresolved border dispute with Eritrea and
the remaining 13 prisoners of war still unaccounted for.
It further wishes to thank Mr. Kairat Umarov, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
751 (1992) concerning Somalia, and lauds his efforts to
continue with faith and perseverance in the execution
of his mandate. We of course commend Ambassador
Karen Pierce of the United Kingdom and her team for
all the efforts they have made in the process leading to
the drafting of resolution 2444 (2018) adopted today.
Most importantly, Djibouti expresses its gratitude to the
members of the Council for their unanimous support of
its legitimate security concerns, aspirations and goals.
First, on Somalia, Djibouti is heartened by the
progress made in the implementation of the political
road map, the national security architecture and the
transition plan, and supports the call for the acceleration
of these efforts. Djibouti welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2431 (2018), extending the mandate of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) until
May 2019. AMISOM’s continued enabling role and

18-3772511/13

S/PV.8398

The situation in Somalia

support is vital to the implementation of the transition
plan and the strengthening of the capacities of the
Somali security forces.
However, it notes with the utmost concern that
Al-Shabaab remains a threat to peace and security in
Somalia, as evidenced by the latest terrorist attack in
Mogadishu, in which dozens of innocent men, women
and children were killed or injured. Al-Shabaab
routinely commits brazen terrorist attacks at home and
abroad and carries out targeted political assassinations.
It is therefore urgent to accelerate efforts to implement
the national security architecture, and we should
collectively mount, in earnest, a meaningful effort to
weaken and defeat Al-Shabaab.
Djibouti remains committed to peace in Somalia
and will continue to contribute in any way it can.
In that regard, I wish to inform the members of the
Security Council that the African Union Peace and
Security Council, currently chaired by Djibouti,
will be conducting a field visit in Somalia on 27 and
28 November. The Council will have an opportunity
to gather information at first-hand and conduct an
in-depth analysis of the security situation in the country.
It will therefore be in a position to articulate practical
action-oriented recommendations on the way forward.
On Eritrea, Djibouti welcomes the lifting of arms
embargoes, travel bans, assets freezes and targeted
sanctions on the country. As the Council is aware,
Djibouti’s paramount interest is to secure a peaceful,
permanent resolution of all boundary and territorial
differences, in accordance with international law.
Those differences, which arose in 2008 and led to an
armed conflict that year, have remained unresolved and
constitute a threat to Djibouti itself and to international
peace and security. Direct negotiations and mediation
by third parties have been attempted, but have failed to
make significant progress towards a settlement.
Djibouti has called upon the Council, with the
assistance of the Secretary-General, to facilitate an
agreement of the parties to voluntarily submit their
boundary and territorial differences for full and final
settlement by an impartial third party, such as an
international arbitration tribunal or the International
Court of Justice, in accordance with Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations. What Djibouti seeks
are impartial, forward-looking measures that assist
the parties in settling their prolonged conflict by
recommending a specific means of settlement from
12/13

14/11/2018

among those identified in Article 33 and establishing a
mechanism leading to agreement on those means.
In that regard, Djibouti reiterates its gratitude
to the members of the Council for the unanimous
support for resolution 2444 (2018), just adopted. It
underlines the importance of continuing efforts aimed
at normalizing relations between Eritrea and Djibouti
for regional peace, stability and reconciliation; the
settlement of disputes in a peaceful manner, consistent
with international law; and support for the good-faith
resolution of these matters.
As noted in paragraph 3 of the resolution, the
Presidents of Djibouti and Eritrea met in Jeddah on
17 September and agreed to continue efforts aimed
at the normalization of relations between the two
countries. Djibouti is committed to deepening dialogue
and negotiating in good faith with Eritrea until an
amicable resolution is achieved on all outstanding
issues. Continued stalemate is not an option; we need
to expedite the process. In that regard, we welcome
paragraph 57 of the resolution, which underscores the
importance of the Council’s continued engagement,
guidance and oversight. Djibouti is committed to
working with Eritrea until the parties reach a full and
final agreement on the international land boundary, the
sovereignty of Doumeira Island, the maritime boundary
and the status of the prisoners of war.
On the prisoners of war, 13 prisoners, who remain
unaccounted for, are still in Eritrean custody. As we
have stated before in the Chamber, the release of our
remaining prisoners of war from the cruelty of their
captivity has been uppermost in our thoughts. We will
engage meaningfully with Eritrea to clarify the fate of
the remaining prisoners of war and will work tirelessly
to ensure their prompt repatriation. We express hope
that, after nine years of stonewalling about them, Eritrea
is at last willing to comply with Council decisions and
will engage in good faith on the issue of the Djiboutian
combatants missing in action, as called for in paragraph
6 of resolution 2444 (2018). The Government of Djibouti
has authorized the High Commissioner for Refugees
to review all of the individual histories of Eritrean
prisoners of war held in Djibouti since the clashes of
2008 and to make recommendations with respect to
their status and need for protection.
Finally, Djibouti welcomes the reporting
mechanism, as provided for in paragraph 57. We are
looking forward to the report of the Secretary-General
18-37725

14/11/2018

The situation in Somalia

to be presented to the Council no later than 15 February
2019. Indeed, progress can be made, and it can be made
swiftly, if there is commitment to the process by the
disputing States.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm the readiness
of Djibouti to contribute to strengthening goodneighbourly relations among the countries of the region.
We must do all we can to ensure that the metaphor that
we often use to describe the current dynamic in the
region — the “wind of peace that blows in the Horn
of Africa” — is not a mere cliché and an empty slogan
or, at best, a catchphrase without any concrete, tangible
basis in reality. Peace in the region must be total,
inclusive and must generate a transformative force that,
we hope, will enable the countries in the Horn of Africa
to reach their economic potential for the sake of the
peoples living there.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Eritrea.
Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): I wish to congratulate China
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November.
For the past nine years in its appeals before the
Council, the delegation of Eritrea has sought an end
to the unwarranted punitive measures imposed on the
people of Eritrea. The long-overdue call for justice has
finally been answered through the Council’s unanimous
decision to adopt resolution 2444 (2018).
The lifting of the sanctions will mark an end
to a difficult period for Eritrea and the region. The
actions and inactions of the Council have had harmful
consequences for the people of Eritrea and the Horn of
Africa, resulting in two decades of missed opportunities
for peace and socioeconomic progress.
On this historic day, I humbly congratulate the
people of Eritrea, who have endured persistent external
pressure designed to taint their heroic history and thwart
their vision for durable peace and economic progress in
the Horn of Africa. Eritreans will not look backwards

S/PV. 8398

and are not resentful. While mindful of the historical
lessons of the past two decades, they are determined to
create a peaceful and prosperous nation that is worthy
of the sacrifice made for over seven decades to build a
harmonious, peaceful and confident country.
Eritreans are extremely pleased to have witnessed
the recent positive regional developments. Eritrea as a
nation is committed to working with all its neighbours,
including Djibouti, to consolidate the gains made
since the historic rapprochement between Eritrea and
Ethiopia, the Agreement on Peace, Friendship and
Comprehensive Cooperation between Ethiopia and
Eritrea, and the tripartite agreement of cooperation
between Somalia, Eritrea and Ethiopia, which mark the
beginning of a new dawn. Eritrea would like to take
this opportunity to thank Ethiopia and Somalia, which
have called for the immediate lifting of the sanctions,
for their courageous position.
While proud of the region’s capability to resolve
intransigent conflicts at an unprecedented speed, we
are not complacent. Eritrea recognizes that a more
difficult and complex task lies ahead. The country is
determined to redouble its efforts and work closely with
its neighbours to build a region at peace with itself that
fulfils the desires and aspirations of every woman, man
and child for a dignified life.
Eritrea welcomes the good wishes and the
encouragement of the international community and
applauds its willingness to show support for this new
era. However, more than good intentions, the region
needs an understanding approach on the part of the
international community and the freedom to chart its
own policies and future based on the shared history,
culture and interests of the people of the region.
In conclusion, I thank all those who have advocated
and supported the lifting of the sanctions against the
people of Eritrea. I would also like to thank Kazakhstan,
as Chair, and the United Kingdom, as penholder,
for the constructive engagement they have had with
my delegation.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

18-3772513/13
