S/PV.8650

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8650

th meeting
Wednesday, 30 October 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila/Ms. Mapisa-Nqakula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Rodríguez
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
African Union
Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and security in
Africa, including on the work of the United Nations Office to the African Union
(S/2019/759)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-34039 (E)
*1934039*

African Union

S/PV.8650

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

in close cooperation and partnership and in the spirit of
mutual respect and solidarity.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
African Union
Report of the Secretary-General on
strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union on issues
of peace and security in Africa, including on
the work of the United Nations Office to the
African Union (S/2019/759)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Hanna Serwaa Tetteh, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office to the African Union, and Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.
Ms. Tetteh and Ms. Mohammed are joining us via
video-teleconference from Djibouti.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/759, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including on the
work of the United Nations Office to the African Union.
I now give the floor to Ms. Tetteh.
Ms. Tetteh: I would like to express my appreciation
to the President of the Security Council for convening
this important meeting on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, including
the African Union (AU). From the outset, I would like to
congratulate members of the Security Council and their
colleagues at the African Union Peace and Security
Council for the successful annual joint meetings between
the two Councils held in Addis Ababa last week. The
constructive nature of the discussions illustrated the
strong commitment of the members of both Councils
to addressing peace and security challenges in Africa
2/20

30/10/2019

The Security Council has before it the report of the
Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including on the
work of the United Nations Office to the African Union
(S/2019/759). As I had the opportunity to mention in
Addis Ababa last week, the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations continues to grow
from strength to strength. The Secretary-General noted
in his address to the African Union summit in February
that there has been a quantum leap in our joint strategic
cooperation. Our collaboration in addressing peace
and security issues on the continent is becoming more
systematic and predictable. We both recognize that
contemporary threats to peace and security in Africa
are complex and interconnected and that their impact is
so profound that neither organization can resolve them
without cooperating with the other. We recognize and
leverage each other’s relative strengths and comparative
advantages in pursuit of a common objective, namely,
collective peace, security and development.
Our collaboration in Madagascar is a good case
in point. Collaboration among the African Union, the
United Nations, the Southern African Development
Community and other partners, with the African Union
in the lead, prevented the deterioration of a political
crisis. The collaboration facilitated peaceful, free,
fair and credible elections held on 7 November and
19 December 2018, respectively, and the subsequent
peaceful political transition in January 2019. Similarly,
our joint efforts in the Central African Republic
resulted in the signing of the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation on 6 February, which has
led to a substantial decrease in incidents of violence, a
progressive re-establishment of security structures and
an improvement in humanitarian access. Commissioner
Chergui of the African Union and Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix remain actively engaged in supporting
implementation of the Agreement and to underscore
the consequences of violations, including through a
joint visit earlier this month. This engagement is also
of particular importance in the context of the upcoming
elections in 2020.
Joint African Union-United Nations efforts have
also resulted in positive developments in the Sudan.
There is a resolve to advance the implementation of
the Constitutional Declaration of 17 August and the
19-34039

30/10/2019

African Union

agreement governing the transition. The Transitional
Government led by Prime Minister Abdalla Adam
Hamdok, which was sworn in on 8 September, has
articulated its priorities, with a primary focus on
achieving lasting and comprehensive peace across the
Sudan and on the country’s urgently needed economic
recovery. On 11 September, the parties signed the
Juba Declaration for Confidence-building Procedures
and the Preparation for Negotiation, which constitutes
a trust-building agreement and a road map for a
comprehensive peace agreement.
However, significant challenges remain, which
call on us to deepen our collaboration with the African
Union and regional economic communities and
mechanisms and to act in a concerted manner to address
the challenges that we continue to face. As illustrated in
the report of the Secretary-General, we continue to face
challenges to lasting peace and security on the continent
resulting from political and socioeconomic exclusion
and discrimination, weak governance institutions, in
some cases poor public sector management, including
with regard to election management bodies, and the
challenges of contested elections where the electoral
process is called into question.
Respect for the rule of law, human rights and the
challenges associated with the delivery of basic services
and the equitable management of natural resources,
added to the negative effects of climate change and food
insecurity, continue to create challenges for us on the
continent. With regard to climate change in particular,
we are witnessing an impact across a continent
manifested by floods, hurricanes and the resultant
humanitarian crises. Those weaknesses are in some
instances compounded by external interference, proxy
conflicts, violent extremism, terrorism, organized
crime, corruption and the absence of effective State
authority in large parts of the continent.
There is serious concern about the situation in
South Sudan, as Council members witnessed in Juba
last week and from their deliberations with members
of AU Peace and Security Council in Addis Ababa.
The implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan is lagging behind agreed benchmarks and
timelines, and slow progress on the implementation
of pre-transitional tasks, including the transitional
security arrangements, and the outstanding decision on
the resolution of the number of states and boundaries,

S/PV. 8650

for instance, continues to threaten the implementation
of the provisions of the Revitalized Peace Agreement.
As the Council members who were in Addis Ababa
last week and the AU Peace and Security Council
underscored, it is critical that the 12 November deadline
for the formation of the reconstituted Transitional
Government of National Unity — as previously agreed
by the parties and endorsed by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) — be maintained
and respected to avoid a breakdown of the peace
process. We hope that momentum will be maintained to
address the outstanding issues and return South Sudan
to a path leading towards peace and stability. The
close attention of, and follow-up by, IGAD, supported
by the African Union and the United Nations, will be
important in that regard.
In Somalia cooperation between the Federal
Government of Somalia and some federal member states
remains a challenge. Yet it is critical in order to make
progress on political, security and economic reforms.
We recognize that, in order to have a universal mandate
and universal election in 2020 or 2021, the Federal
Government and the legislature have to deliver on their
commitments to adopt the electoral law by December,
complete the constitutional review by June 2020,
adopt an amended federal Constitution establishing
the Constitutional Court and the Judicial Service
Commission, continue the national reconciliation
process and ensure the participation of all sectors of
society, including women, in political decision-making.
At the recently concluded Somalia Partnership Forum
in Mogadishu, international partners agreed to a mutual
accountability framework to narrow their joint focus to
priority areas in order to achieve key priority outcomes
before December 2020.
The situation in Libya remains of concern to
the United Nations, the African Union and the
wider international community. Military actions
and inflammatory rhetoric continue to escalate, and
conditions on the ground are not conducive to direct
dialogue among the parties. An estimated 135,000
people remain in immediate front-line areas, with more
than 270,000 more in areas directly impacted by the
conflict, including migrants, some of whom are being
held in inhumane conditions in official and unofficial
detention. Council members also heard concerns
expressed by the AU Peace and Security Council last
week, including with regard to the continued violations
of the arms embargo, which is exacerbating the crisis,

19-340393/20

S/PV.8650

African Union

30/10/2019

further undermining the territorial integrity of Libya
and fuelling instability within the region.

consultative meetings, including the meeting currently
taking place in Djibouti.

The challenges in the Sahel region remain
daunting, including terrorism, violent extremism,
drug smuggling, trafficking, transhumance issues and
intercommunal violence, which are exacerbated by the
absence of State authority in vast areas, particularly in
border areas.

The practice of joint briefings to the two Councils
by senior officials of both the United Nations
Secretariat and the AU Commission continues to be
mutually beneficial and is now the norm. That has
provided us with an opportunity to broaden discussions
to incorporate the views of both organizations and to
consider new information and perspectives on conflict
situations. Our partnership review and coordination
mechanisms remain vibrant and active, including the
third annual conference of the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the AU Commission, which took
place in May, the consultative meetings of the Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security at the Commissioner
and Under-Secretary-General level, which took place
in February and September, and the desk-to-desk
Consultative Meeting on the Prevention, Management
and Resolution of Conflict, held in March.

We are witnessing the impact of climate change
and food insecurity on peace and security, with the
lack of access to basic rights, services, economic
opportunities, increased violence and challenges to the
role and participation of women, which continues to
hinder development.
The Joint AU-United Nations Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
was signed in April 2017, provides the approach and
mechanisms to effectively address those complex
challenges. The United Nations and the African
Union have agreed to strive, wherever possible, to
reach a common understanding of conflict situations
and, through consultative decision-making, develop a
collaborative approach. We have agreed to exchange
information and analyses on the root causes of conflicts
on ongoing developments as the basis for subsequent
joint assessments to help identify how the two
organizations can work together to prevent and continue
to address them. We have agreed to share early-warning
information and analyses of potential hotspots and
work together to prepare options and coordinate and
collaborate on measures for conflict prevention.
We have also agreed that good offices and mediation
transcend conflict prevention and extend throughout
the conflict cycle. We have agreed to collaborate
closely in good offices, preventive diplomacy and
inclusive mediation activities on the continent in
coordination with other subregional organizations
and regional mechanisms. Furthermore, we have
agreed to collaborate in electoral matters, improving
good governance, the protection of human rights and
humanitarian assistance.
To that end, during the reporting period, the African
Union and the United Nations undertook mediation and
good offices missions across the continent, notably to
Madagascar, the Central African Republic and Libya.
Special Representatives and Envoys from the two
organizations conduct joint field visits and hold regular
4/20

Those mechanisms have provided an opportunity
to take stock of the progress and the challenges that
we are facing in enhancing our partnership and chart
the way forward. We have conducted regular conflictprevention and joint horizon-scanning meetings and
joint technical visits to the headquarters of the regional
economic communities to share information, carry out
joint analyses, support ongoing coordination activities
and strengthen working relationships.
We have supported the participation of women in
mediation and conflict prevention, in particular through
the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention
and Mediation, also known as FemWise-Africa, in
coordination with the AU Peace and Security Department
and the African Union’s High Representative for the
silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative, which
the United Nations is also supporting.
In that regard, the AU has identified its priority
as the intensification of efforts to enhance operational
and structural conflict prevention with an emphasis on
the nexus linking peace, security, development and the
imperative to respond early and decisively to prevent
the occurrence or escalation of conflict.
We welcome the discussions between members of
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council on the modalities for joint field visits. As
I had the opportunity to state last week, joint visits
between senior officials of the Secretariat and the AU
Commission have become an important and regular
19-34039

30/10/2019

African Union

feature of our work. The benefits are clear to us,
particularly in developing a common understanding
of complex conflict situations and their root causes,
assessing the state of play as well as delivering joint
messages. We look forward to further discussion and
resolution of this issue by members of both Councils,
recognizing that this will contribute significantly to
further strengthening our partnership.
We recognize that the financing of AU peace-support
operations remains an important strategic issue for
the African Union. In that connection, I would like
to commend the commitment of AU member States
to support peacebuilding activities through their
contributions to the African Union Peace Fund, which
currently stands at $131 million. I also welcome the
efforts of the Chairperson of the AU Commission to
fully operationalize the governance architecture of the
Fund. Furthermore, we look forward to the AU Peace
and Security Council’s engagement with the United
Nations on this issue following the AU Assembly
meeting that should take place in February 2020.
In conclusion, I thank the Council members for
their continued strong backing for the AU-United
Nations partnership for peace and security in Africa,
and for their support to the United Nations Office to the
African Union.
The President: I thank Ms. Tetteh for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mohammed.
Ms. Mohammed: I am honoured to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, who could not join us because
of pressing commitments on the continent. I wish to
start by warmly congratulating the delegation of the
Republic of South Africa for the distinguished manner
in which it has conducted the work of the Security
Council during this busy month of October.
I would like to mention, in that regard, the
contribution of the President of the Security Council
to ensuring the success of the thirteenth annual
consultations between our two Councils, held in AddisAbaba last week. It was a clear illustration of the
strategic partnership we aspire to consolidate between
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations. This
topic also testifies to the strategic importance of
the issue at hand and bears witness to the continued
support of South Africa to the AU-United Nations
partnership, which enjoys unprecedented momentum.

S/PV. 8650

I thank the President for giving us this opportunity to
brief the Council and share our reflections on the state
of our partnership.
Since the signing of the Joint Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security and the subsequent
Framework on Development, in 2017, the frequency of
our joint efforts has increased as we seek to effectively
address the complex peace and security challenges in
Africa. I firmly believe that our strategic cooperation
will continue to strengthen as we increasingly conduct
joint analyses and response, exchange information and
develop a common understanding of our respective
comparative advantages.
In the course of our enhanced partnership, we have
made significant progress. One of our key achievements
can be seen in the joint field visits, the most recent
headed by the Deputy Secretary-General and the
AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security to
the Horn of Africa over the past few days within the
context of the solidarity missions of women, peace
and security, which both Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Hanna Tetteh and I were honoured
to join. At the risk of repeating some points made by
Special Representative Tetteh, I should like to highlight
the following.
In the Central African Republic, joint AUUnited Nations efforts resulted in the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation. In
accordance with the recommendations made during the
seventeenth AU-United Nations Joint Task Force, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations and the
AU Commissioner for Peace and Security conducted
a joint visit to the Central African Republic earlier
this month. The AU and the United Nations remain
actively engaged to support the full implementation
of the Agreement, especially in light of the upcoming
presidential elections in 2020.
In a similar vein, our combined efforts have
contributed to positive developments in the Sudan. The
accelerated implementation of the Sudan’s 17 August
Constitutional Declaration and the agreement governing
the transition is a priority for both the AU and the
United Nations. It is worth noting that the removal of
the Sudan from the list of State sponsors of terrorism is
critical to the Sudan’s economic recovery.
In South Sudan, while some progress has been
made, both the United Nations and the AU play a
role in supporting the South Sudanese parties in their

19-340395/20

S/PV.8650

African Union

30/10/2019

path towards peace and stability by resolving the
outstanding issues relating to the peace agreement and
redeploying efforts to support elections at the end of the
transition period. The importance of accelerating the
full implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan cannot be overemphasized.

processes, strengthen good governance and promote
the protection of human rights across the continent.
The AU and the United Nations, in cooperation with the
relevant regional economic communities, will continue
to work with Member States ahead of upcoming
elections to foster national cohesion and inclusive
political and electoral processes.

In Somalia, the AU and the United Nations have
underscored the need for the resumption of dialogue
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states towards achieving necessary milestones
in the road map towards elections in 2020-2021. Working
with United Nations colleagues in Addis Ababa, the AU
has already begun a conversation on the development of
a political strategy to facilitate coherence in our longterm engagement in Somalia.

There is an increasing need to enhance our joint
regional approaches to climate security, especially
for the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and other affected
areas. The impacts of climate change are exacerbating
existing tensions across those regions and have
manifested as increased intercommunal tensions and
clashes in various parts of the continent. While the
AU has deployed various efforts towards ensuring the
provision of timely responses in disaster situations,
joint preventive efforts should also be considered.

In Libya, the situation remains a source of concern
for the African Union. The AU has openly expressed its
frustrations and the need for the it to be more involved
and not sidelined. It is therefore imperative for the
United Nations and AU to have a coordinated approach
in the support we can offer to Libyan actors to support
the peace process.
In Mali, the collaboration among the AU, the
United Nations and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the role played
by each organization are critical to contributing to a
more secure environment in the region and working to
finalize a harmonized strategy on the Sahel. There is a
need for international partners to continue to support
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and provide the resources
and assistance required by the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel to fully play its role in combating
terrorism and transnational organized crime.
With regard to other parts of the Sahel region, the
AU, the United Nations and ECOWAS have remained
committed to supporting regionally owned and driven
initiatives to combat the complex peace and security
challenges. Despite our coordinated efforts, we continue
to bear witness to widespread violent extremism, drug
smuggling, human trafficking, transhumance issues and
intercommunal violence. Socioeconomic inequalities
are being further exacerbated by climate-related
security risks in the region.
In addition to the joint AU-United Nations efforts
I have mentioned, our organizations continue to work
together to support free, fair and credible electoral
6/20

While recognizing the progress in our joint
efforts in the prevention and management of conflicts,
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations
should be enhanced with regard to peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction. Furthermore, our
organizations should enhance joint work in technical
areas such as mission planning and management,
financial management and accountability for
peace operations.
From the African Union’s perspective, the strategic
partnership with the United Nations should be based
on shared values, mutual respect and solidarity. While
increased joint analysis and planning can certainly
strengthen the partnership, the lack of joint response
has been a major source of frustration for both
organizations. Joint priorities must be reflected in our
joint analysis to foster a harmonized approach and result
in joint responses. A demanding area in the partnership
has been the joint assessment of ongoing missions,
particularly the African Union Mission in Somalia, and
the dynamics that tend to characterize the conclusions
that guide the elements of mandate renewal. Where
there have been disagreements between the two bodies,
the view of the United Nations has often prevailed.
While there are different considerations behind those
dynamics, there is a perception that the African
Union’s position does not matter in the grand scheme
of things, which undermines rather than enhances the
relationship. I believe that dynamic was also evident in
the efforts to address the Libyan crisis.
19-34039

30/10/2019

African Union

In conclusion, the relationship between our two
Councils essentially drives the partnership of the two
organizations. I commend the Councils for regularly
engaging in joint briefings by senior officials in
both the AU Commission and the United Nations
Secretariat, as it provides an opportunity to broadly
discuss our perspectives and findings on various
conflict situations and enables us to develop a shared
understanding of the dynamics on the ground. It is
therefore vital to continue strengthening both political
and institutional engagement between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council, taking
into account our mandates, comparative advantages
and common objectives.
The President: I thank Ms. Mohammed for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. de Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting and for leading our very
successful visit to the African Union (AU) headquarters
last week. I would also like to thank the two briefers
for their statements. I would now like to highlight
three points.
My first message is that the partnership between
the United Nations, the African Union and African
subregional organizations is of strategic importance for
preventing and resolving crises in Africa today. France
is staunchly committed to supporting that partnership
in the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. We also wholeheartedly support
the development of trilateral cooperation between the
United Nations, the African Union and the European
Union. A great deal of progress has been made under
the leadership of the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
that partnership has already borne fruit.
In the area of prevention, the efforts of the
African Union, supported by the United Nations, the
Southern African Development Community and other
partners, including France and the European Union,
brought increased transparency and credibility to the
presidential elections held in 2018, specifically those in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Madagascar.
More recently, the African Union and Ethiopia have
helped to bring about an agreement in the Sudan, with

S/PV. 8650

the support of the United Nations and the Friends of the
Sudan contact group.
In the area of conflict resolution, the work of the
African Union and the United Nations in the Central
African Republic led to the signing on 6 February of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic between the Government of
the Central African Republic and 14 armed groups. Since
then, the African Union and the United Nations have
been working in close cooperation to ensure successful
implementation of the Agreement. In the Sahel, the
joint action of the United Nations and the African
Union is essential to achieving full implementation of
the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
In the fight against terrorism, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali is providing logistical support to the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), whose
role will be strengthened by the initiatives adopted
in September in Ouagadougou by the Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States, with a view to curbing the spread of the
terrorist threat. It was in that context that we proposed
establishing a new partnership for security and stability
in the Sahel, a Franco-German initiative that was
launched in conjunction with the current President of
the G5-Sahel, President Kaboré of Burkina Faso, at the
Group of Seven summit in Biarritz.
My second message is that the strategic importance
of the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union is also due to the growing strength of
African peace operations, which respond to a real need
and enable rapid intervention in crisis hotspots before
they escalate. We therefore support the sustainable
and predictable development and funding of those
operations by the African Union and the United Nations,
including through mandatory contributions. We will of
course continue to take into account the views of our
partners in the African Union and the three African
members of the Security Council in order to arrive at
solutions that respond to operational needs and can
achieve consensus in the Council. In that context, we
believe that the efforts of the United Nations and the
African Union should be continued on several other
tracks — budgets and finance, human rights compliance
and reporting between the two organizations. France is
ready to provide full support in that regard.

19-340397/20

S/PV.8650

African Union

My final message is that a broader approach
to crisis response is necessary, both upstream and
downstream. In terms of prevention, tangible results
have already been achieved, as I mentioned earlier.
But we must do more, particularly with regard to
synergies between African Union mechanisms such as
the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention
and Mediation and those of the United Nations, such
as the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation. Other
aspects are our ability to develop a common vision
on the issues affecting the continent, and the annual
consultations between the Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council, which took place just
last week and which play a very useful role. I would
also like to emphasize the role of the three African
members within the Security Council as a bridge
between the two Councils, and lastly, the joint efforts
we can make to ensure that crises are not repeated in
future, particularly by investing in the education of our
younger generations and by taking meaningful action
to counteract climate change.
Before concluding, I would like to stress the
central role of the French-speaking communities in
growing the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union, and the need to strengthen
that role in both organizations, since the heart of those
communities is in Africa and is therefore key to a better
common understanding of the challenges facing the
African continent.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): It is a pleasure to speak
before you today, Madam President, and I thank you
for presiding over today’s meeting. I also thank the
briefers, whose presence here sitting alongside us
and each other I see as a symbol, not only of the close
cooperation between the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations, but also of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
To have two women leaders here is wonderful, and
in that respect we are already seeing the implementation
of resolution 2493 (2019), which we adopted yesterday.
While that is of course an ongoing process, the joint
trips to Africa with the Deputy Secretary-General
that Ms. Mohammed mentioned in her statement are a
very positive sign. I would like to thank both women
and the United Nations Office to the African Union
in Addis Ababa and the African Union for preparing
and conducting last week’s field trip, which was very
well organized and extremely useful. Cooperation of
this kind between the Security Council and the African
8/20

30/10/2019

Union Peace and Security Council is very important, as
we saw last week. From my perspective it could become
even more concrete, maybe sometimes a bit less formal
and more focused on joint analysis, joint action and
joint solutions.
As the briefers said, the cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations must cover the
whole conflict cycle, from prevention through mitigation
and mediation to post-conflict reconstruction. In that
context, I would like to highlight two entities that have
not yet been mentioned, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund. We encourage all countries
affected by conflict to make use of those institutions.
As a member of the European Union I will be
forgiven for also mentioning the cooperation that takes
place between the European Union and the African
Union, as well as trilaterally with the United Nations.
What happens in Africa matters to Europe, and vice
versa. We are one another’s closest neighbours and
therefore this cooperation is very important. We support
bilateral and trilateral cooperation between the African
Union, the United Nations and the European Union at
the strategic, political and tactical levels.
I do not wish to go into the situations of specific
countries, but I will say that I share the positive
assessment of cooperation in many conflict situations
that was given by both briefers with regard to
Madagascar, the Central African Republic, the Sudan,
Somalia and the Sahel. With regard to the Sahel, I would
refer to what Ambassador De Rivière has just said on
the German-French cooperation initiative, as well
as on United Nations assistance for peace operations
mandated by the Security Council and led by the AU. I
think that we need to work harder in that area.
Turning to cooperation in general, I wish to come
back to something that both briefers mentioned. It
is important that we work together in considering
conflicts to ensure that the root causes are properly
addressed. We must do so by ensuring respect for
the rule of law and human rights and that adequate
services are rendered to the population. I was struck
by the fact that both briefers also referred to climate
change and security as a root cause of conflict. As
Ms. Mohammed mentioned, climate insecurity leads to
intercommunal conflicts, which is also something that
must be addressed.
With regard to our trip to South Sudan last
week, Germany maintains, of course, the same
19-34039

30/10/2019

African Union

position — as does everyone around this table — on the
full implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, with regard to the transitional Government,
elections, the Constitution and a constitutional court.
Both the President and the leader of the opposition must
place their people’s well-being before their own. It is
absolutely necessary that the people suffering there,
whom we saw with our own eyes, finally benefit from
a better solution.
On the situation in Libya, I would once again like
to underline how important the participation of women
in this peace process is. Ms. Mohammed highlighted
the need for the African Union to be more involved.
Again, I can only highlight that the African Union is
fully involved with the European Union and the League
of Arab States, which also plays an important role,
in the Berlin process. We can confirm that, from our
perspective, the African Union plays a key role and
that we can reach a solution only if all players involved
act together and prevent the situation from further
deteriorating. As Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, I
once again make a plea for the arms shipping into Libya
to stop.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by extending
my thanks to today’s briefers, Special Representative
Hanna Tetteh and Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, for
their very insightful briefings on cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU).
Let me now focus on some crucial elements that we
find particularly important.
Poland strongly supports the strategic partnership
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in Africa. Therefore, we
welcome the progress made in the partnership between
the United Nations and the AU over the past year — the
period covered by the Secretary-General’s report under
consideration (S/2019/759).
In recent years, the African Union has taken on
important responsibilities and its role in promoting
peace and security has only expanded. In particular, we
commend the results achieved in the Central African
Republic through close cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union Commission. We also
highly commend the African Union’s mediation efforts
with respect to the structure of the Sudanese transitional

S/PV. 8650

Government. There is no doubt that the principle of
African solutions to African problems remains relevant.
Earlier this year, we endorsed our commitment to
peace and security on the African continent with the
adoption of resolution 2457 (2019) concerning, inter
alia, the Silencing the Guns initiative. Poland believes
that this will be an additional step towards stabilizing
the situation on the continent through enhanced
international cooperation. Strong local, regional and
global partnerships are needed to manage the demands
in the region and bring about balance and growth.
Strategic cooperation between the African Union and
the United Nations should continue to be manifested in
multiple consultative mechanisms on peace and security
challenges in Africa, including on early warning and
conflict prevention and resolution.
The United Nations and the AU, as well as
the regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms, must carry on their cooperation at all
levels and on a wide range of issues, from capacity
development and policy design to crisis response
operations. Close cooperation does not mean,
however, shifting full responsibility onto regional and
subregional organizations. The United Nations should
address conflicts in a comprehensive way, using all
available instruments, from prevention through peace
settlement and peacekeeping to comprehensive postconflict restoration.
Poland believes that continued United Nations
support to the African Union in efforts to equip it with
the capacities, tools and means necessary for effective
action is critical. It is of utmost importance in enabling
both organizations to face new threats and address
complex sources of instability in Africa. Therefore, we
consider regular interactions between the Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council to be an
essential instrument to deepen this partnership, as we
saw last week in Addis Ababa. In that regard, we also
stress the importance of the United Nations Office to
the African Union in providing support and ensuring
concerted action between the two Councils.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Poland’s full support
to strengthening United Nations-African Union
cooperation and expressing our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his continued efforts focused on
strengthening the partnership with the African Union,
as well as other regional partners in Africa.

19-340399/20

S/PV.8650

African Union

Let me assure Council members that Poland
stands ready to work closely with African partners,
not only on African issues but also on ways to address
global challenges.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I wish to
thank both of our briefers for their updates.
The African Union is an essential partner to the
United States and the United Nations in Africa. This is
true in part because some 80 per cent of United Nations
peacekeeping troops and budgets are committed to
Africa, but also because of the good work that the African
Union does in some of the world’s most challenging
security environments. I had the pleasure of seeing this
work first-hand during my time with peacekeepers from
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan just last
week. The African Union has made vital contributions
to peace on the continent, including brokering Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and helping to create a road map for
peace in the Sudan, but it can do even more to increase
these contributions going forward.
In Burundi’s upcoming presidential elections,
the African Union’s election support will be critical
to a peaceful, transparent and inclusive process. The
African Union should also encourage the Government
of Burundi and the East African Community to advance
inter-Burundi dialogue. In Cameroon, violence in the
Anglophone regions merits the African Union’s urgent
attention. The African Union and the United Nations
should schedule a joint visit to assess the situation and
urge the parties to peacefully resolve their differences.
We also recognize that instability in Libya directly
impacts African Union member States, so we appreciate
the African Union’s commitment to supporting
Special Representative Salamé’s efforts to reach a
political solution. It is vital that the United Nations
succeed in that task, and we welcome the African
Union’s participation in the Berlin format. That brings
us one step closer to a political solution. We remain
deeply concerned by the violation of the Council’s arms
embargo on Libya. Member States that supply illicit
weapons to the country undermine Libya’s stability and
we hope that the African Union will join the Council in
stopping the flow of those weapons and look forward to
supporting the African Union’s Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative.
Of course, achieving peace sometimes requires
asking our friends to make hard choices. As the
10/20

30/10/2019

Secretary-General’s report on United Nations-African
Union cooperation (S/2019/759) notes, many of the
joint efforts made by the United Nations, the African
union and regional economic communities focus on the
primacy of politics. So, we are encouraged by this past
week’s consultations, during which the United Nations
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
largely agreed on several ways to address challenges
in South Sudan, the Sahel and the Central African
Republic. Verbal commitments, however, are not
enough. Both parties could follow through by calling
on South Sudan’s leaders to reaffirm commitments
to the cessation of hostilities and to compromise on
outstanding issues to form a transitional Government
by 12 November.
Finally, the United States supports the efforts of
the United Nations and the African Union to secure
predictable, sustainable and reliable financing for future
operations. Work remains to achieve the conditions
that this Council set out in resolutions 2320 (2016) and
2378 (2017). As I stated last month, the mechanism
using United Nations-assessed contributions requires
a deliberate approach with appropriate safeguards, and
any resolution on that topic must address long-standing
United States policy positions, including with respect
to financial transparency and trade measures. We have
additional concerns regarding adequate burden-sharing
and adherence to United Nations standards for conduct
and peacekeeping operations. From the effectiveness of
operations to their fiscal help, stricter African Union
adherence to these principles will directly translate to
greater peace and security on the continent.
When the African Union does good work, lives
change for the better. That is why the United States has
spent more than $1.5 billion on training-support for 23
partners in Africa since 2005, including for military
and police personnel deployed to African peacekeeping
missions in six different countries. I urge all Member
States to join us in developing the capacities of African
troop and police-contributing countries.
As we have noted in several previous meetings, the
African continent is brimming with potential. Africa
has a dynamic population with hundreds of millions of
people, each with unique callings. A strong partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
is one of the keys to realizing those callings, so I
look forward to working with the members of the
Council to strengthen the United Nations-African
Union relationship.
19-34039

30/10/2019

African Union

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, like others before
me I would like to thank South Africa, particularly my
brother Jerry, for the visit to the African Union (AU)
last week, which not only provided us with insights on
the issues in Africa, but closer engagement with our
brothers and sisters of the African Union Peace and
Security Council.
I would also like to thank the briefer, my sisters
Hanna and Fatima, for their presentation. We also
met with them while visiting Addis Ababa this past
week, and this additional information is certainly a
contribution to our understanding on the issue.
Indonesia shares the view that partnership with
all stakeholders is pertinent to addressing peace
and security challenges in Africa, and we welcome
the significant progress made between the United
Nations and the African Union. The Silencing the
Guns by 2020 initiative and the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic are but two examples of such progress and
achievement. I should like to underline that success
in any initiative entails unity, solidarity, partnership
and the involvement of all. In that regard, I would like
to applaud the African Union for its commitment to
finding solutions to African challenges.
Now, please allow me to address some key points.
The first concerns the importance of maintaining
communication between the United Nations and the
African Union. We join the Secretary-General in
highlighting the fact that a strong partnership between
the Organization and the AU is essential to effectively
seeking solutions to Africa’s increasingly complex
peace and security challenges. We welcome the joint
meeting of the AU Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council last week and urge
more strategic discussion between them to find the most
suitable solutions and concrete actions, and ensuring
full implementation of the various agreements related
to many conflict cases. Closer collaboration would
entail finding ways and means for both organizations
to complement each other’s roles and mandates, and
provide impact on the ground on preventive diplomacy,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities. We
should be innovative in our approach to enhancing
our partnership, with focus on outcome-oriented
solutions, hybrid peacekeeping and pursuing projects
on socioeconomic objectives. This would of course

S/PV. 8650

include focusing on both organizations’ comparative
advantages to which many have alluded.
Secondly, development and capacity-building
are prerequisites for sustainable peace in Africa. We
recognize the African Union-United Nations Framework
for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development last year and
look forward to hearing updates on its progress. More
possible collaboration and synergy should be explored
through better coordination between the United
Nations, the African Union and international financial
institutions. We recall the collaboration undertaken by
the Organization and the World Bank through the 2017
joint report Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches
to Preventing Violent Conflict. It provides the key
message that economic policies, including economic
incentives, can be tools for prevention. Indonesia also
supports the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and Peacebuilding Fund in addressing the root
causes of conflict. We welcome the work of the country
configuration of the PBC in preventing countries from
relapsing into conflict through development. The clear
majority of African issues in its agenda re-emphasizes
the important role of the PBC in Africa.
Thirdly, the existing partnership between United
Nations and the AU should be complemented with
additional international support. Indonesia and Africa
have been close since the Bandung Conference of 1955,
and we will continue to support Africa through technical
cooperation and capacity-building programmes. In
April 2018, we held the Indonesia-Africa Forum and
subsequently the Indonesia-Africa Infrastructure
Dialogue in August 2019. These events have resulted
in concrete economic cooperation in various strategic
sectors, including infrastructure, trade, connectivity
and strategic industries. We believe that economic
development will certainly address some of the major
issues that Africa currently faces.
We also maintain our commitment to maintaining
peace in Africa through our participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Currently, Indonesia
is the largest personnel-contributing country sitting on
the Council, with around 3,000 personnel, including 128
female peacekeepers. We are preparing more female
peacekeepers who are adept and able to contribute
to capacity-building in their field. We are currently
contributing to seven United Nations missions in Africa.

19-3403911/20

S/PV.8650

African Union

Interregional support is equally important. Just
like the AU, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is also working closely with the
United Nations through its partnership with the
Organization. We are working together to strengthen
the cooperation between ASEAN and the AU on issues
of common interest.
Indonesia will remain committed, as a true partner
of Africa, to maintaining peace and security. Allow
me to reiterate Foreign Minister Marsudi’s words at
the Security Council ministerial meeting on peace and
security in Africa, under the Russian presidency this
past month. Partnership with Africa should be
“based on good faith, honesty and sincerity. This is
the spirit of togetherness that we need to replicate
at the global level: a partnership that will not
cause any harm to Africa; a partnership that will
bring mutual benefits to Africa; and a partnership
that will bring equality and common progress to
Africa.” (S/PV.8627, p. 15)
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate once
again our conviction in the truth of the principle that
neighbours know best. Just as in the case of Africa,
this principle can offer solutions to the issues at hand.
In our experience in the ASEAN region, being a
neighbour is not only about geography; it is also about
camaraderie and about caring and sharing, and it is
always about humanity.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Ms. Hanna Tetteh, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the African
Union, and Ms. Fatima Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
for their detailed briefings.
We have thoroughly studied the latest report of the
Secretary-General, issued in September, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
and the activities of the United Nations Office to the
African Union (S/2019/759). We fully support the
report’s declared intention to further strengthen the
organizations’ strategic partnership on questions of
peace and security in Africa. There is no question
that the challenges facing Africa and the international
community as a whole require that we pool our efforts
and harness the comparative advantages of regional
organizations. We welcome the visible intensification
of the African stakeholders’ initiatives in this area,
including through the creation of the African Peace and
12/20

30/10/2019

Security Architecture. We believe that an approach that
emphasizes African solutions to African problems is an
effective way to overcome security challenges.
We believe that cooperation between the United
Nations and African regional organizations should be
based on the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. It is important to ensure that for
each concrete case we develop a solution for settling
the crisis that is tailored to local specifics. We believe
that in most instances it is regional actors that are best
informed about situations in their areas of responsibility.
At the same time, in the light of the role played by the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security, we do not think that the Council
can remove itself from the work of resolving problems
in that area on the African continent.
We understand our African partners’ concerns about
the provision of resources for African peace-support
operations. It will be important to further enhance
predictability, reliability and flexibility in financing
African operations and joint missions. We are ready to
continue to engage in constructive dialogue in drafting
Security Council resolutions on African peacekeeping.
We have noted the significant focus in the
Secretary-General’s report on the Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative, which we fully support, and we
welcome the decision of the African Union Assembly
to proclaim 2020 the year of that African initiative.
We see serious potential in expanding the
cooperation between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council. The
annual meeting of the two Councils, the most recent of
which was held in Addis Ababa last week, represents
a good opportunity for them to synchronize watches,
so to speak, and harmonize their agendas. I want to
take this opportunity to thank the African Union for
its warm hospitality. We also appreciated the value of
the visit to Juba organized on the eve of the meeting
in the Ethiopian capital. We hope that the discussions
that took place will help all the parties implement
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that one of
the priorities of Russia’s foreign policy is developing
relations with African countries and their regional
organizations. Our positions on many regional and
global issues are close or fully coincide. This was
convincingly demonstrated during last week’s first19-34039

30/10/2019

African Union

ever Russia-Africa Summit, held in Sochi. We are
firmly focused on implementing the outcomes of the
summit, including with regard to creating a permanent
mechanism for partnership through dialogue and
partnership and the intensification of mutually
beneficial cooperation with African States and regional
organizations, for which we hope to have their support.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
attaches great value to the role of the African Union
(AU) in preventing, mediating and resolving conflicts
on the African continent. This is an important element
not only of our collective work as the Security Council
but also of the United Kingdom’s own bilateral strategic
partnership with the African Union.
We are proud to provide national support for
African Union priorities in this area, including the
continental early-warning system, electoral observation
missions, peace-support doctrine development and
predeployment training for African troop- and
police-contributing countries. We very much commend
the determination of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the African Union to
reinforce the partnership between the United Nations
and the AU on peace and security.
Let me pay tribute personally and specifically
to the valuable work of the United Nations Office to
the African Union, under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tetteh,
and of her counterpart here at the United Nations,
Permanent Representative Observer Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, who both do excellent work for their
respective organizations.
The United Nations-African Union partnership in
peacekeeping and in peace-support operations continues
to develop. The United Kingdom supports in principle
access to United Nations assessed contributions for
future AU-led peace-support operations on a case-bycase basis and subject to certain key conditions. A
key consideration in any future Council decision on
this issue is the African Union’s own commitment to
funding 25 per cent of the costs of its own peace-support
operations. This is an important symbol of African
determination to take ownership of African-led
solutions to conflicts on the continent.
Robust financial reporting arrangements, clear
joint planning and coordination structures and strong
compliance frameworks for human rights, international
humanitarian law and conduct and discipline will also

S/PV. 8650

be key. May I at this point express my disappointment at
finding that in the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia discussions this year, posts dealing with
just these issues were not supported by members of
the Group of African States in the Fifth Committee.
We encourage the Secretariat and the African Union
Commission to continue their work on these important
technical areas.
At the Niamey meeting held on 8 July, Member
States agreed that detailed proposals for effective
division of labour between the AU and African
subregional organizations would be developed. We very
much welcome this. An enhanced partnership between
the United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations will be crucial in supporting progress
on issues such as the continued implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan, and let me here echo the words
of my colleagues about our visit to Juba this month
under the leadership of the South African presidency of
the Council and, of course, our American colleagues.
We left Juba with a clear agreement that we needed to
stick to the 12 November timeline and that all parties
needed to compromise for the good of the people of
South Sudan. The Security Council and the African
Union expressed their commitment to being part of
and monitoring the implementation of any outstanding
tasks after the transitional Government was formed
and expressed also a determination to take action
against spoilers.
Let me also say how important that partnership was
in the Sudan’s transition to civilian governance; the
African Union was strongly supported by the Council
through the events of this summer, and, of course, for a
sustainable political settlement in Somalia.
On Libya, I would very much welcome an increased
African Union role, as we discussed when we were in
Addis Ababa. It is extremely important, as our German
colleague has pointed out, that the African Union be
fully represented as a key part of the Berlin process.
But I would also just like to highlight the key role that
other regional organizations, including the League of
Arab States, play, which I have no doubt the Kuwaiti
Ambassador and the observer of the European Union
will mention.
Closer coordination among the United Nations,
African Union and subregional organizations should
also support earlier and more effective action to

19-3403913/20

S/PV.8650

African Union

prevent slow-burning political crises from developing
into conflicts, with each leveraging their comparative
advantage. I think that this is entirely consistent with
the African Union’s initiative to silence the guns by
2020 and the focus that the Secretary-General and,
indeed, the Council has put on conflict prevention.
We particularly recommend greater collaboration
with regard to Cameroon, where inclusive discussion
and follow-up on the recommendations of the national
dialogue are urgently needed to maintain momentum
towards peace. Close coordination among subregional
actors, the African Union and the United Nations is
also vital to resolving the political crisis in Burundi
and making progress towards credible and inclusive
elections in 2020.
We and each of our colleagues on the African Union
Peace and Security Council have, of course, our own
role to play in strengthening the United Nations-African
Union partnership on peace and security under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. Our recent
annual consultations in Addis Ababa were a reminder
of how valuable it is for us to discuss these issues and
seek ways to leverage our comparative advantage. I can
only agree with the Ambassador of Germany that it
would be great to see even greater frankness, perhaps
most importantly where we do not agree, and a greater
focus on actions that we can take together.
Let me just say that I hope we can keep the channels
of dialogue between our two Councils open through
the coming year, ensure that our consultations foster
the development of even deeper and more meaningful
coordination, and do more together to make a reality of
peace on the continent of Africa.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank you, Madam President, for
presiding over today’s meeting. We also thank Special
Representative Tetteh and Ambassador Mohammed for
their briefings.
Last week, the Security Council held the thirteenth
annual consultation with the African Union Peace and
Security Council, which produced effective results and
sent a positive sign for further cooperation between
the two Councils. This consultation epitomizes the
deepening cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU).
In recent years, there have been frequent interactions
between the United Nations and the AU, and their
14/20

30/10/2019

relations have undergone considerable improvement.
Cooperation is particularly productive in the areas of
conflict prevention and resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The two Councils signed such strategic
cooperation documents as the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security and the Africa Union-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Secretary-General Guterres and AU Commission
Chairperson Faki Mahamat held the successful third
AU-United Nations annual conference. The pattern
for bilateral cooperation is taking shape and has
multiple layers in several areas at high levels. Thanks
to the support of the United Nations and the AU,
peace and security in Africa today have improved,
although the continent continues to face a series of new
situations and challenges. Now is the time to advance
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU.
Such cooperation should be only be strengthened,
not weakened.
The United Nations and the AU should be the
champions of multilateralism. The two parties
should continue to strengthen cooperation and jointly
uphold multilateralism, the free-trade system and
the international order underpinned by international
law. The international community should support
African efforts to seek African solutions to African
problems. The AU and other regional and subregional
organizations are uniquely positioned with special
advantages, rich experience and the ability and wisdom
to properly address hotspot issues in Africa based on
the situations on the ground.
The United Nations and the AU should explore
innovative cooperation. Because cooperation between
the two parties in addressing hotspot issues in
Africa becomes increasingly close, a more effective
mechanism should be put in place to strengthen their
collaboration in such key areas as conflict prevention,
crisis management and post-conflict reconstruction.
AU-led peace operations, which have become an
important method of responding to African conflicts
and crises, significantly complement United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The United Nations should
help the AU establish a reliable, stable and predictable
funding mechanism for its own peace operations. It is
hoped that the Security Council and the United Nations
Secretariat will heed the views and concerns of African
countries and support the efforts of African countries
19-34039

30/10/2019

African Union

and regional organizations in maintaining peace and
security on the continent, with a keen focus on the
aspirations and urgent needs of African countries.
The United Nations and the AU should be at the
forefront of win-win development. The two parties
should further expand their cooperation in order to
address the root causes of African issues. Since the
key to solving all problems lies in development, and
poverty and underdevelopment are the root causes
of hotspot issues, the way forward is to achieve
sustainable development. The implementation of the
2030 Agenda should be closely integrated with the
African Union’s Agenda 2063. Supporting economic
and social development in Africa should guide enhanced
cooperation between the two parties in the future. It is
also an important way to help Africa address the root
causes of conflict.
China actively supports advancing cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union and
has made tireless efforts to this end. China will always
adhere to Mr. Xi Jinping’s concept of sincerity, practical
results, affinity and good faith and uphold the greater
good, while pursuing shared interests. China actively
participates in African efforts for peace, security and
development. At this very moment, more than 2,000
Chinese peacekeepers are safeguarding peace in five
United Nations mission areas in Africa. In September
2015, President Xi Jinping announced the establishment
of the China-United Nations Peace and Development
Trust Fund, which will support, as priorities, Africa’s
peacekeeping, counter-terrorism and sustainable
development efforts. As of today, 34 projects benefiting
Africa have been launched. As such, the Fund has
become a new platform for tripartite cooperation among
China, Africa and the United Nations.
The Beijing summit of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation was successfully held in September last
year. The unanimously adopted Beijing Declaration
on Building a Closer Community of Destiny between
China and Africa identified the peace and security
sector as one of the eight major cooperation priorities
in support of ongoing African efforts to silence the
guns in Africa by 2020. A China-Africa peace and
security cooperation fund will be set up to support the
maintenance of peace, security and stability in Africa,
as well as the two parties in their related peacekeeping
and stabilization endeavours.

S/PV. 8650

China is willing to continue working with
the international community to further promote
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU in
order to bring peace, stability and development to the
African continent.
Ms. Rodríguez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today’s meeting. We also thank Ms. Tetteh
and Ms. Mohammed for their briefings.
We attach great importance to strengthening
multilateralism and cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, as well as other regional
and subregional organizations and international
financial institutions, so as to meet contemporary
challenges with greater consistency, effectiveness and
efficiency. We recognize in the African Union Master
Road Map of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in
Africa by the Year 2020 an example of the commitment
and responsibility of African countries with a view
to building a continent free of conflict, which means
addressing such root causes of conflict as poverty,
inequality, climate change and weak institutions.
In those objectives, and as indicated in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/759), there is a
clear convergence of interests and responsibilities
between the United Nations and the African Union,
from peacekeeping and security to the implementation
of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which will require fostering synergies
and complementarity that leverage the comparative
advantage of each of these bodies.
With regard to conflict prevention, we recognize the
efforts of the African Union to promote the Continental
Early Warning System, as well as to establish the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, to strengthen the role of women in the context
of the African peace and security, including through a
network of mediators ready for deployment. We believe
those mechanisms could be put in place to enable them
to be used in peacekeeping operations, particularly in
countries that will hold elections next year.
Regarding peace operations, we highlight the
additional work being carried out in Darfur, Somalia
and South Sudan, among others. We also believe that it
is possible to strengthen the existing cooperation based
on the experience gained in the field in combating
the scourge of terrorism. Greater cooperation with
innovative initiatives, such as the Multinational Joint

19-3403915/20

S/PV.8650

African Union

Task Force against Boko Haram or the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel, should be explored in
greater depth.
We believe it important to continue exploring
options so that the United Nations can contribute to
strengthening the capacities and efficiency of such
forces in order to provide them with predictable,
sustainable and flexible funding. Similarly, given that
there can no peace without justice, we recognize the
importance of the United Nations continuing to work
closely with the African Union in developing capacities
to prevent, investigate, address and report violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.
We also deem it necessary for both organizations to
jointly coordinate in peacebuilding and peacekeeping
phases so as to address the root causes of conflicts
and promote the rule of law and economic growth
based on greater citizen participation, in particular by
women and young people, the private sector and civil
society organizations. To that end, we believe that the
Peacebuilding Commission is an appropriate platform
for promoting synergies in such areas.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the work
carried out by the United Nations Office to the African
Union along with other regional and subregional entities
on the ground, which provides a space for interaction
that can offer strategic guidance for cooperation and
mutual coordination.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Ambassador Fatima Mohammed
and Ms. Hanna Tetteh for their briefings.
The Dominican Republic acknowledges the
commitment and strong strategic partnership in the
area of peace and security between the United Nations,
the African Union and other subregional organizations
in the pursuit of more systematic and coherent solutions
to the peace and security challenges in Africa.
In that regard, we welcome the recent joint annual
consultative meeting of the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council held in
Ethiopia. We also commend the progress made in the
implementation of the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security and the African Union-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as
16/20

30/10/2019

well as the joint efforts to implement the African Union
initiative to silence the guns in Africa by 2020.
Despite progress made in conflict resolution in
several countries of the region, the challenges posed
by violent extremism, terrorism, organized crime,
corruption, impunity and the adverse effects of climate
change, among others, continue to threaten political
and socioeconomic stability in a large part of Africa.
We are aware that the challenges to African peace
and security are complex and need broad cooperation to
address them properly. We recognize that the situation
requires more robust support and more proactive and
better coordinated prevention initiatives. We should
not wait for conflicts to break out. The United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, together with
regional structures should strengthen the systematic
implementation of standardized assessment procedures
for potentially violent situations.
There is a need to invest in education, job
creation in countries and initiatives that particularly
benefit women and young people, recognizing their
contribution in their communities, especially as
mediators and peacebuilders.
It is increasingly necessary for the United
Nations and regional bodies to develop more closely
coordinated efforts that complement each other and
generate synergies to deliver consistent and unified
messages. In that regard, we hope that the modalities
for joint visits to Africa can be agreed to strengthen the
collective perspective.
In the same vein, we view positively the upcoming
assessment report on cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, as well as the structure
and capacity of the United Nations-African Union
partnership, and we look forward to its conclusions.
It is clear that to ensure sustainable peace and
rapid response mechanisms, the United Nations needs
regional peace support structures with the capacity for
early deployment, as well as the equipment and capacity
to overcome the challenges facing the continent. In that
regard, we welcome the adoption of the Declaration of
Shared Commitments, and we hope that procedures will
be adopted to increase the predictability, sustainability
and flexibility of financing for peacekeeping operations
and African Union-led joint forces authorized by the
Security Council.
19-34039

30/10/2019

African Union

S/PV. 8650

Finally, we applaud the excellent work being done
by the United Nations and the African Union in their
ongoing mediation and cooperation to find solutions
to the peace and security challenges in Africa. A
more coordinated partnership and closer cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council, are essential tools to find
predictable and lasting solutions.

Nations meetings and activities, as reflected in the
work of all its organizations, agencies and programmes.
We emphasize the importance of promoting bilateral
cooperation and partnership between the League of
Arab States and the African Union, as well as trilateral
cooperation between the two organizations and the
United Nations, in order to reach peaceful solutions
and put an end to conflicts — for instance, in Libya
and Somalia.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on presiding over this important meeting, which
reflects the significance of the relationship between the
United Nations and the African Union. I also appreciate
the valuable briefing of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, who described in depth the
considerable ongoing progress and development in the
relations between the two organizations concerning
the implementation of the framework agreement
signed by them in April 2017. I also thank Ms. Fatima
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, for her comprehensive briefing
on the joint efforts under way in certain African States
dealing with conflicts.

Peace operations represent the most important
facet of cooperation between the two organizations,
particularly between both Councils. The success of those
operations is a fundamental issue for effectively finding
solutions to peace and security challenges in Africa.
That is evident in the fact that seven of the 14 active
United Nations peace operations are deployed on the
African continent, with a total of 80,000 peacekeepers.
We call for the preservation and consolidation of our
achievements, in particular the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, to ensure that those
operations become more efficient, better equipped,
stronger and safer. That requires clear mandates with
sustainable, continuous and predictable funding.

With regard to the field visit of the Security Council
members to Juba and Addis Ababa few days ago, I
would like to thank Ambassadors Matjila and Craft,
who led the meetings, and all those who contributed
to the good preparation of the visit in Addis Ababa in
view of the fruitful and constructive meetings between
the members of the Security Council and of the African
Union Peace and Security Council. We are aware of the
high levels of cooperation, coordination and partnership
between the two Councils, as was clearly demonstrated
in the meetings on matters of mutual interest, as well
as the genuine desire of members of both Councils to
further promote closer relations.
As described by the Secretary-General in his latest
report (S/2019/759) on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, the systematic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union has made significant progress in terms
of its orderly and predictable nature and through the
joint strategy to address complex challenges to peace
and security in Africa. That is an excellent example of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, which is particularly commendable
given that Africa’s concerns permeate most United

We commend the commitment of the African Union
to covering 25 per cent of the costs of peace operations
in Africa on a permanent basis, as well as the fact that
the Peace Fund currently has $124 million at its disposal,
the highest amount since the establishment of the Fund
in 1993. That proves the real commitment of States to
energizing the Fund. We hope to see the adoption of a
Council draft resolution that would allow the financing
of peace operations led by the African Union and
authorized by the Security Council, especially given
the African Union’s serious intention to implement the
2018 joint declaration in order to establish frameworks
for joint planning, respect for human rights, conduct,
discipline and accountability in African Union peace
operations, in accordance with resolutions 2320 (2016)
and 2378 (2017).
We believe that regional economic commissions
contribute to facilitating the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations in the prevention
and resolution of armed conflict. We welcome the
ongoing consultations between the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and regional economic
commissions, and we call for them to continue.
In parallel, many other developments merit
highlighting. There is the dawn of a new era in the

19-3403917/20

S/PV.8650

African Union

Sudan, the historic reconciliation between Ethiopia
and Eritrea and the gradual drawdown of joint United
Nations-African Union operations in Darfur, which
is expected to be fully completed in 2020. Those are
all positive factors that we hope will continue. We
reaffirm the importance of the Security Council
continuing to support the partnership between the two
Organizations in order to achieve more progress with a
view to achieving the ultimate goal of peace, security
and stability. To that end, we support all efforts by the
Secretary-General through his Special Envoys.
We wish to recall the historic and privileged
relationship between the State of Kuwait and the
African continent. We have established cooperation and
partnership with Africa through our observer status at
the African Union. That relationship motivates us to
continue to support the African Union in achieving the
objectives of its Agenda 2063, in harmony with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. It also motivates
us to implement the African Union’s Silencing the
Guns in Africa initiative, which was highlighted by the
Security Council in its resolution 2457 (2019), in order
to establish peace, stability and security in Africa.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank Special Representative
Hanna Serwaa Tetteh and Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed
for their briefings this morning. I would also like to
commend and thank South Africa for having organized
the recent visit to Addis Ababa and for facilitating the
discussions that took place there.
As the Secretary-General’s latest report rightly
points out (S/2019/759), the strategic and operational
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union remains essential on several levels. In
the context of peace and security, common approaches
by both organizations can make a difference, as
demonstrated by the finalizing of peace agreements
in the Central African Republic and the Sudan. With
regard to conflict prevention and peacekeeping, we
welcome the joint horizon-scanning meetings and joint
technical visits, which have already demonstrated their
added value and will have another opportunity to do
so over the coming months in Cameroon and Burundi.
The partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union is equally important to peacekeeping
operations and peace support operations. We take
note of the critical role played by the joint review of
the African Union Mission in Somalia in the context of
revising the Mission’s mandate.
18/20

30/10/2019

With regard to peacebuilding and partnership
within the context of the rule of law, cooperation on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration also
remains crucial, not only between the United Nations
and the African Union but also with other partners,
such as the World Bank. While the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union is robust, it
remains crucial that we strengthen it further. We wish
to make a few remarks on that matter.
First of all, as we witnessed once again during
our recent visit to Addis Ababa, the African Union
is building an impressive Peace and Security
Architecture, which must be adequately funded and
based on the revitalization of the Peace Fund and the
critical framework of ensuring respect for human
rights. African Union peace operations must ultimately
be able to benefit from more predictable, sustainable
and flexible funding.
Moreover, coordination and collaboration between
the United Nations and the African Union and their
respective institutions must be strengthened at the
thematic level, as demonstrated in the recent debates
and discussions on the role of youth and women, as well
as the link between climate and security. Coordination
and collaboration must also be strengthened at the
operational level. The agendas of both Councils could
be better coordinated, while the management of the
conflict cycle and an integrated approach should be
better harmonized between the two organizations.
Elections will be held in 14 African countries in
2020. In that context, we are pleased to note that the
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union is excellent. However, we believe that
it could be strengthened still further. On the one hand,
in terms of the electoral process, the African Union
Commission has a higher level of convening power
than the United Nations. On the other hand, the United
Nations still has a comparative advantage in the context
of an integrated approach.
The United Nations and the African Union remain
major partners. Let us not forget that that partnership is
above all based on common values, including respect
for the rule of law, democracy, human rights and respect
for our fellow citizens. Let us strengthen them all.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as Minister of Defence and Military
Veterans of South Africa.
19-34039

30/10/2019

African Union

S/PV. 8650

I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the three African members of the Security Council,
Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and South Africa.

Charter with regard to the partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations, particularly
the African Union.

I thank Secretary-General António Guterres for his
report (S/2019/759) on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) on issues of peace and security in Africa. I also
thank Ambassador Fatima Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
and Ms. Hanna Tetteh, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the African Union, for their
briefings today.

We recognize the positive impact that the Joint AUUnited Nations Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security has had in elevating the cooperation,
coordination and collaboration between the two
organizations into a strategic partnership, particularly
at the level of the United Nations and AU Secretariats.
The increased collaboration and strategic partnership
have contributed positively to both the United Nations
and the AU in terms of developing common objectives
and seeking sustainable solutions to the complex
conflicts on the African continent. It is clear that the
complex peace and security issues facing the continent,
including the necessity for the prevention, resolution
and management of conflicts, require effective and
meaningful partnership and collaboration among the
United Nations, the AU, regional economic communities
and regional mechanisms. The three African members
of the Security Council therefore welcome efforts that
seek to strengthen the strategic partnership and ensure
that all concerned genuinely accept the leveraging of
the complementary roles and comparative advantages
of both the United Nations and the AU, including
in areas such as mediation, preventive diplomacy,
peacekeeping, peace enforcement and peacebuilding.

While the Charter of the United Nations gives
the Security Council the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Chapter VIII of the Charter also recognizes the
complementarity between the roles of the United Nations
and regional organizations. In that regard, the African
Union and regional economic communities throughout
the continent are engaged in the resolution of conflicts
in their respective regions. Regional organizations
are often those most affected by the conflicts in their
respective regions. In most circumstances they are also
best placed to address those conflicts, because that
action is linked to their own stability, development
and prosperity.
The African Union has developed an expansive
Peace and Security Architecture for ensuring
sustainable peace on the continent. Its mechanisms
form part of the concerted efforts of the African Union
to achieve peace and realize its aspirations to silence
the guns by 2020. It is in pursuit of that aspiration
that in Malabo on 2 and 3 December the Government
of Equatorial Guinea will host a ministerial-level
conference on the topic of silencing the guns by 2020,
the same theme that the African Union Summit will
adopt for 2020. There can be no question that the active
engagement of the continent together with its external
partners, including the United Nations, has led to the
resolution of long-standing conflicts. The political and
strategic alignment between the Security Council and
regional organizations has been effective, as we have
seen in Somalia, the Central African Republic and
the Sudan. What is also clear, however, is that this
collaboration should be formalized and structured if
it is to be efficient. Over the past 12 years, much has
been done to improve that collaboration. The adoption
of resolutions 1809 (2007) and 2033 (2012) has given
impetus to the implementation of Chapter VIII of the

The key principles that should direct and shape
the partnership and cooperation between the two
organizations going forward are meaningful and
inclusive collaboration, shared and common approaches,
and effective consultative mechanisms. One of the most
critical areas where the strategic partnership between
the United Nations and the AU on peace and security
in Africa continues to grow and must be enhanced is
that between the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council. On 21 and 22 October, members
of both Councils met within the framework of the
thirteenth annual joint consultative meeting in Addis
Ababa. During that meeting, members of the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council
discussed various situations of conflict in Africa,
specifically those in the Central African Republic,
Libya, South Sudan and the Sahel region.
With regard to the issue of South Sudan, there
was convergence between the Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council on what ought to
happen in the lead-up to the 12 November deadline for
the formation of a revitalized Government of National

19-3403919/20

S/PV.8650

African Union

Unity, demonstrating that both Councils can have a
shared understanding and common positions on peace
and security matters in Africa. However, there are areas
where the two Councils are at opposite ends. The issue
of Libya is an illustration of a situation where interests
other than the advancement of the peace process have
the potential to undermine the strategic partnership
between the Councils. In the efforts to resolve the issue
in Libya, it is imperative that the Security Council
take into account the roles and contributions of the AU
Commission and the AU Peace and Security Council,
including by considering the request to appoint a joint
special envoy.
The two Councils also exchanged views on
thematic issues, including the African Union’s flagship
initiative to silence the guns by 2020 and the modalities
for joint field visits by both Councils. As a follow-up
to those consultations, the three African members
of the Security Council would like to emphasize the
following points.
First, we need to translate and elevate some of the
commitments made by both Councils into tangible
outcomes. To do that, we have to evaluate the extent to
which the principles of cooperation and commitment to
the partnership between the United Nations and the AU
have translated into the development of practical and
shared purposes within both Councils. In that regard,
the Security Council should endeavour to give effect
to the commitments it has already made in previous
resolutions, especially resolution 2033 (2012).

20/20

30/10/2019

Secondly, the focus of the debate on strengthening
the United Nations-AU partnership must move away
from generalities about partnership and cooperation and
towards decisive and practical steps that the Security
Council, in particular, and the United Nations and AU,
in general, can take to realize the full implementation of
this strategic partnership. The three African members
of the Security Council welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s undertaking to conduct an assessment of
the United Nations-AU cooperation, including the
structure and capacity of the United Nations Office at
the AU, as requested by the Council in resolution 2320
(2016). It is also imperative that the Security Council
outline its own perspectives regarding the efficacy of
the partnership between the two Councils, based on the
experiences and outcome of the recently held thirteenth
joint consultative meeting, among other things.
In conclusion, the three African members of the
Security Council commend the continued engagement
between the Secretary-General and Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, Chairperson of the AU Commission, in
order to improve the synergy between the Secretariat
and the AU Commission, and to encourage continued
consultative meetings between the Councils. As we
have heard from the briefers, both secretariats have
executed their tasks diligently. We urge all parties
concerned to work towards the effective strengthening
of the partnership so that it contributes to real peace
and security in Africa.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

19-34039
