53

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Fifth Committee

-----------

2. Requests the Secretary-General to bring to the
attention of the specialized agencies which are members of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
the reports submitted to the General Assembly at its
seventh session by the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board and by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Dudgetary Questions ; 22
3. Recommends that the appropriate governing organs of the specialized agencies concerned accept the
jurisdiction of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal in matters involving applications alleging nonobservance of Pension Fund regulations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its eighth session on the action
taken by the specialized agencies concerning this recommendation.
410th plenar}' meeting,
21 December 1952.

further consideration in the light of the observations
presented with respect to these articles in the twentyfourth report 28 of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the seventh
session of the General Assembly and of the discussions
held at the 369th meeting of the Fifth Committee;
3. Refers to the Joint Staff Pension 'Board for consideration at its next session the recommendation of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions that the administrative expenses incurred in the administration of the Regulations of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund should be
charged to the Fund;
4. Requests the Joint Staff Pension Board to report to the General Assembly at its eighth session on
the matters referre<l to in paragraphs 2 and 3 of the
present resolution.
410th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

679 (VII). Second actuarial valuation of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
The Generdl Assembly
1. Takes note of the report 23 of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board on the second actuarial
valuation of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund as of 31 December 1951;
2. Takes note of the observations H thereon of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.
410th plenary meeting,
21 Decembn- 1952.

680 (Vll). Amendments to the Regulations for
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
The General Assembly,
Having considered the recommendations 28 proposed
by the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board in
pursuance of article 37 of the Regulations 26 for the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, with respect
to amendments and additions to be made in the Regulations,
1. Approves the amendments and additions 2 ' to
the Regulations for the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund as set forth in the annex to the present
resolution and decides that the Regulations so amended
shall take effect as from 1 January 1953;
2. Refers the proposals of the Joint Staff Pension
Board relating to articles 11 and 16 to the Board for
22 See document A/1.285.

23 See Official Rtcords of the General Assembly, Seventh
Session, Su,t/ement No. 8A.
H See document A/2346.
21 See document A/2203.
28 See resolution 248 (III).
2 ' The text of the above-mentioned amendments and additions, indicated by italics, can be found in document A/2345
which is reproduced in the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 45.

ANNEX

Regulaiiom o/ the United Nationa Joint Staff
Penaion Fund
(Incorporating the amendments and additions approved
by the General Auembly at iu seventh se111ion)
ARTICLE

I

Definitions
1. "Member organization" means the United Nations or a
specialized agency referred to i~.Article 57, paragraph 2, of
the Charter which has been admitted to the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund under article XXVIII of these regulations.
2. "Age of retirement" means the age at the end of the
month in which the participant reaches the age of sixty years
or such later age as may be determined in accordance with the
staff regulations applying to the participant concerned for the
termination of appointment by retirement.
3. "Pensionable remuneration" means the remuneration of
a participaut which is pensionable in accordance with his terms
of employment. It shall not include any special grants or allowances, such as children's allowances, education grants, expense
allowances, cost-of-living allowances, payments for overtime,
fees, honoraria, and payments for any expenses incurred in the
service of a member organization: If part or the whole of the
pensionable remuneration is paid in kind, the value of such
payments, if not stated in the terms of employment, shall be
determined by the Joint Staff Pension Board.
4. "Final average remuneration" means the average annual
pensionable remuneration of the participant during the last ten
years of his contributory service. Where the participant has
less than ten years of contributory service, the ·final average
remuneration shall mean the average annual pensionable remuneration during the actual period of contributory service.
5. "Contributory service" means the actual time spent in
continuous employment, with a member organization or with
two or more of these organizations, for which cootributions
have been paid in accordance with these regulatiom
28

See document A/2285.

54

General Aa11embly-Seventh Seuion

6. "Actuarial equivalent" means the equivalent determined
on the basis of the mortality tables and the rate of interest
last adopted by the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
under article XXIX.
7. "Designated recipient" means a person or persons, physical or corporate; designated by a participant to the Joint Staff
Pension Board in accordance with a procedure determined by
that Board, as the person or persons eligible to receive the
benefits payable under these regulations to a designated recipient. Where· more than one person is so designated, the
participant shall determine the proportion of the benefit to be
paid to each such person.
ARTICLE

of his retirement benefit becomes due, elect to receive a lump,
sum not greater than one-third of the actuarial equivalent of
the retirement benefit payable to him, and his retirement benefit
shall be reduced in the proportion that such lump sum bears
to the actuarial equivalent of his retirement benefit prior to
reduction.

3. A participant who is entitled under this article to a
benefit which is less than 180 dollars per annum may, prior to
the date on which the first payment of his retirement benefit
becomes due and with the consent of the Joint Staff Pension
Board receive the whole benefit payable to him in the form
of a lump sum which is the· act_uarial equivalent of his benefit.

II

ARTICLE

V

Participation

Disability bent fits

1. Every full-time member of the staff of each member
organi7.ation shall become a participant in the United· Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund if he enters employment under a
contract £or one year or more, or when he has completed one
year of· employment, provided that he is. under sixty years of
age at the time of entering such employment and that his
participation is not excluded by his contract of employment.
2. The foregoing provision shall apply to the Registrar and
every full-time officer of the Registry of the International
Court of Justice.
3. Participation of a participant shall cease when the payment of a benefit under these regulations becomes due to him or
on bis account.

Subject to the provisiol)s of article X, 1 (b), a participant
who, before reaching the age of sixty, has, in the opinion of
the Joint Staff Pension Board, become unable to perform his
duties owing to serious physical or mental impairment shall
be entitled, subject to article IX, while such disability continues, to a disability benefit payable in the same manner as
a retirement benefit and equal to nine-tenths of one-sixtieth
of his final average remuneration multiplied by the number of
years of his contributory service not exc.eeding thirty years.
This disability benefit shall be not less than the smaller of:

ARTICLE III

Validation of non-pensionable service
1. A participant who has been in the employment of a member organization in a non-pensionable capacity may elect within
one year of the commencement of his participation to have .the
period of such prior employment included in his contributory
service to the extent to which he pay9' into the Pension Fund,
in accordance with the administrative rules established for this
purpose by the Joint Staff Pension Board, a sum or sums equal
to the contributions which he would have paid had he been
subject to these regulations throughout this period, with compound interest at 2½ per cent per annum, and provided that
there has been continuity of employment. For the purposes of
this article, intervals of not more than thirty calendar -days in
the period of employment shall not be considered as breaking
the continuity of employment. The time covered by these intervals shall not be included in the period of contributory
service.

2. Payment into the Pension Fund of amounts equal to
twice the amount of the payment so made by the participant
shall be made by the member organization designated for that
purpose in accordance with arrangements concluded by the
member organizations.
3. The earliest date from which employment with the
United Nations can be validated is the first day of February
1946.
ARTICLE. IV

Retirement benefits

I. A participant who reaches the age of sixty shall, upon
retirement, be entitled during the remainder of his life to an •
annual retirement benefit, payable rponthly, equal to one-sixtieth
of his final average remuneration multiplied by the number of
years of his contributory service not exceeding thirty years.
2. A participant may, with the consent of the Joint Staff
Pension Board. prior to the date on which the first payment

(a)

Three-tenths of the final average remuneration;

or

(b) Nine-tenths of the retirement benefit to which he
would have been entitled if he had remained in service until
he had reached the age of sixty and his final average remuneration had remained unchanged.
ARTICLE

VI

Commencement and disco11tinuance of disabiiity benefit
1. The Joint Staff Pension Board shall determine, in accordance with article V at:1d the procedure laid down in the
administrative rules made under these regulations, when a
participant qualifies for a disability benefit. The partidpant
shall not, however, be entitled to a disability benefit so Iona'
as he is entitled .to receive any· larger payments under the
staff regulations applying to him other than payments under
a scneine of compensation for disability attributable · to the
performance of official duties on behalf of a member organization.

2. Until the recipient of a disabijity benefit reaches the aae
of sixty, the Joint Staff Pension Board may require evidence
of the continuance of disability and review his eligibility to a
disability benefit in the light of such evidence. Where the
Board decides that the recipient is no longer eligible for a
disability benefit, it shall, after giving sucl_i notice as it considers proper in each case, discontinue the disability benefit.
Where the disability benefit is discontinued and the recipient
is not re-employed by a member organization, the recipient
shall be entitled to a withdrawal benefit equal to the amount
by which the withdrawal benefit which he would have received
under article X if he had become entitled to a withdrawal
benefit at the time he began to receive the clisability benefit
exceeds the total amount of disability payments made to him.
ARTlc~ VII

Death bmefii,
1. If a married male partidpant dies, hia widow shall be
entitled,. subject to article IX. to • widow's benefit amountins,
except as provided in paragraph 3 below, to half of the benefit
which would _have ·been p;ud to the participant had he qualified

55

Resolution11 adopted on . report• of the . Fifth Committee
for a disability benefit at the time ·of his death or, if such de-

ceased participant had attained the age of sixty, to one-half
of the benefit which would have been paid to the participant
had he retired under the. provisions of article IV at the time of
his death. This benefit shall cease on the widow's re-marriage.
2. ( a) If a married man who is a recipient of a retirement
benefit as provided under article IV dies, his widow, provided
she was his wife at the time of the cessation of his service
with the member organization, shall be entitled, except as provided in paragraph 3. helow, to a widow's benefit half as
large as the henefit which was being paid to the deceased at
the time of his death. However, if the deceased at the time
of his retirement had received a lump sum as provided in
article IV, in lieu of part of the retirement benefit to which
he was entitled, the· widow's benefit shall be half of the total
retirement benefit to which the staff member was entitled
at the cessation of his service. This benefit shall cease on the
widow's re-marriage.
(b) If a married man who is a recipient of a disability
benefit dies, his widow, provided she was his wife six months
before he qualified for a disability benefit, shall be entitled,
except as provided in paragraph 3 below, to a widow's benefit
half as large as the benefit being paid to the deceased at the
time of his death. This benefit shall cease on the widow's
re-marriage.
(c)

Notwithstanding sub-paragraph (b) above, when the

disability of the deceased was the result of an accident or of
damage to health arising from service in an unhealthy area,
his widow, provided she was his wife at the time he qualified
for the disability benefit, shall be entitled to a widow's benefit
half as large as the benefit which was being paid to the deceased at the time of his death. This benefit shall cease on
the widow's re-marriage.

3. If a widow eligible for a benefit under paragraph 1
or 2 is younger than the deceased by more than twenty
years, the annual amount of the benefit shall be reduced so
that the value of the benefit shall be the actuarial equivalent ·
of the benefit which would have been payable to a widow
twenty years younger than the deceased.
4. Upon ceasing to be entitled to a widow's benefit by reason of re-marriage, the widow shall be entitled to a lump-sum
payment equal to twice the annual amount of her widow's
benefit.
5. Upon the death of a participant who does not leave a
widow entitled to a widow's benefit, there shall be paid to his
designated recipient a sum equal to :
(a) . His own contributions to the Pension Fund, with compound interest at 2½ per cent per annum, plus
(b)

SU'ch amount as may have been transferred on his ac-

count to the Pension Fund from the Provident Fund of a

member organization at the time of his entry into the Pension
Fund, without interest

. If a d~s.ignated recipient does not survive a participant or
tf a part1c1pant has not made, or has revoked, a designation,
such sum shall be paid to the participant's estate.
6. A widow whose annual benefit under this article is less
than 120 dollars may, prior to the first payment of such benefit
and with the consent of the Joint Staff Pension Board receive
in lieu thereof a lump sum which is the actuarial ec;uivalent
of such benefit
ARTICLE VIII

Child's benefits

1. Each child ot a participant on whose account a benefit
becomes payable under articles IV, V or Vil; shall be entitled
to a child's benefit. The child's benefit shall be payable monthly

up to and including the month in which the child shall attain
the age of eighteen.
2. The a~nual benefit on account of each child shall be 600
dollar; if there he no parent surviving or if the surviving parent he a widow who has· not become entitled to a widow's
benefit under these regulations or a widower who, in the
opinion of the Roard. is unahle to support the ex-partici;:,ant's
children; otherwise it shall be 300 dollars. However, the sum
of children's benefits, plus any retirement benefit payable under
article IV, I, or disability henefit or widow's benefit, shall not
exceed the·•final average remuneration of an ex-participant plus
the children's allowances which were paid by a member organization at the cessation of his employment.
3. Entitlement to a child's henefit is limited to children
existing at the time of eligibility for retirement or disability
benefit or at the time of the death of the ex-participant.
4. Under no circumstances shall more than one child's benefit he payable in respect of any one child.
ARTICLE

IX

Eligibility for dirability and death bent1fits
1. The Joint Staff Pension Boar<1 shall require every entrant or re-entrant, before admission to coverage by the benefits
provided under articles V and VII, 1, to undergo a medical
examination to be prescribed in the administrative rules made
under these regulations unless the Board decides to accept the
findings of a medical examination previously undergone by the
entrant.

2. On the basis of the medicai examinations referred to in
the preceding paragriph, the Joint Staff Pension Board shall
decide whether the participant concerned shall be covered by
the provisions of articles V and VII, l, immediately, or shall
not be covered by those provisions until he has completed five
years of contributory service or, in the case of a re-entrant,
until he has completed five years of contributory service subsequent to his re-entrance. However, no participant shall be
excluded from the benefits provided under articles V and
VII, 1, if the disability or death is.the direct result of an accident or of damage to health arising from service in an unhealthy area.
ARTICLE X

Withdrawal bmefits
1. If a participant ceases to be in the employment of a
member organization for reasons other than death, or dismissal
for serious misconduct, as defined in the staff regulations, and
is not eligible for a disability or retirement benefit, he shall be
entitled to the following withdrawal benefits:
(a) If the participant has less than five years of. contributory service, he shall be paid a sum equal to :
(i) His own contributions to the Pension Fund, with compound interest at 2½ per cent per annum, plus
(ii) Such amount as may have been transferred on his
account to the Pension Fund from the Provident Fund
of a member organization at the time of his entry into
the Pension Fund, without interest.

(b) If the participant has five or more years of contributory
service he shall be entitled, four months after his employment
ceases, to a lump-sum payment which shall be the actuarial
equivalent, at the date his employment ceased, of the retirement
benefit payable at the age of sixty calculated on the basis of
his contributory service and final average remuneration, provided that the amount to be received under this clause shall not
be less than the amount receivable under sub-paragraph (a)
above. During that period of four months, he shall not be

56

General Asaembly-Seventh Session

eligible for a disability benefit but shall be eligible for a death
benefit based on his contributory service at the date he ceased
to be employed by a member organization; except that a widow's benefit will be payable only if his widow was his wife at
the time his employment ceased. If he dies during this period
of four months and a death benefit becomes payable under
article VII, no further benefit shall be payable.
(c) At the request of a participant the Joint Staff Pension
Board shall pay the lump sum due under sub-paragraph (b)
above at a date earlier than that prescribed, hnt the participant
shall cease to be eligible for death benefits on the date that such
payment is made.
·
(d) Any participant whose years of contributory service
when added to his age at withdrawal equal sixty or more
years may elect to receive, in lieu of the lump sum due under
sub-paragraph (b) above, his withdrawal benefit in the form
of either:
(i)

A retirement benefit, either immediate or deferred to
age sixty, which is the actuarial equivalent of such
lump sum; or

(ii)

One-half of the lump sum due under sub-paragraph
(b) above and a retirement benefit deferred to age
sixty which is the actuarial equivalent of one-half of
such lump sum.

2. At the request of a person entitled to a benefit under this
article, the payment of the withdrawal benefit shall be postponed for a period not exceeding three years from the date
when the benefit became due. During the period of such postponement compound interest at the rate of 2½ per cent per
annum shall be added to the amount of such benefit.
ARTICLE XI

Su111mary dismissal for serious misconduct •
A participant who, in conformity with the staff regulations,
has been summarily dismissed for serious misconduct shall receive:
(a) His own contributions to the Pension Fund, with compound interest at 2½ per cent per annum, plus
(b) Such amount as may have been transferred on his
account to the Pension Fund from the Provident Fund at the
time of his entry into the Pension Fund, without interest, provided that, on the recommendation of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, or of the competent authority of the member orgadzation concerned, the Joint Staff Pension Board may,
to the extent so recommended, grant to such participant a lump
sum equal to either the whole or a part of the remainder of the
benefit he would have been entitled to, under article X, had he
ceased to be employed for reasons other than summary dismissal for serious misconduct.
ARTICLE XII

Re-employment

If a person who has ceased to be a participant becomes a
participant again by virtue of a new appointment, the following provisions shall apply, subject to article IX:
1. If the participant received a lump-sum withdrawal ~enefit, he may pay into the Pension Fund in a manner acceptable
to the Joint Staff Pension Board a sum or sums equivalent to
the withdrawal benefit received, with compound interest at
2½ per cent per annum. If such repayments are made:

• The General Assembly 1·efened the proposals of the Joint
Staff Pension Board relating to the above article to the Board
for further consideraticn (see para. 2, resolution 680 (VII)).

(a) If participation has been interrupted for a period of
three calendar years or less, the participant's contributory
service credit prior to separation shall be restored.

( b) If the participation has been interrupted for a period
exceeding three calendar years, the repayments so made shall
be credited as additional contrihutions in accordance with the
provisions of article XVIII, 2 and 3.
2. If the participant was in receipt of a withdrawal benefit
under article X, 1 (d), payment of that benefit shall cease, and
··(a) If participation has been interrupted for a period of
three calendar years or less and if :h ,iarticipant repays all
payments of his benefit rPccive<l with compound interest at
2½ per cent per annum, his contributory service credit prior
to separation shall be restored. If the participant does not so
repay the payments of his benefit received, then the lump sum
which is the actuarial equivalent of the discontinued benefit at
the date upon which payments were discontinued shall be
credited as an additional contriuution in accordance with the
provisions of article XVIII, 2 and 3.
(b) If the participation has been interrupted for a period
exceeding three calendar years, the lump sum which is the
actuarial equivalent of the discontinued benefit at the date upon
which payments were discontinued shall be credited as an additional contribution in accordance with the provisions of article
XVIII, 2 and 3.
3. If the participant was in receipt of a disability benefit
under article V, payment of that benefit shall cease, and
(a) He shall re-enter the Pension Fund as a participant
with credit for the contributory service which he had accumulated when his disability benefit began.
(b) Any withdrawal benefit which may become payable to
him within five years after his re-entry into the Fund may be
reduced by the Board by the amount of the disability benefit
payments made to him; and the amount of any retirement benefit which may become payable to him within one year after his
re-entry into the Fund may be reduced by the Board to an
amount not exceeding the sum of the disability benefit of which
he had been in receipt and the retirement benefit earned during
his period of contributory service since reappointment.
ARTICLE XIII

Prescr,1ation of pension rights
Any agreement adjusting the provisions of these regulations
which the Secretary-General proposes to conclude with a Member government, or with an inter-governmental organization,
with a view to securing continuity of the pension and staff
benefit rights of participants, shall be communicated to the
Joint Staff Pension Board by the r.:presentatives of the Secretary-General on that Board, for observations, prior to the submission of such an agreement to the General Assembly for
approval.
ARTICLE

XIV

Establishment of a Pension Fund
A Fund shall be established to meet the liabilities resulting
from these regulations which shall be known as the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund. All moneys deposited with
bankers, all securities and investments and all other assets
which are the property of the Fund shall be deposited, acquired and held in the name of the United Nations on behalf
of all the participants and beneficiaries of the Fund. The Fund
shall be administered separately from the assets of the United
Nations by the Joint Staff Pension Board in accordance with
these regulations, and shall be used solely for the purposes
provided for in these regulations.

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Fifth Committee
ARTICLE

XV

Payments into the Fund
The Fund shall he maintained by:
l. The contributions of the participants;
2. The contributions of the member organizations;
3. The yield from the investments of the Fund;
4. Any deficiency payments under article XIX; and
5. Any other receipts.
ARTICLE

XVI

57

regular benefit to which he may become entitled under these
regulations; and such additional henefit sha11 be the actuarial
equivalent of the amount so credited at the time such benefit
becomes payable.
3. Any married male partic-ipant who has contrihuted undrr
the provisions of this article and who becomes entitled to a
retirement or disability benefit may, prior to the commencement of payment of such benefit, elect to receive, in lieu of the
additional benefit payable in accordance with paragraph 2 of
this article, a hencfit payahle only during his own lifetime
which is the actuarial equivalent oi the benefit, including the
prospective widow's benefit, otherwise payable.

Contributions on account of participants•
l. Seven per cent of the pensionable remuneration of each
participant shall be deducted from his remuneration and paid
each month to the Pension Fund.

2. During any period of sick leave on full or partial pay, a
participant shall continue to contribute to the Pension Fund by
deduction from such payments on the basis of his full pensionable remuneration, and any benefit under these regulations to
which he becomes entitled during such period shall be calculated on the basis of his full pensionable remuneration.
3. During any period of authorized leave without pay or
sick leave without pay, a participant may have such periods
included in his contributory service by paying his own contribution and the contribution that would normally be payable,
under article XVII of these regulations, by the United Nations
or a member organization on the basis of his full pensionable
remuneration. In cases approved by the Secretary-General in
respect of the United Nations staff, or by the compete11t authority in respect of the staff of member organizations, the
United Nations or the member organizations may continue to
pay the contribution otherwise due under article XVII of these
regulations notwithstanding that the participant is not in receipt of pensionable remuneration; and in such cases the participant will' pay only his own contribution.

ARTICLE XIX

Deficiency payments
l f at any time an actuarial valuation shows that the assets
of the Pension Fund may not be sufficient to meet the liabilities
under the regulations, there shall be paid into the Fund by each
member organization the sum necessary to make good the deficiency. Each member organization shall contribute to this sum
an amount proportionate to the total contributions which each
paid under article XVII during- the three years previous to
the date of the actuarial valuation referred to above.
ARTICLE XX

Staff pension committees of member organizations
Each member organization shall have a staff pension committee, which shall include members chosen by the body of the
member organization corresponding to the General Assembly
of the United Nations, by the chief executive officer, and by
the participants.
ARTICLE

XXI

United Nations Staff Pension Committee
ARTICLE XVII

Normal contrib•tions by member organizatiotis
Each member organization shall pay jnto the Pension Fund
monthly a contribution equal to 14 per cent of the total monthly
pensionable remuneration of the participants employed by it.
ARTICLE XVIII

Voluntary deposits by participants
1. In addition to the contributions deducted from the remuneration of a participant as provided in article XVI, any
participant may, subject to the approval of the Joint Staff
Pension Board and under such conditions as the Board may
prescribe, deposit in the Pension Fund, in a lump sum or sums
and/or by an increased rate of contribution, an amount computed to be sufficient to purchase an additional retirement benefit which, together with his prospective regular retirement
benefit as provided herein, will provide for him .a total retirement benefit not to exceed one-half of his final average remuneration at the age of retirement. Interest at such rates as may
be set from time to time by the Board shall be allowed on such
contributions.

2. Such additional contributions and/or amounts deposited
under the provisions of article• XII, together with tne interest
thereon, shall be credited to the participant's individual account
in the Pension Fund and shall be used to provide an additional
benefit, payable in the same form and at the same time as any
11
The General Assembly referred the proposals of the Joint
Staff Pension Board relating to the above article to the Board
for further consideration (see para. 2, resolution 680 (VII)).

I. The United Nations Staff Pension Committee shall consist of three members elected for three years by the General
Assembly, three members appointed by the Secretary-General
and three members, who must be participants and on the staff
of the United Nations, elected for three years by such participants by secret ballot. Where questions directly affecting
participants employed in the Registry of the International Court
of Justice are under consideration, a member appointed by the
Registrar shall be entitled to attend the meetings of the Staff
Pension Committee. The Assembly and the participants sha11
each elect three alternate memhers for three years, and the
Secretary-General shall appoint three alternate members.
2. The term of office of elected members of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee shall begin on 1 January following the election, and shall terminate on 31 December following
the election of their successors. The elected members shall be
eligible for re-election.
3. A secretary to the United Nations Staff Pension Committee shall be appointed by the Secretary-General upon the
recommendation of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee. The Secretary of the Joint Staff Pension Board can be
appointed to this office.
ARTICLE XXII

Joint Staff Pension Board
1. The Joint Staff Pension Board shall consist of nine members appointed by the United Nations Staff Pension Committee,
and three members appainted by each of the staff pension
committees of the other member organizations. Members ·-,f
the Board shall be appointed by each staff pension commit" ,.

General Assembly-Seventh Session

58

in equal numbers from each of the three groups referred to in
article XX.
2. The Joint Staff Pension Board may appoint a standing
committee, which will act on its behalf when the Board is not
in session.

tions by the staff pension committee of a member organization
shall be met out of the general budget of that organization.

ARTICLE XXIII

l. A specialized agency referred to in Article 57, paragraph 2, of the Charter shall become a member organization
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund on its acceptance of these regulations, provided that agreement has
been reached with the Secretary-General of the United Nations as to any payments necessar1 ,,. be made by such
specialized agency to the Pension Fund in respect of the new
obligations incurred by the Fund through its admission, and
as to the other transitional arrangements that may be necessary. including the extent to which these regulations are to
be applicable to employees of the specialized agency at the
time of admission to the Fund.
2. Any agreement which the Secretarj'-General proposes
to conclude with a specialized agency shall be communicated
to the Joint Staff Pension Board by the representatives of the
Secretary-General on that Board, for observations, prior to
its conclusion.

Secretary of the Joint Staff Pension Board
Upon the reco~endation of the Joint Staff Pension Board,
the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall appoint a
secretary and other officer or officers to act in the absence of
the secretary. The secretary and the officer acting in his absence
shall exercise their functions under the authority of the Board.
The payment of all benefits under these regulations must be
certified by the secretary or the officer authorized by the Board
to act in his absence.
ARTICL,E XXIV

Power of delegation
Subject to article XXIII, the Joint Staff Pension Board may
delegate to the staff pension committee of each member organization, in respect of the participants and beneficiaries in that
body, some or all of its discretionary powers relating to:
(a)
(b)

Admission of participants;
The granting of benefits under these regulations.
ARTICLE XXV

Investment of assets of the Fund
Subject to the complete separation to be maintained between
the assets of the Fund and the assets of the United Nations
as provided in article XIV, the investment of the assets of the
Fund shall be decided upon by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, after consultation with an Investments Committee and after having heard any observations or suggestions
by the Joint Staff Pension Board concerning the investments
policy. The Investments Committee shall consist of three members appointed by the Secretary-General after consultation with
the Advisory Commi.ttee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, subject to ·subsequent confirmation by the General
Assembly.
ARTICLE XXVI

Staff

1. Subject to article XXIII, the Secretary-General of the
United Nations shall provide the staff required by the Joint
Staff Pension Board and by the United Nations Staff Pension
Committee, including the staff necessary for keeping of the
accounts and records of the Fund and the payment of benefits.
2. Consulting actuaries to the Joint Staff Pension Board
shall be appointed by the Secretary-General on the recommendation of the Board.

ARTICLE XXVIII

Admission of speciali::ed agencies

A1mcu: XXIX
Adoption of basic tables
The Joint Staff Pension Board, upon the advice of a qualified
actuary or actuaries, shall adopt from time to time service and
mortality tables and the rate of reguiar interest which shall be
usl:d in a'.1 act:larial calculations required in connexion with
the Pension Fund. Unless and until changed by the Joint Staff
Pension Board, a rate of 2¼ per cent per annum shall be the
applicable rate of regular interest. Once in each five years
following the establishment of the Pension Fund, the Board
shall have an actuarial investigation made into the mortality,
service, and compensation experience of the participants and
beneficiaries of the Pension Fund; and taking into account the
results of such investigation, the Board shall adopt such mortality, service and other tables as it shall deem appropriate.
ARTICLE XXX

Cu"ency
1. Contributions to the Fund shall be calculated upon the
pensionable remuneration fixed by the terms of employment
and shall be remitted to the Fund in United States dollars
or in such other currency as may be agreed between the
Board and the member organization concerned.
2. Benefits shall be calculated and. paid in the currency
in which contributions have been received by the Fund on
the account of each participant, provided however that payment of benefits may be made in any other currency selected
from time to time by the recipient, at the rate of exchange
obtainable by the Fund at the date of payment.
ARTICLE XXXI

A ctWJrial valuations
ARTICI.E XXVII

Adminislratfoe eJ(penses
l. Expenses incurred in the administration of these regulations by the Joint Staff Pension Board shall be met out
of the generltl budget of the United Nations. Arrangements
between the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
the competent authorities of the other member organizations
· may, however, be concluded to provide for the sharing of such
«:xpenses.
2. Expenses incurred in the administration of these regula-

1. The Joint Staff Pension Board shall have an actuarial
valuation of the Pension Fund made not later than one year
after the appointed date • by a qualified actuary or actuaries,
and thereafter at least every three years. The actuarial report
shall state the assumptions on which the calculations are
based ; it shall describe the method of valuation used; it shall
state the results of the investigations as well as the recommendations, if any, for any appropriate action. The report shall
be presented to the Joint Staff Pension Board, and to the
competent authority of each member organization.
• See article XL.

Reaolutiona adopted on reporb of the Fifth Committee
2. Upon the receipt of the actuarial report, the Joint Stal
Pension Board shall make proposals to the General Aslefflbly
of the United Nations, and to member organizations, for any
action to be taken as a result thereof. Copies of the actuarial
report and of any such proposals shall be forwarded to the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
Aancu XXXII

Non-assignability of rigltls
A participant or a beneficiary may not assign his rights under
these regulations to another person.
ARTicu XXXIII

Debls owed to llte Fllffd
Any payment due from a participant to the Pension Fund
and unpaid at the date of his becoming entitled to any benefit
under these regulations shall be deducted from the benefit in
a manner to be determined by the Joint Staff Pension Board.
ARTICLE XXXIV

Doc"mmlary fflidence
Every participant and every beneficiary under these regulations shall furnish such documentary evidence as may be required under the administrative rules.

59

default in the payment of contribu~ions, shall be subject to
approval by the General Assembly of the United Nations upon
the recommendation of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board.
2. In the event of termination of membership the following
provisions shall apply : The proportionate share of each such
former member organization in the total assets of the Pension_
Fund as of the date its membership terminated shall be determined by actuarial valuation. The share so determined shall
be disposed of either by payment to the former organization
or pursuant to such arrangement as may be mutually agreed
between that organization and the Board, in either case on
behalf of and for the exclusive benefit of its staff who were
participants as of such date; provided, however, that no part
of the assets of the Pension Fund which are in excess of
the amount required to meet the liabilities ,under the regulations
;,.s of such date shall be included in determining such pro•
portionate share.
ARTICLE XXXiX

External awdit
The Joint Staff Pensio1. Board shall arrange for an annual
audit of the Fund to be made b) the Board of Auditors of t' ~
United Nations. A copy of the report of the Board of Auditors
shall be included as part of the annual report u prescribed
under article XXXV.
ARTICLE XL

ArnazXXXV

Aptoint,d dot,

Annual retorl
The Joint Staff Pension Board shall present annually to the
General Assembly of the United Nations and to the member
organizations a report, including a balance-sheet, on the operation of these regulations. The Secretary-General shall inform
each member organization of any action taken by the General
Assembly upon the _report.

ARTicu XXXVI
A dMinislralitJ1

These regulations, which supersede and replace the Provisional Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Scheme, shall come into force on 23 Jauuary 1949.

681 (VII). Adminiatration of the United Nations

""'s

The Joint Staff Pension Board shall make administrative
nlles necessary for the carryinc out of these regulations. These
administrative rules shall be rt!ported to the General Assembly
of the United Nations and to the competent organ of each
member organization.
. ARTICU XXXVII

AMmdfftfflU
The Joint Staff Pension Board may recommend to the General Assembly of the United Nations amendments to these
reau]ationL The General Assembly may, after the Joint Staff
Pension Board has been consulted, amend these regulations;
and the regulations 10 amended shall take effect in regard to
the participants in the Fund, including those who were participants before the regulations were amended, as from the
date specified by the General Assembly but without prejucUce
to rights to benefits acquired through contributory service accumulated prior to that date.
ARTICLE XXXVIII

Tn'fflinaffon of llte ,,.,,,.b,rsltit of a fftlflWff orga,,i.rolion
1. Termination of membership in the Pension Fund of a
member organization, whether u the result of an applicatioa
by such member organization or u a result of continued

A

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the proposals and opinion concerning the organization of !he Secretariat contained in the
memorandum II by the Secretary-General on the question of the administration of the United Nations, and
of the report· •0 of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on these proposals,
Considering that the problems of reorganization require further study,
1. Decides to include the question of the organization of the Secretariat ih the provisional agenda of the
eighth session of the ~eral Assembly;
2. Req,usts the Secretary•General to prepare a full
report on the problems of reo~zation of the Secretariat, including the relationship between the Departments of Economic Affairs and of Social Affairs and
the Technical Assistance Administration, as well as on
their administrative and financial implications, and to
circulate it, with the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Ques• See document A/2214.
ao See document Ara,J.
