United Nations

A/RES/67/164

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 March 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 69 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2012
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/67/457/Add.2 and Corr.1)]

67/164. Human rights and extreme poverty
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,2 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 3 the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 4 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 5
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 6 and other human rights
instruments adopted by the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 47/196 of 22 December 1992, by which it declared
17 October the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, and its resolution
62/205 of 19 December 2007, by which it proclaimed the Second United Nations
Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017), as well as its resolution 65/214
of 21 December 2010 and its previous resolutions on human rights and extreme
poverty, in which it reaffirmed that extreme poverty and exclusion from society
constitute a violation of human dignity and that urgent national and international
action is therefore required to eliminate them,
Recalling also its resolution 52/134 of 12 December 1997, in which it
recognized that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human
rights was essential for the effective understanding, promotion and protection of all
human rights,

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
4
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
5
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
6
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
2

12-48844

*1248844*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/164

Human rights and extreme poverty

Recalling further Human Rights Council resolutions 2/2 of 27 November
2006, 7 7/27 of 28 March 2008, 8 8/11 of 18 June 2008, 9 12/19 of 2 October 2009 10
and 15/19 of 30 September 2010, 11
Recalling Human Rights Council resolution 21/11 of 27 September 2012, 12 by
which the Council adopted the guiding principles on extreme poverty and human
rights 13 as a useful tool for States in the formulation and implementation of poverty
reduction and eradication policies, as appropriate,
Reaffirming the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, welcoming the high-level plenary meeting of the
General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, and recalling its outcome
document, contained in resolution 65/1 of 22 September 2010,
Deeply concerned that extreme poverty persists in all countries of the world,
regardless of their economic, social and cultural situation, and that its extent and its
manifestations, such as hunger, trafficking in human beings, disease, lack of
adequate shelter, illiteracy and hopelessness, are particularly severe in developing
countries, while acknowledging the significant progress made in several parts of the
world in combating extreme poverty,
Deeply concerned also that gender inequality, violence and discrimination
exacerbate extreme poverty, disproportionally impacting women and girls,
Stressing that special attention should be given to children, older persons,
persons with disabilities and indigenous peoples who are living in extreme poverty,
Concerned by the challenges faced today, including those derived from the
financial and economic crisis, the food crisis and ongoing concerns over food
security, as well as the increasing challenges posed by climate change and the loss
of biodiversity, and by their impact on the increase in the number of people living in
extreme poverty and their negative effect on the capacity of all States, especially
developing countries, to fight extreme poverty,
Recognizing that the eradication of extreme poverty is a major challenge
within the process of globalization and requires coordinated and continued policies
through decisive national action and international cooperation,
Recognizing also that social protection systems make a critical contribution to
the realization of human rights for all, in particular for those who are in vulnerable
or marginalized situations and are trapped in poverty and subject to discrimination,
Stressing the necessity of better understanding and addressing the causes and
consequences of extreme poverty,
Reaffirming that, since the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits
the full and effective enjoyment of human rights and may, in some situations,

_______________
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53),
chap. I, sect. A.
8
Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
9
Ibid., chap. III, sect. A.
10
Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/65/53 and Corr.1), chap. I, sect. A.
11
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/65/53/Add.1), chap. II.
12
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. II.
13
A/HRC/21/39.

2/5

Human rights and extreme poverty

A/RES/67/164

constitute a threat to the right to life, its immediate alleviation and eventual
eradication must remain a high priority for the international community,
Stressing that respect for all human rights, which are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, is of crucial importance for all policies and
programmes to fight extreme poverty,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and the full and effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing and contribute to the eradication of extreme poverty,
Reaffirms that extreme poverty and exclusion from society constitute a
1.
violation of human dignity and that urgent national and international action is
therefore required to eliminate them;
Also reaffirms that it is essential for States to foster participation by the
2.
poorest people in the decision-making process in the societies in which they live, in
the promotion of human rights and in efforts to combat extreme poverty and that it
is essential for people living in and affected by poverty and in vulnerable or
marginalized groups or situations to be empowered to organize themselves and to
participate in all aspects of political, economic, social and cultural life, in particular
the planning and implementation of policies that affect them, thus enabling them to
become genuine partners in development;
Emphasizes that extreme poverty is a major issue to be addressed by
3.
Governments, civil society, community-based social organizations and the United
Nations system, including international financial institutions, and in this context
reaffirms that political commitment is a prerequisite for the eradication of poverty;
Reaffirms that the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits the
4.
full and effective enjoyment of human rights and renders democracy and popular
participation fragile;
Recognizes the need to promote respect for human rights and
5.
fundamental freedoms in order to address the most pressing social needs of people
living in poverty, including through the design and development of appropriate
mechanisms to strengthen and consolidate democratic institutions and governance;
Reaffirms the commitments contained in the United Nations Millennium
6.
Declaration, 14 in particular the commitments to spare no effort to fight against
extreme poverty and to achieve development and poverty eradication, including the
commitment to halve, by 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income
is less than one United States dollar a day and the proportion of people who suffer
from hunger;
Also reaffirms the commitment made at the 2005 World Summit to
7.
eradicate poverty and promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development
and global prosperity for all, including women and girls; 15
8.
Further reaffirms the commitment made at the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals to
accelerating progress in order to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger by 2015; 16

_______________
14

Resolution 55/2.
See resolution 60/1.
16
See resolution 65/1.
15

3/5

A/RES/67/164

Human rights and extreme poverty

9.
Recalls that promoting universal access to social services and providing
social protection floors can make an important contribution to consolidating and
achieving further development gains and that social protection systems that address
and reduce inequality and social exclusion are essential for protecting the gains
made towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, and in this
regard takes note of International Labour Organization Recommendation No. 202 on
social protection floors;
10. Encourages States, when designing, implementing, monitoring and
evaluating social protection programmes, to ensure gender mainstreaming and the
promotion and protection of all human rights in accordance with their obligations
under international human rights law, through this process;
11. Also encourages States to take all necessary measures to eliminate
discrimination against all persons, in particular those living in poverty, to refrain
from adopting any laws, regulations or practices denying or limiting the enjoyment
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including economic, social and
cultural rights, and to ensure that people, in particular those living in poverty, have
equal access to justice;
12. Welcomes the ongoing efforts to strengthen and support South-South
cooperation and triangular cooperation, and stresses that South-South cooperation is
not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South cooperation;
13. Encourages the international community to strengthen its efforts to
address challenges that are contributing to extreme poverty, including those derived
from the financial and economic crisis, the food crisis and ongoing concerns over
food security, as well as the increasing challenges posed by climate change and the
loss of biodiversity in all parts of the world, especially in developing countries, by
enhancing its cooperation to help to build national capacities;
14. Reaffirms the critical role of both formal and informal education in the
achievement of poverty eradication and other development goals as envisaged in the
Millennium Declaration, in particular basic education and training for eradicating
illiteracy, and efforts towards expanded secondary and higher education as well as
vocational education and technical training, especially for girls and women, the
creation of human resources and infrastructure capabilities and the empowerment of
those living in poverty, in this context reaffirms the Dakar Framework for Action
adopted at the World Education Forum on 28 April 2000, 17 and recognizes the
importance of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
strategy for the eradication of poverty, especially extreme poverty, in supporting the
Education for All programmes as a tool to achieve the Millennium Development
Goal of universal primary education by 2015;
15. Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to give high priority to the question of the relationship between extreme
poverty and human rights, and also invites her to further pursue the work in this
area;
16. Calls upon States, United Nations bodies, in particular the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations
Development Programme, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
_______________
17

See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).

4/5

Human rights and extreme poverty

A/RES/67/164

organizations to continue to give appropriate attention to the links between human
rights and extreme poverty, and encourages the private sector and international
financial institutions to proceed likewise;
17. Takes note with appreciation of the guiding principles on extreme
poverty and human rights,13 adopted by the Human Rights Council in its resolution
21/1112 as a useful tool for States in the formulation and implementation of poverty
reduction and eradication policies, as appropriate;
18. Encourages Governments, relevant United Nations bodies, funds,
programmes and specialized agencies, other intergovernmental organizations and
national human rights institutions as well as non-governmental organizations and
non-State actors, including the private sector, to consider the guiding principles in
the formulation and implementation of their policies and measures concerning
persons affected by extreme poverty;
19. Requests the Office of the High Commissioner to disseminate the guiding
principles, as appropriate;
20. Welcomes the efforts of entities throughout the United Nations system to
incorporate the Millennium Declaration and the internationally agreed development
goals set out therein into their work;
21. Also welcomes the work undertaken by the Special Rapporteur on
extreme poverty and human rights and her reports, submitted to the General
Assembly at its sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh sessions; 18
22. Decides to consider the question further at its sixty-ninth session under
the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms” of
the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
60th plenary meeting
20 December 2012

_______________
18

A/66/265 and A/67/278.

5/5
