United Nations

A/RES/58/129

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 46

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 19 December 2003
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/58/L.51 and Add.1)]

58/129. Towards global partnerships
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/215 of 21 December 2000 and 56/76 of
11 December 2001,
Reaffirming the vital role of the United Nations, in particular the General
Assembly, in the promotion of partnerships in the context of globalization,
Underlining the intergovernmental nature of the United Nations,
Reaffirming its resolve to create an environment, at the national and global
levels alike, that is conducive to sustainable development and the elimination of
poverty,
Recalling the objectives formulated in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, 1 particularly in regard to developing partnerships through the provision
of greater opportunities to the private sector, non-governmental organizations and
civil society in general so as to enable them to contribute to the realization of the
goals and programmes of the Organization, in particular in the pursuit of
development and the eradication of poverty,
Underlining the importance of the contribution of the private sector, nongovernmental organizations and civil society in general to the implementation of the
outcomes of United Nations conferences in the economic, social and related fields,
Recalling the central role and responsibility of Governments in national and
international policy-making,
Stressing that efforts to meet the challenges of globalization could benefit from
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and all relevant partners, in
particular the private sector, in order to ensure that globalization becomes a positive
force for all,
Underlining the fact that cooperation between the United Nations and all
relevant partners, in particular the private sector, shall serve the purposes and
principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and make concrete
_______________
1

03 50232

See resolution 55/2.

A/RES/58/129

contributions to the realization of the goals contained in the Millennium Declaration
and in the outcomes of major United Nations conferences and summits and their
reviews, in particular in the area of development and the eradication of poverty, and
shall be undertaken in a manner that maintains the integrity, impartiality and
independence of the Organization,
Emphasizing that all relevant partners, in particular the private sector, can
contribute in several ways to addressing the obstacles confronted by developing
countries in mobilizing the resources needed to finance their sustainable
development, and to the realization of the development goals of the United Nations
through, inter alia, financial resources, access to technology, management expertise,
and support for programmes, including through the reduced pricing of drugs, where
appropriate, for the prevention, care and treatment of HIV/AIDS and other diseases,
Encouraging the private sector to engage as reliable and consistent partners in
the development process and to take into account not only the economic and
financial, but also the developmental, social, human rights, gender and
environmental implications of their undertakings and, in general, towards accepting
and implementing the principle of good corporate citizenship, that is, bringing social
values and responsibilities to bear on a conduct and policy premised on profit
incentives, in conformity with national laws and regulations,
Recalling that the International Conference on Financing for Development
welcomed all efforts to encourage good corporate citizenship and noted the
initiative undertaken in the United Nations to promote global partnerships, 2
Noting that the World Summit on Sustainable Development, in order to
promote the effective implementation of Agenda 21 at the international level,
encouraged partnership initiatives for implementation by all relevant stakeholders to
support the outcome of the Summit, 3
Also noting that the Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 2003/61 of
25 July 2003, reiterated, upon the recommendation of the Commission on
Sustainable Development at its eleventh session, 4 that partnerships for sustainable
development, as voluntary multi-stakeholder initiatives, contribute to the
implementation of Agenda 21 5 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit
on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 6
Further noting that the Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 2003/15
of 21 July 2003, endorsed the conclusion adopted by the Commission for Social
Development at its forty-first session 7 that, at the international level, recent
initiatives towards building voluntary partnerships for social development should be
encouraged,
_______________
2
See Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 1822 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7).
3
See Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum).
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I, sect. A.
5
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
6
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
7
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Supplement No. 6 (E/2003/26), chap. I, sect. B.

2

A/RES/58/129

Taking note of the work of the United Nations on partnerships, such as the
Global Compact Initiative launched by the Secretary-General, the Information and
Communication Technologies Task Force and the United Nations Fund for
International Partnerships, and welcoming the establishment of a multitude of
partnerships at the field level, entered into by various United Nations agencies, nonState partners and Member States, such as the United Nations Public-Private
Alliance for Rural Development,
Stressing that partnerships should focus on the achievement of concrete results,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 8

2.
Stresses that the principles and approaches that govern such partnerships
should be built on the firm foundation of United Nations purposes and principles, as
set out in the Charter of the United Nations, and invites the United Nations system
to continue to adhere to a common and systematic approach to partnership which,
without imposing undue rigidity in partnership agreements, includes the following
principles: common purpose, transparency, bestowing no unfair advantages upon
any partner of the United Nations, mutual benefit and mutual respect, accountability,
respect for the modalities of the United Nations, striving for balanced representation
of relevant partners from developed and developing countries and countries with
economies in transition, sectoral and geographic balance, and not compromising the
independence and neutrality of the United Nations system in general and the
agencies in particular;
Encourages the relevant United Nations bodies and agencies, and invites
3.
the Bretton Woods institutions, as well as the World Trade Organization, to continue
to explore possibilities of enhancing the use of partnerships to better implement
their goals and programmes, in particular in the pursuit of development and the
eradication of poverty, bearing in mind the different mandates, modes of operation
and objectives of the bodies and agencies, as well as the particular roles of the nonState partners involved;
Recalls that the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation6 designated the
4.
Commission on Sustainable Development to serve as a focal point for discussions
on partnerships that promote sustainable development, and in this context reaffirms
the criteria and guidelines for partnerships in the context of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development process and its follow-up, as set out by the Economic and
Social Council in its resolution 2003/61;
Stresses the importance of the contribution of voluntary partnerships to
5.
the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including those
contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration,1 while reiterating that they
are a complement to but not intended to substitute for the commitments made by
Governments with a view to achieving these goals;
Also stresses that partnerships should be consistent with national laws,
6.
national development strategies and plans, as well as the priorities of countries
where their implementation takes place, bearing in mind the relevant guidance
provided by Governments;
Calls upon all bodies within the United Nations system that engage in
7.
partnerships to ensure the integrity and independence of the Organization and to

_______________
8

A/58/227.

3

A/RES/58/129

include information on partnerships in their regular reporting, as appropriate, on
their web sites and through other means;
8.
Stresses that partnerships should be designed and implemented in a
transparent and accountable manner, and in that regard calls upon partners to
provide to and exchange relevant information with Governments, other stakeholders
and the relevant United Nations agencies and bodies and other international
organizations in which they engage, in an appropriate way, including through
reports, with particular attention to the importance of sharing among partnerships
information on their practical experience;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to promote the transparency
9.
and accountability of partnerships;
10. Acknowledges that serving successful partnerships requires specific skills
on the part of the Secretariat staff, and calls upon the Secretary-General to continue
to support and further to develop such skills, through appropriate training and the
sharing of best practices;
11.
2002;

Recalls the relevant paragraph in its resolution 57/300 of 20 December

12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
76th plenary meeting
19 December 2003

4
