S/PV.7411

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7411th meeting

Sunday, 22 March 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Shen Bo
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. McLay
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

15-07941 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1507941*

S/PV.7411

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Qatar and
Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jamal
Benomar, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
Yemen, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Benomar,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Doha.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Benomar.
Mr. Benomar: At my last briefing earlier this month
, the Security Council requested that I report on the
implementation of resolution 2201 (2015), which was
adopted unanimously on 15 February. I had reported,
regrettably, that many of the Council’s demands had
gone unmet. The one new and positive development I
have to report is the release from house arrest of Prime
Minister Bahah and four cabinet ministers.
We as the United Nations stand for the peaceful
resolution of conflict through negotiated political
settlements. Furthermore, the Security Council has
entrusted to me the mandate of facilitating inclusive
negotiations in order to reach a consensus solution
in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference,
and the Peace and National Partnership Agreement
and its security annex. As such, I have reiterated time
and again to all sides that such a solution is the key
to unlocking the prevailing political impasse. As the
saying goes, an ounce of prevention is worth a pound
of cure. This is why, for many weeks now, and taking
serious risks in precarious security circumstances, I
have continued meeting with the 12 political parties,
including the Houthis. I have also been in close contact
with President Hadi, including through two visits

2/7

22/03/2015

to Aden. I am working with all sides in the hope of
resolving the current standoff and to avert civil war in
order to get the political transition back on track.
Nevertheless, the events of recent weeks and days
seem to be leading Yemen yet farther from a peaceful
settlement and towards the edge of civil war. Since
President Hadi arrived in Aden, he has declared Aden
as Yemen’s temporary capital; started expanding the
so-called popular committees loyal to him, which
have now taken control of Aden; and accused former
President Ali Abdullah Saleh and the Houthis of
launching a coup against him. The Houthis, in turn
have rejected President Hadi as the legitimate leader
of Yemen, and have continued to occupy Government
institutions and to expand into other territories, despite
the Security Council’s repeated demands.
In early March, President Hadi took a decision
to replace the Central Security Forces (CSF) chief in
Aden, who is alleged to be loyal to former president
Saleh and the Houthis, with a replacement who was
seen as a controversial choice. However, the CSF chief
refused to cede the post, leading to several rounds of
fighting between his troops and military units against
the popular committees loyal to President Hadi.
The stage was then set for what transpired next.
On 19 March, heavy clashes took place between the
Central Security Forces and the popular committees in
and around Aden international airport. In a dramatic
move, Air force jets from Sana’a were deployed to Aden
and dropped bombs on Al-Maasheeq, the presidential
compound. Fortunately, the President was not injured
and moved to a secure location. Air force jets have
reportedly continued flying over Aden since the attack.
Consistent with the Security Council press statement
of 20 March (SC/11826), I also condemn the attack
on the airport and the airstrikes, which constitutes an
unprecedented and dangerous escalation.
On 20 March, terrorists in Sana’a detonated
explosives at two mosques, killing as many as 140
people and wounding over 350, which I also condemn
strongly, and I offer my condolences to the families
of the victims. The next day, the so-called popular
committees seized a key military installation in Lahj,
in the south, displacing troops. In response, the Houthi
Revolutionary Committee issued a call for all military
units in the North to mobilize in preparation for a
campaign in the South.

15-07941

22/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

On 21 and 22 March, Houthi militias, backed by
units of the Yemeni army, appeared in rising numbers
in Taiz, a northern industrial hub in the south-east and
the gateway into Aden. Earlier today, it was reported
that the Houthis have seized control of Taiz airport and
other parts of the city. Also in Taiz, soldiers reportedly
dispersed protesters using tear gas and live ammunition.
As in Taiz, anti-Houthi demonstrations have taken place
Sana’a and other cities. I am extremely concerned about
the use of arbitrary arrest and detention, abduction and
violence, and call for the human rights of peaceful
protesters and journalists to be respected fully.
It would appear that the Houthis, backed by
members of the Yemeni armed forces, are now moving
further south, towards both Lahj and Aden. There is a
prevailing sense among Yemenis that the situation is
on a rapid downward spiral. Many are also concerned
that the conflict is taking on worrying sectarian tones
and deepening north-south divisions. Fears exist that
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula will exploit the
current instability to cause further chaos. Following the
suicide bombings and fighting, emotions are running
extremely high, and unless a solution can be found in
the coming days, the country will slide into further
violent conflict and fragmentation.
I have been engaged with all sides to call for
restraint and to de-escalate the situation. Some have
questioned the utility of our presence in Sana’a and
continuing the United Nations-facilitated negotiations
against the backdrop of the new developments. This
leads me to repeat the question: What alternative do we
have? It would be an illusion to think that the Houthis
could mount an offensive and succeed in taking control
of the entire country, including Mareb, Taiz and the
south. It would be equally false to think that President
Hadi could assemble sufficient forces to liberate the
country from the Houthis. Any side that would want to
push the country in either direction would be inviting
a protracted conflict in the vein of a combined IraqLibya-Syria scenario.
There are extremists on many sides who would like
these negotiations to fail and who have been actively
trying to undermine them. I should reiterate that peaceful
dialogue is the only option we have. As mediator, I must
protect the integrity of the negotiations. I must have the
space to engage in dialogue with all parties, including
those responsible for using force to disrupt the political
transition. We have been able to play a constructive role
so far because the United Nations has engaged with all

S/PV.7411

parties on an impartial basis, in the belief that it is in
Yemen’s best interests that we do so.
A final power-sharing deal to enable the transition
to be completed can materialize only if we engage all
sides in the political process, including the Houthis and
President Hadi. Both are now crucial to the solution. The
United Nations continues to engage with all the parties
in a manner that neither legitimizes those who have
used force to disrupt the political process, diminishes
the legitimacy of the President and Government or
harms the impartiality of the United Nations.
I have just concluded my second visit in 10 days
to Riyadh. I thank the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques for the assistance that has been offered to the
victims of the recent violence in Yemen. I have also
had consultations with the Government of Qatar in its
capacity as GCC Chair, as well as with Mr. Abdullatif
Al-Zayani, Secretary General of the GCC. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the GCC have played a major role
in supporting the Yemeni people over the years. I am
confident that the Security Council, the GCC and the
United Nations will continue to work closely together
to help the Yemenis put their transition back on track.
In conclusion, I urge all sides, in this time of rising
tensions and inflammatory rhetoric, to appreciate the
gravity of the situation and to de-escalate by exercising
maximum restraint, ceasing all hostilities and refraining
from provocation or using violence to achieve political
goals. Peaceful dialogue is the only way forward.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Benomar
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
would first like to express our sincere thanks to you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting of
the Security Council in order to bring us up to speed on
the fast-developing events in Yemen that have followed
the aggression on Thursday against the city of Aden
and the presidential compound of Al-Maasheeq, in the
context of the ongoing coup that began on 21 September
2014 with the Houthis’ occupation of the capital, Sana’a.
The entire population of Yemen deplores and rejects the
coup, which is helping to fuel civil war and sectarian
infighting. This violent scenario has continued with the
insane acts of terrorism committed by unseen hands
in Sana’a on Friday at the Al-Badr and Al-Hashoosh

15-079413/7

S/PV.7411

The situation in the Middle East

22/03/2015

mosques, in which dozens died, leaving a deep scar on
Yemen.

threaten peace and security not only in Yemen but also
regionally and internationally.

In the gradual Yemeni political transition — which
is a model for such transitions and for peaceful change,
under the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) and its Implementation Mechanism, for which
we thank our brothers in the GCC, particularly the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and which are designed to
enable Yemen to emerge from its problems and build
a modern federal State — all that there remained to do
was to adopt the Constitution and convene presidential
and parliamentary elections in a specific time frame
so that our people could overcome their suffering and
build a State based on the rule of law, justice, equal
citizenship and good governance. The Peace and
National Partnership Agreement permits no one to act
selfishly, unilaterally or autocratically, or to use force
to achieve political gains at the expense of the people’s
aspirations and interests.

The Council’s ongoing support for the constitutional
legitimacy embodied in President Hadi Mansour and
the unity and security of Yemen is reflected in the
many resolutions it has adopted on this issue, including
resolutions 2014 (2011), 2051 (2012), 2140 (2014),
2201 (2015) and 2204 (2015), as well as the relevant
presidential statements. I would therefore urge the
Council to silence the drums of war being beaten by
the promoters of the coup, as well as the sedition they
seek to fuel in my country, which is incited by Iran’s
ambition there.

The only way for our country to emerge from the
current crisis is to comply with the relevant Security
Council resolutions regarding the situation in my
country, most recently resolution 2201 (2015), which
calls on Ansar Allah to abandon its coup of the
constitutional legislature. As the President of Yemen
said yesterday, that would involve withdrawing all
the committees that have been imposed on ministries
and Government institutions, as well as all the armed
elements in Sana’a and other cities of Yemen; returning
to the official military all the light, medium and
heavy weaponry that has been plundered and seized
from the armed forces units and security camps;
working to comply with all relevant Security Council
resolutions and abandoning any measures adopted
since 21 September; and beginning to immediately
implement the main points of the road map for the
political process, particularly the Gulf Initiative and the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference agreed
to by the United Nations and the 10 States sponsoring
the Initiative, and establishing a specific timetable for
that implementation.
I appeal to the Council, and to every representative
of States that enjoy ties of friendship to our people, to
fulfil their obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations to take urgent measures to halt the progression
of aggression and violence that is undermining
the legitimate authorities, partitioning Yemen and
attacking its security and its political settlement, since
the criminal acts of the Houthi militias and their allies

4/7

I stress the President’s call on all Yemeni political
elements, which has been welcomed by our brothers in
the GCC, to grasp the gravity of the current situation
and to participate effectively in the GCC dialogue being
held in Riyadh in order to find a solution that would
avert Yemen’s descent into civil strife, partition and
violence. We support the Secretary-General’s efforts
with respect to Yemen, and hope that the Council will
support them in the presidential statement it is to adopt
momentarily.
In conclusion, I extend my thanks and appreciation
to all our brothers in the GCC States, in particular the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, for their political, financial
and security-related support for our people at all stages
of the crisis. I wish also to thank all State sponsors
of the Gulf initiatives, as well as the members of the
Security Council, the international community, the
United Nations, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the
League of Arab States and all brotherly Arab States,
particularly Egypt and Jordan, for their unwavering
support for our people. The Yemeni people will never
forget the resolve and support that have been offered
to us, and we urge all involved to continue supporting
the peaceful political transition in my country and not
to abandon Yemen in these difficult humanitarian,
economic and political circumstances.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the States members of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) — the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of
Bahrain, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Sultanate of
Oman, the State of Qatar and the State of Kuwait — I
thank you, Sir, for convening this emergency meeting
to discuss the dangerous events that continue to rage

15-07941

22/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

in Yemen. I also thank Mr. Jamal Benomar, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen, for his
efforts.
The GCC reaffirms its full support for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Yemen and for the legitimacy of President Abdrabuh
Mansour Hadi Mansour. We reject all ongoing
unilateral actions taken by the Houthis. We reiterate the
GCC’s readiness to support the security and stability
of Yemen, preserve its constitutional legitimacy and
reject all attempts to undermine it in order to restore
Yemen’s security and establish conditions conducive
to a resumption of the political process pursuant to the
GCC Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism. We
hope that Yemen will not become a headquarters of
terrorist organizations.
Since the adoption of resolution 2201 (2015)
on 15 February, the Houthis have continued to take
dangerous unilateral actions in an attempt to exacerbate
the situation and to undermine stability in Yemen
and the political transition there. These measures are
blatant violations of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2201 (2015). The
Houthis continue to commit their atrocities and have
failed to withdraw their forces from State facilities and
to release Government officials from detention. They
continue to take measures that are the sole prerogative
of the legitimate Government, in clear violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. They have dismissed all decisions adopted by
the international community, instead of striving to
implement the relevant United Nations resolutions and
to maintain the unity of Yemen. They have bombed
the presidential palace in an escalation that can only
further exacerbate the situation at all levels.
At a time when the Security Council is assessing
the outcomes of its own resolutions, the Houthis and
their supporters continue to move to take control of
the city of Taiz — an escalation intended to challenge
the resolve of the international community. They
are consolidating their control of Yemen without
considering the consequences of their actions on the
country’s stability and security. In the light of their
atrocities and violations, we call on the Security
Council to take practical and urgent measures to ensure
that its resolutions are implemented and to maintain
international peace and security by adopting decisions
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which will thwart those who violate its resolutions and

S/PV.7411

prevent weapons from falling into the hands of the rebel
groups.
We are deeply alarmed by the deterioration of the
current security situation, including an upsurge in the
activities of Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, which
facilitate the spread of the ideologies of extremism,
terrorism and violence. The increasing terrorist attacks
in Yemen, including the bombing of mosques in Sana’a
and Sa’dah, have been strongly condemned by the
GCC, given their worrisome impact on the security and
stability of Yemen and the region.
Confirming the GCC’s efforts in support of the
security and stability of Yemen and its understanding
that these can be restored only through serious dialogue
among all sectors of the population, the GCC leaders
have responded to the plea sent by the President of
Yemen to His Majesty King Salman Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud of Saudi Arabia to convene a conference
on Yemen under the auspices of the GCC secretariat
in Riyadh, to which all Yemeni parties are invited.
We reiterate our invitation to all Yemeni groups to
participate in the conference, and hope that our Yemeni
brethren shall prioritize the interests of their country
and accept the invitation. They will enjoy all possible
support of the GCC at all levels, because the security of
Yemen is directly linked to that of the GCC.
Throughout every crisis in Yemen, the GCC has
always sought to lend a hand to our Yemeni brethren,
with whom we have always shared and will always
share the responsibility to ensure the security and
stability of the region. This will not happen without
ongoing cooperation among the countries of the region
to ensure mutual respect and non-interference in each
other’s internal affairs.
The current dangerous situation in Yemen will
require hard work on our part to prevent Yemen’s
descent into even deeper peril, enhanced international
efforts and efforts on the part of the international
community to take its responsibilities seriously. We
reiterate our commitment to supporting the aspirations
of the Yemeni people and maintaining regional peace
and security and the unity of Yemen, which are top
priorities of the Gulf Cooperation Council. As we
have said, Yemen’s security and stability are directly
related to the national security of GCC members, and
we will take all measures necessary to protect Yemen’s
security, stability and vital interests.

15-079415/7

S/PV.7411

The situation in the Middle East

The President (spoke in French): After consultations
among Council members, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on their behalf.
“The Security Council recalls its resolutions
2014 (2011), 2051 (2012), 2140 (2014), 2201 (2015),
and 2204 (2015) and presidential statements of
15 February 2013 and 29 August 2014.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the unity, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Yemen, and its commitment
to stand by the people of Yemen.
“The Security Council reiterates its support
for the efforts of the Gulf Cooperation Council and
commends its engagement in assisting the political
transition in Yemen.
“The Security Council supports the legitimacy
of the President of Yemen, Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, and calls upon all parties and Member
States to refrain from taking any actions that
undermine the unity, sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Yemen, and the legitimacy of
the President of Yemen.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for, and commitment to, the efforts of
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Yemen, Mr. Jamal Benomar, and to the United
Nations-brokered negotiations.
“The Security Council condemns the ongoing
unilateral actions taken by the Houthis, which
undermine the political transition process in
Yemen, and jeopardize the security, stability,
sovereignty and unity of Yemen and expresses deep
concern about the insufficient implementation of
resolution 2201 (2015).
“The Security Council deplores that the
Houthis have not implemented its demands in
resolution 2201 (2015) to withdraw their forces
from government institutions, including in the
capital, Sana’a, and normalize the security situation
in the capital and other provinces, and relinquish
government and security institutions.
“The Security Council expresses serious
concern over continued arbitrary detentions by
all parties, in particular by Houthis, contrary to
resolution 2201 (2015), and reiterates its demand

6/7

22/03/2015

for the unconditional and safe release of all persons
arbitrarily detained.
“The Security Council welcomes that the
Prime Minister Khaled Bahah and other members
of the Cabinet are no longer under the house arrest
imposed by the Houthis.
“The Security Council urges non-State actors to
withdraw from Government institutions, including
in the south of Yemen, and to refrain from any
attempt to take over such institutions.
“The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the air strikes against the presidential
palace in Aden and attacks at Aden international
airport. The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the horrific 20 March bomb attacks
at the two mosques in Sana’a and in Sa’dah, Yemen,
which killed at least 126 and injured many more.
The Security Council urges all sides to refrain from
any further use of military force, any offensive
military actions and other uses of violence.
“The Security Council reiterates its call urging
all parties to agree upon and announce publicly
dates for completing the constitutional consultation
process, to hold a referendum on the constitution,
and to conduct elections under the new electoral
law pursuant to the new constitution and in this
regard demands that the parties take all actions
conducive to this process, including by the full
implementation of resolution 2201 (2015).
“The Security Council reiterates its concern
at the ability of Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
to benefit from the deterioration of the political
and security situation in Yemen, mindful that any
acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of their motivation, whenever, wherever
and by whomsoever committed.
“The Security Council reiterates that the
solution to the situation in Yemen is through
a peaceful, inclusive, orderly and Yemeni-led
political transition process that meets the legitimate
demands and aspirations of the Yemeni people
for peaceful change and meaningful political,
economic and social reform, as set out in the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and Implementation
Mechanism, the outcomes of the comprehensive
National Dialogue Conference, the Peace and

15-07941

22/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

National Partnership Agreement and its security
annex.
“The Security Council strongly calls upon
all parties, in particular the Houthis, to abide by
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference, and
the Peace and National Partnership Agreement and
its security annex and the relevant Security Council
resolutions and to accelerate inclusive United
Nations-brokered negotiations, including on issues
relating to governance, to continue the political
transition in order to reach a consensus solution
and stresses the importance of full implementation
of agreements reached and commitments made
towards that goal.
“The Security Council emphasizes its call
for all parties in Yemen, including the Houthis,
Government officials, leaders of political parties
and movements, and members of so-called popular
committees, to adhere to resolving their differences
through dialogue and consultation, reject acts of
violence to achieve political goals, and refrain from
provocation and all unilateral actions to undermine
the political transition. The Security Council
stresses that all parties should take concrete steps
to agree and implement a consensus-based political
solution to Yemen’s crisis in accordance with
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference, and
the Peace and National Partnership Agreement and
its security annex.
“The Security Council welcomes the intention
of the President of Yemen, Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour, to engage in good faith in the United
Nations-brokered negotiations.
“The Security Council welcomes the intention
of the Gulf Cooperation Council to convene a
conference in Riyadh, upon the request of the
President of Yemen, with the participation of all
Yemeni parties to further support the political
transition in Yemen, and to complement and
support the United Nations-brokered negotiations.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance
of all parties allowing all Yemenis to assemble
peacefully without fear of attack, injury, arrest, or
retaliation.

S/PV.7411

“The Security Council calls on all parties to
comply with their obligations under international
law, including applicable international humanitarian
law and human rights law.
“The Security Council reiterates its demand
that all parties in Yemen cease all armed hostilities
against the people and the legitimate authorities of
Yemen and relinquish the arms seized from Yemen’s
military and security institutions, in accordance
with the Peace and National Partnership Agreement
and its security annex.
“The Security Council also urges all parties
to facilitate safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian actors to reach people in need of
humanitarian assistance. It also reaffirms the need
for all parties to ensure the safety of civilians,
including those receiving assistance as well as
the need to ensure the security of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated
personnel.
“The Security Council notes with appreciation
the work of the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Yemen, Jamal Benomar, and stresses the
importance of the United Nations close coordination
with international partners, including the Gulf
Cooperation Council, Group of Ambassadors in
Sana’a, and other actors, in order to contribute to
the successful transition.
“The Security Council calls on all Member
States to refrain from external interference which
seeks to foment conflict and instability and instead
to support the political transition.
“The Security Council demands that all parties
fully implement all Council resolutions on Yemen,
including resolution 2201 (2015).
“The Security Council reaffirms its readiness
to take further measures against any party in case
of non-implementation of its resolutions on Yemen,
in particular its resolution 2201 (2015).”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/8.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

15-079417/7
