S/PV.7757

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7757th meeting

Monday, 22 August 2016, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim/Mrs. Adnin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Carrión
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015) (S/2016/714)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-26482 (E)
*1626482*

S/PV.7757

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.

the reality of what is at stake this morning here in the
Chamber — not the politicking and posturing or the
power games and defensiveness. All we need is for the
guns to fall silent.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258
(2015) (S/2016/714)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/714, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I would like to begin by saluting the
life of Khaled Omar Harrah, a member of the White
Helmets killed on 11 August by air strikes. Council
members all remember him, I am sure. We remember
him in the video that we saw as he brushed aside debris
and reached through a hole in the wall to pull out a
10-day-old baby from the rubble of a collapsed building
in 2014. How could we not? How could anyone forget
those searing images of rescued children, carried by
young men and women barely visible through clouds
of smoke and mounds of rubble. How can we forget
such haunting images as that of 5-year-old Omran
Daqneesh, a silent face covered in blood and dust, after
being pulled from the rubble caused by an air strike.
In Omran’s case, there is even a video — if one can
bear to watch. Just pause for a moment and imagine
that this was your child, a child that has known nothing
but horrific war. And his brother is dead. Omran was
the “lucky one” according to a local doctor. Lucky is
the word that corresponds to such a context. That is
2/24

22/08/2016

Aleppo is being bombed every single day. Just this
morning, we received reports of dozens of new attacks.
The entire city is affected by fighting causing hundreds
of civilian casualties. Air strikes in the east and rocket
and mortar attacks in the west are destroying civilian
structure, forcing yet more people to flee for safety,
while their houses are being destroyed and others are
trapped by fighting and unable to move owing to fear
and insecurity. As we sit here around this safe table,
humanitarian rescue workers are risking their lives in
search for those buried under the debris. The risk to
rescue workers is always immense, but it is particularly
so in much of Syria, with reports of these so-called
“double-tap attacks”, wherein a helicopter or a jet
bombs a building, then waits some time — just enough
for rescue and medical workers to arrive — before
attacking again. It is estimated that more than 130
White Helmets volunteers have lost their lives since
2013 and that most killings were caused by those
heinous double-tap attacks.
Most rescue workers know that the helicopters are
still circling, but they also know that people are trapped,
dying under the rubble. They still go in, risking their
lives. Doctors facing shortages of supplies must decide
which patients to treat, even as the hospitals in which
they work are attacked while they are all crammed into
the basement. Rescue workers must decide to which
neighbourhoods to send ever-dwindling crews after an
airs trike or mortar attack has destroyed yet another
home, school or hospital.
Khaled and his colleagues have been saving
thousands of lives. Their humanity provides hope in a
place in which there is scarcely any left. They represent
the very best of what it means to be a humanitarian. Just
last Friday, we commemorated World Humanitarian
Day, when we took time to pay tribute to Khaled
and all the brave men and women who have died in
humanitarian service in Syria and around the world.
Let us together honour them here today as well, and
all of those who continue to risk their lives every day
for the benefit of others. The best way of honouring
them is to make the politics round this table work by
collectively agreeing to stop the guns, the shells, the
airstrikes and the bombs. With the Council’s collective
will, that can be done now — and now, immediately. I
16-26482

22/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

can assure members that the humanitarians are ready
to go in.
I have briefed the Council numerous times already
on Aleppo. Aleppo has become the apex of horror
at its most horrific extent of the suffering of people.
I did so during an emergency meeting in early May
(see S/PV.7687). I briefed the Council in June (see
S/PV.7725) , in July (see S/PV.7744) and as recently as
last week. I have underscored that up to 275,000 people
in eastern Aleppo have been almost entirely cut off
from vital supplies, including food, water, medicine and
electricity, for over a month now, and they are living
in constant fear of total besiegement, while access also
remains extremely difficult to the estimated 1.5 million
people in western parts of the city. Depending on
military developments, either or both parts of the city
could become besieged.
Earlier this month I stressed that the United Nations
had developed an emergency response operational
plan and stood ready to send truckloads of lifesaving
supplies across Aleppo if access and security were
granted. I repeatedly called for a pause in fighting to
allow us to secure a lifeline to those in need. I urged
for a ceasefire, or at a minimum a 48-hour pause. The
Secretary-General reiterated those calls, and so has his
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, as well as others,
including President Peter Maurer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. This is not a negotiating
tactic — this is what is needed to put confidence into
the hundreds of truck drivers to jump back in their cabs,
load their trucks and set off on the slow journey over
shell-cratered roads, all the time wondering whether
the sniper will take the shot, or whether an improvised
explosive device will catapult him into the air.
I therefore welcome the announcement by the
Russian Federation on 18 August to support the call for
a 48-hour ceasefire. We are clear that anything shorter
would not allow us to respond meaningfully to the size
of the need we are facing, either in eastern or western
Aleppo today. While that statement is positive, this
cannot be a one-sided offer. I have consistently said
that any pause also needed to include clear security
assurances from all the parties to the conflict. As
German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier said
the other day, “you cannot have a unilateral ceasefire”;
it has to be a United Nations lead, as the humanitarian
access has to be to all those in need, whoever and
wherever they are. I and my Office are therefore
working with all sides to seek to ensure that, should the

S/PV.7757

announcement by the Russian Federation translate into
a comprehensive pause, that will enable aid to safely
make its way to those who so desperately need it and
that we can move as quickly as possible.
We are continuing to provide support into western
Aleppo. Over the weekend, we completed an assessment
of an alternative route into western Aleppo that the
trucks would follow, following the closure of the main
thoroughfare into Aleppo from the south. The new
route, which goes around the east of the city and enters
into west Aleppo from the north, has been cleared for
movement. Through that route, we have been able to
provide assistance through our regular programming to
those in western Aleppo, but have at the same time been
prepositioning aid in western Aleppo for movement into
eastern Aleppo. We have the stocks, have identified the
route and are ready to move 50 trucks of assistance from
western Aleppo into the east, as soon as we receive the
necessary security assurances.
We are also preparing for cross-border movement
of assistance into eastern Aleppo. The plan is largely
business-as-usual for our cross-border operation — it
uses the same mechanisms that are currently in place
and utilizes the same routes that had been used prior
to the 7 July, cutting of the Castello Road. We are
preparing for an initial movement that would send 20
trucks with much-needed food into eastern Aleppo
during the first pause. That would then be scaled up
as appropriate for future pauses, and include additional
humanitarian assistance based on assessed need. The
plan would see the loading of items monitored by the
United Nations Monitoring Mission, which would
then seal the trucks so that any tampering would be
evident on arrival. All trucks would include United
Nations identifying markers. Once cleared, the trucks
would travel across the border into Syria along the
same routes as used prior to 7 July. They would travel
along the Castello Road and into eastern Aleppo city
directly to the warehouses of our partners. Once at the
warehouses, trucks would be confirmed as not having
been tampered with, and then the seals would be broken
and assistance off-loaded.
As I have said, we are ready. Once we have the
green light, we can start to move assistance within 48 to
72 hours. Plans are in place, but we need the agreement
of all parties to let us do our job.
This is a race against time, as fighting rages on,
with ever-more shocking reports of bombed hospitals

16-264823/24

S/PV.7757

The situation in the Middle East

and wrecked schools. Electricity is out, water is scarce
and movement is restricted. Civilian infrastructure
continues to be relentlessly attacked, collectively
punishing hundreds of thousands of civilians. These
include attacks on countless hospitals and medical
facilities, in Aleppo and elsewhere. The few staff that
remain are overstretched and working in shifts. And the
lack of health workers is compounded by the inability
of many health workers to make the daily journey to
work due to insecurity and moving front lines. In July
alone, 44 attacks on medical and health facilities were
reported throughout Syria, including attacks against
five out of the nine hospitals in eastern Aleppo. We
have received further reports of hospital attacks these
past few weeks, including last Friday — on World
Humanitarian Day. In besieged Daraya, for example,
the last remaining civilian hospital was reportedly
hit as a result of shelling and attacks on the area. In
western Aleppo, a mobile clinic was attacked in the
Al-Hamdaniya neighbourhood, a facility supported
by UNICEF and providing health care to internally
displaced persons from the 1070 apartment complex.
To help put things in perspective, Physicians for
Human Rights has documented 373 attacks on 265
medical facilities since the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2139 (2014). Three hundred and thirty-six
attacks were by Syrian Government and allied forces,
14 by non-State armed groups, 10 by the Islamic State
in the Levant and Jabhat Al-Nusra, one by coalition
forces and 12 by unknown forces. At least 72 attacks
were with barrel bombs. According to Physicians for
Human Rights, those attacks caused the deaths of 750
medical personnel. What is more, those numbers do not
even include figures for June, July and August, which
appear to have been among the deadliest since the start
of the conflict, more than half a decade ago. In late July,
for example, airstrikes repeatedly hit the Al-Hakim
hospital. According to reports, a two-day-old baby died
in his incubator due to oxygen interruptions following
the attack. Three more babies reportedly died the next
day due to respiratory problems caused by the fallout of
the bombardment. This is obscene and unconscionable.
Let me now turn to cross-line inter-agency
operations to besieged, hardto-reach and other priority
locations. Progress has been made this year, with a net
total of 1,275,750 people reached in besieged, hard-toreach and priority locations. As I reported to the Council
last month, we have reached each besieged location at
least once, including 401,650 of the 590,200 people
4/24

22/08/2016

living in those locations, including through almost 100
airdrop rotations to Deir ez-Zor city since 10 April.
Significant progress was made on approvals by the
Government of Syria for the July inter-agency convoy
plan, with 34 out of 35 locations approved for convoys,
including all requested besieged areas. Moreover,
following my latest open briefing to the Council, on
25 July, we managed to deploy, during the closing days
of the month, a number of inter-agency convoys to
Hajeb and Banan, as well as Talbiseh, Ar-Rastan and
Al-Houla, reaching over 270.000 people in need.
That being said, as I informed the Council on
9 August, we unfortunately appear to be once again
in reverse gear. In fact, on 19 July, the United Nations
submitted its August inter-agency convoy plan to the
Syrian authorities, which included 24 requests to 32
locations, including all besieged locations, aiming
to reach 991,050 people, including 523,550 people in
hard-to-reach areas and 467,500 people in besieged
areas. In its response, which was due on 28 July but
received on 3 August and amended twice thereafter,
the Syrian authorities affirmed that the United Nations
and its partners could deliver multisectoral assistance
to 505,750 of the 991,050 requested people in 23 of 32
initially requested locations. The Syrian authorities
also requested that 41 other locations be reached in
August outside the plan.
All in all, the United Nations was denied access
to more than 50 per cent of requested beneficiaries,
which includes locations such as Darayya and the Kafr
Batna sub-district in rural Damascus, as well as eastern
Aleppo. The four towns — Madaya, Zabadani, Fo’ah
and Kefraya — even though approved under the August
plan, have not received United Nations assistance
since 30 April because of tensions among parties to
the agreement, fuelled by heavy aerial bombardment
in Idlib and shelling on Fo’ah and Kefraya. Moreover,
active conflict and insecurity elsewhere, as well as
numerous delays in getting the necessary facilitation
letters required to load and move convoys, have been
limiting factors in reaching other locations these past
many weeks.
As a result, no inter-agency convoys have moved in
August — not a single one, and we are just one week
away from September and have already submitted next
month’s inter-agency convoy plan. This plan, which
was submitted to the Syrian authorities yesterday,
aims to reach 1.19 million people in need across 34
besieged, hard-to-reach and priority cross-line areas. A
16-26482

22/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

response from the Syrian authorities is expected around
30 August, as per the agreed review process.
The United Nations has made numerous appeals in
recent weeks and months for the medical evacuation of
people with urgent needs from all besieged locations,
in particular the besieged towns of Fo’ah, Kefraya,
Madaya, and Zabadani, where over 62,000 people
are who continue to be besieged. I welcome the news
received last Friday and over the weekend of the
evacuation by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent of 39
people requiring urgent medical assistance, including
children, from Fo’ah and Madaya. These evacuations
follow the evacuation of a 10-year-old girl from Madaya
on 13 August and the well-publicized evacuation from
eastern Ghouta of conjoined twins on 12 August. These
evacuations would not have been possible without the
approval of the Syrian authorities.
While I would like to express my appreciation to
all who have been involved in this operation, similar
actions are needed in order to evacuate all Syrians in
need of medical assistance. As I have said countless
times before, medical evacuations are not a question of
politics or military advantage, but of basic humanity.
They must be immediately available wherever needed.
This also includes the delivery of humanitarian and
medical assistance to besieged locations, in particular
into the four towns, which have remained without any
United Nations assistance in over 110 days.
This is the greatest crisis of our time, and that is
saying something in the light of what is happening in
Yemen, South Sudan, the Lake Chad Basin, Iraq and
Afghanistan, and that is without even mentioning those
that are not man-made conflicts — natural disasters
such as those in the Philippines, Nepal, Fiji and
Ecuador. The Syrian people have faced an onslaught of
unspeakable violence. The reports are endless: barrel
bombs, hellfire cannons, cluster munitions, chemical
weapons, thermite bombs, napalm, suicide bombs,
mortars and rockets, snipers, bombs landing on schools,
hospitals and civilian neighbourhoods, rape, illegal
detention, torture, child recruitment, sieges of entire
cities, starving people to death deliberately. And all of
that has occurred when someone has the power — with
a pen, with the simple stroke of a pen — to allow food to
get to people. It is a chilling thought that these actions
and these levels of suffering have been tolerated, with
only limited international interference.

S/PV.7757

When hospital attacks have become the new
normal, when medieval sieges of entire cities and
neighbourhoods have become a lasting reality for
hundreds of thousands of people, the Council cannot
look the other way. It needs to act and ensure the full
implementation of all its resolutions. For as long as
there is impunity, this unprecedented scale of abuses
and violations will simply not decline.
In Aleppo we risk seeing a humanitarian catastrophe
unparalleled in the over five years of bloodshed and
carnage in the Syrian conflict. Once again, I cannot
stress strongly enough the need for a 48-hour pause
in fighting to be approved by all sides and come into
effect so that safe and sustained humanitarian access is
opened to all areas of Aleppo. I urge all parties to the
conflict to heed the call for a cessation of violence in all
its forms, first and foremost for the sake of the Syrian
people. I urge all Member States, all Member States
with influence over the parties, all Council members,
all International Syria Support Group (ISSG) members,
and in particular the two ISSG co-chairs, the United
States and the Russian Federation, to rapidly reach
agreement on the security guarantees and operational
modalities for a ceasefire to the fighting in Aleppo and
elsewhere. Not only would such an agreement ease the
suffering of the Syrian people, it could also facilitate
the establishment of an environment more conducive to
the resumption of the intra-Syrian talks.
Before I conclude today, I would like to make a final
note. The United Nations Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator for Syria, Yacoub El Hillo, drove out of
Damascus today, ending a three-year appointment in one
of the most difficult and dangerous positions that exist
in the United Nations. His tireless work, his bravery
and his exceptional diplomatic skills saved countless
lives. He is not just an exemplary humanitarian, but he
has been the bedrock of our humanitarian response in
Syria, one that many others have been able to build on.
I would like to take this opportunity to sincerely thank
him, on behalf the entire United Nations and the wider
humanitarian ecosystem, for all he has done. We owe it
to the Syrian people he has served and saved to capture
the spirit and practice of his brave, professional legacy.
Finally, I am not going to pretend — as the
humanitarian chief of the United Nations, I am very
angry. The callous carnage that is Syria has long since
moved from the cynical to the sinful. What is happening
in Aleppo today, and throughout Syria over the past five
years, is an outrage against every moral fibre in our

16-264825/24

S/PV.7757

The situation in the Middle East

being as human beings, as fellow human beings, with
every Syrian having been caught up in this unending
cataclysm. And it is the failure of politics, of all of
us, which Council members know as members of the
Security Council. So, please, Mr. President, now is the
moment — this instant — to put our differences aside
and come together as one and stop this humanitarian
shame upon us all, once and for all.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank UnderSecretary-General O’Brien for his briefing. I would
assure him that we remember Khaled Omar Harrah, and
we remember and commend all of the humanitarian and
search-and-rescue workers who have put themselves
at risk as they strive to save and support innocent
civilians, both in Syria and beyond. We would also ask
that Mr. O’Brien pass our expression of appreciation to
Yacoub El Hillo for his selfless and unwavering service
in the work he has done in Syria.
Distressed at the horrific humanitarian situation
in Syria and the looming humanitarian catastrophe
in Aleppo, New Zealand, Egypt and Spain, as Syria
humanitarian penholders, felt compelled to speak here
in this open meeting today. We thought it important to
call here publicly, in the open, on all the relevant parties
to take measures to improve the humanitarian situation,
including, first, by allowing immediate, unhindered
and complete humanitarian access to all areas of Syria;
secondly, by immediately lifting all sieges; thirdly, by
implementing substantial pauses in fighting to ensure
that sustained humanitarian deliveries to Aleppo can
commence safely and effectively, whether it be via crossline or cross-border efforts; and, finally, by ensuring
that all initiatives operate according to international
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles.
We acknowledge the Russian support for the 48hour humanitarian pauses and look forward to them
working with the United Nations and other stakeholders
to ensure their full implementation, in accordance
with international humanitarian law, as called for this
morning by Under-Secretary-General O’Brien.
Terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, is
criminal and unjustifiable. Da’esh and the Al-Nusra
Front, which recently renamed itself to Jabhat Fateh
Al-Sham, are designated by the Security Council as
6/24

22/08/2016

terrorist organizations. The international community
must do all it can to prevent any material or financial
support from reaching those groups and dissuade any
party to the cessation of hostilities from fighting in
collaboration with them.
We strongly condemn ongoing and repeated attacks
against medical personnel and facilities. All parties
must uphold the principle of medical neutrality. The
humanitarian situation will continue to deteriorate in
the absence of a political solution.
We reaffirm support for the Syrian-led political
process, facilitated by the United Nations, which includes
formal negotiations on a political transition process.
We had hoped to agree on a draft press statement
that encompassed the points that I have just outlined,
and we are disappointed and frustrated that we have
not been able to do so. It is disappointing that we
are not able to agree on a response to the horrific
humanitarian situation throughout Syria and the
looming humanitarian catastrophe in Aleppo. We must
do better as a Council. The innocent civilians of Syria
deserve no less from us.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
Stephen O’Brien and all the humanitarian workers who
trying to do their jobs as best they can in Aleppo and
the rest of Syria.
We gather in the Chamber every month, and
we routinely reduce the situation in Syria to simple
statistics — statistics such as 400,000 killed, over
2 million injured and millions more forced to flee. A
number one does not hear often in Syria is zero, but that
is the number I would like to focus on today. That is the
exact number of aid convoys that have reached besieged
and hard-to-reach areas this month.
We sat time and time again in the comfort of the
Chamber and agreed on the need for humanitarian
assistance to reach those in need, and yet zero crates of
food have arrived in Aleppo and zero medical supplies
have arrived to replenish the makeshift hospitals that
care for civilians. As the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/714) makes clear, four of those hospitals, as
well as the central blood blank, were hit by air strikes
in east Aleppo city on 23 and 24 July. There is zero
justification for those attacks. Either these facilities
are being directly targeted or air strikes are being
conducted with deliberate disregard for civilians on the
ground. Both scenarios are wholly inexcusable.
16-26482

22/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

And yet it gets worse. Human Rights Watch reported
last week that the joint Syrian-Russian air campaign
had violated international law by dropping incendiary
munitions on civilian areas. A single occurrence of that
would be unacceptable, and yet the report says that it
has happened twice a week, on average, for over two
months. Those weapons have no place in war, and
urban spaces in Syria are clearly not an exception. I
call on Russia to end the use of those weapons in the air
campaign and to use its influence on the regime to end
all attacks on civilians.
The list of heinous weapons being deployed in
Syria, sadly, does not end there. Over half a year after
the destruction of Syria’s declared chemical weapon
stockpile, reports now suggest that there is a resurgence
of chlorine gas attacks in Idlib and in Aleppo. Is there
a more sickening way to mark the third anniversary
of the gas attack in Ghouta? Let us therefore all be
clear: the use of those weapons is abhorrent and we
unequivocally condemn those who unleash them. Later
this week, we will have an opportunity to hear a fuller
picture, when the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism reports. The Council must stand ready to
demonstrate a robust response to that report, whatever
the findings.
All the horrors that I have just described are the
reality of life today in Syria and in Aleppo. Those
committing those horrors have a responsibility to
change the reality, and yet they show no willingness
to do so. Let me spell out for them what they have to
do. First stop the bombing — stop the indiscriminate
attacks on medical facilities and civilians. Secondly,
guarantee safe and sustained access to humanitarian
agencies. Thirdly, resume political talks. It is really
that simple.

S/PV.7757

and face of Omran Daqneesh, the stunned, bloodied,
terrified little boy who sat in an ambulance, having
narrowly escaped death. As Stephen reminded us, his
brother and hundreds of thousands of his fellow Syrians
were not so fortunate. Omran has become the human
face of the Syrian conflict for millions around the world,
but we must not forget that there are 13.5 million faces
in Syria just like his — the faces of men, women and
children in desperate need of humanitarian assistance.
We can help deliver that. The United Kingdom stands
ready to play our part, and I implore each and every one
of us gathered here to do the same.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
also like to begin by thanking Stephen O’Brien for the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2016/714) and for
his briefing this morning.
The Security Council is meeting publicly in order to
give the humanitarian situation in Syria the attention in
deserves, as the picture is dreadful. In Aleppo, 250,000
people are facing what the Secretary-General calls
an uprecedented humanitarian catastrophe. Civilians
endure endless aerial bombardments. Moreover,
chemical-weapons attacks were documented in Aleppo
on 10 August, as they were in Saraqeb nine days prior.
Such attacks constitute a violation of resolution 2118
(2013) and yet another instance of a war crime and
attack against civilians.
Three years ago, almost to the day, Bashar
Al-Assad’s regime massacred over 1,000 civilians
through the use of chemical weapons in Ghouta. I would
like to take the occasion of this notorious anniversary
to reaffirm France’s determination to ensuring that this
crime is not forgotten and does not go unpunished.

The United Nations call for weekly, 48-hour pauses
to get aid into Aleppo is a step forward. We fully support
it, as it could ensure that those in dire need of medical
evacuation can access medical treatment. And, with
Russia’s indication of support for that initiative, I hope
we can all now agree to it. I also hope that we can all
agree to the point just put forward by the representatives
of New Zealand, Spain and Egypt. I certainly do.

Aleppo joins the list of cities besieged by the
regime and its allies, using the same methods. Last
February, the cessation of hostilities sparked new
hope. The regime seeks to quash that hope. It has never
truly desisted from its efforts to plunge the city into a
humanitarian chaos of unprecedented scope. In fact, it is
clear today that its agreement to a cessation of hostilities
was merely an attempt to mask an exclusively military
strategy. Aleppo must not become the new Homs. It is
the responsibility of the Security Council to check the
military course currently at work.

I started this intervention with some statistics, but
sometimes statistics cannot show the true human impact
of conflict. Anyone who has been on social media or
has watched the news this week will know the name

Elsewhere in Syria, the situation is no longer
sustainable. Given that air strikes have become
incessant, Syrians are trying to survive under the
bombs. Humanitarian access continues to be hampered

16-264827/24

S/PV.7757

The situation in the Middle East

in Dar’a, Darayya and Madaya, endangering the lives of
hundreds of thousands of civilians. As Stephen O’Brien
has reminded us, the United Nations humanitarian plan
for the month of August is a serious failure. With regard
to the month of July, the report is just as disappointing,
as less than half of the population under siege was able
to receive food aid, while medical supplies continued
to be removed from convoys by the Syrian regime.
Syrian civilians lack everything, and we know where
responsibility lies.
What has happened? On 22 December 2015 the
Security Council adopted resolution 2258 (2015), which
demands that,
“[a]ll parties, in particular the Syrian authorities,
immediately comply with their obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law and international humanitarian
rights law as applicable” (resolution 2258 (2015),
para. 1).
Since then, after a brief pause, the brutality again
escalated. On 4 May, after the resumption of hostilities
by the regime and its allies, we organized with the
United Kingdom delegation an open meeting on Aleppo
(see S/PV.7687) to call for compliance with the Council’s
demands regarding the humanitarian situation and, in
particular, for the cessation of attacks against civilians
and adherence to the timetable agreed by the Council in
resolution 2254 (2015).
But none of those commitments has materialized.
As Mr. O’Brien has just said, we are moving in reverse.
The relentless bombing has continued, humanitarian
access to besieged cities has been continuously denied
and the prospect of establishing a transitional authority
by 1 August was scratched out in a pen stroke through
the regime’s operations supported by its allies. The
tragedy in Aleppo was fully described during the Arria
Formula meeting on 8 August. The poignant story of
CNN journalist Clarissa Ward and the statements made
by Aleppo doctors drew attention to the scandalous
practice of targeting medical facilities. As Mr. O’brien
has just mentioned, Khaled Harrah of the White Helmets
died several days later. I, too, would like here to pay
tribute to him, as well as to all humanitarian workers.
The negotiations in Geneva on the terms of a truce in
Aleppo must be completed. International humanitarian
law and the principles governing humanitarian
efforts are not negotiable. The introduction of weekly
humanitarian pauses is a strict minimum requirement,
8/24

22/08/2016

which, moreover, should have been implemented much
earlier. But above all, what is required is respect for
one of the most fundamental rights in situations of
armed conflict, namely, unconditional, safe, full and
unhindered humanitarian access — in Aleppo and
throughout Syria — for all people in need of it.
Similarly, a lasting cessation of hostilities is
pressing and crucial throughout the country. Depriving
people of their rights and all protection seeds the
ground for their radicalization. We must break that
spiral, which has caused too much suffering. Only a
cessation of hostilities will allow for credible political
negotiations. We remind everyone that there is no
military solution to the conflict and that only a political
solution can bring back stability and lastingly staunch
the source of radicalization. As called for in resolution
2254 (2015), France again calls for the implementation
of
“[a]n inclusive and Syrian-led political process
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people, with a view to full implementation of the
Geneva Communiqué of 30 June 2012”(resolution
2254 (2015), fifth preambular paragraph).
France again expresses its adamance in that regard,
so that the supporters of the regime work towards
implementing the commitments collectively undertaken
in this forum.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Stephen O’Brien for
his briefing.
Last Friday, 19 August, saw the commemoration
of World Humanitarian Day. My delegation therefore
wishes to acknowledge the tireless effort and personal
sacrifice of every one of the thousands of humanitarian
workers throughout the world who daily put their lives
at risk to help those most in need of their help. Today,
130 million people around the world are in need of such
assistance, including several million in Syria alone.
Those are terrible statistics that mask personal tragedies.
Sometimes, however, there are exceptions. The case of
the Syrian child Aylan Kurdi, who washed up on the
coast off Turkey while trying to escape with his family
the horror of the Syrian conflict shocked the world last
year. Just a few days ago, pictures of little 5-year-old
Omran Daqneesh seated in an ambulance in Aleppo
while waiting for his wounds to be treated shook us
once again. Those images leave us wondering if his
expression denotes indifference to the horror to which
16-26482

22/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

he has become accustomed or if, while he is still in a
state of shock, his face reflects his wondering why since
birth his life has been marked only by war and death.
That latest incident also makes us reflect on the
important and courageous task that doctors and other
health personnel carry out in order to save lives such
that of this little boy — in times when exercising such
a noble profession or being present in a hospital in
Syria is now synonymous with becoming the target of
attacks and aerial bombing, when the special protection
afforded to them under international law should be an
indication to the contrary. How can we explain that
only days ago four babies died as a result of the latest
attacks? What is the limit to so much injustice?
It is for those reasons that Uruguay most
enthusiastically welcomed the recommendations of the
Secretary-General with regard to the implementation
of resolution 2286 (2016) and strongly condemns the
attacks perpetrated against medical facilities and
personnel in Syria, irrespective of who is responsible.
The two cases I just mentioned represent only
a mere microcosm of the catastrophe that the Syrian
people have experienced for over five years. Its
enormous impact and immediate symbolism should
make us reflect on the responsibility, which weighs
heavily on our shoulders, to find solutions to put an
immediate end to the war, which undoubtedly is the
worst humanitarian disaster of the twenty-first century.
In July, the Nooreldin al-Zenki armed opposition
group decapitated a Palestinian boy in a barbaric act
that we duly condemned. The following day, the same
group issued a communiqué acknowledging that some
of its members had been responsible for such an act of
savagery act and that an internal disciplinary committee
would investigate the facts. Is that the accountability
and justice that we demand?
Uruguay believes that the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de Mistura,
proceeded correctly last Thursday, when he sent a
clear message of discontent when he suspended the
meeting of the humanitarian access working group on
of the International Syria Support Group and urged
all the parties to accept weekly 48-hour humanitarian
pauses, as repeatedly called for by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Regrettably,
the convoys are still awaiting authorization to enter.
To quote Mr. De Mistura, in the month of August “not
one single humanitarian convoy in one month has

S/PV.7757

reached any of the besieged areas”. What we see and
hear of are only pitched battles, offensives, counteroffensives, rockets, barrel bombs, mortars, cannons,
napalm, chlorine gas, snipers, aerial bombing attacks
and suicide attacks. This is a clear failure on the part of
the international community — and in particular of the
Council, which has not been able provide the necessary
support to humanitarian agencies to implement the
proposed humanitarian pauses despite the fact that the
majority of us who are here today have supported that
initiative.
We reiterate our firm support for the requested
truce and renew our call on those directly involved
in the conflict or have an influence on the parties to
act responsibly in order to allow immediate access to
humanitarian aid, which is of such vital importance
to the survival of thousands of people trapped by
fighting in Aleppo and other areas. That also requires
new understanding to relaunch and strengthen the
cessation of hostilities throughout Syria to significantly
reduce the levels of violence and create a climate more
conducive to the delivery of humanitarian aid and the
resumption of the political process.
Lastly, Uruguay would like to reiterate once again
the urgency of resuming talks between the parties that
could lead to a political transition. We are convinced
that that is the only way to achieve a lasting solution
to the conflict in accordance with the provisions of
resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016). In that regard,
we once again express our full support for the Special
Envoy in his efforts to convene the parties as soon as
possible for a new round of talks.
Time is running out. We cannot allow the Syrian
people, overwhelmed by so many years of suffering,
to believe that the United Nations and the Security
Council have completely abandoned them.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I want to thank Mr. Stephen O’Brien for
his briefing to the Security Council, as well as to align
myself with the statement made by the representative of
New Zealand on behalf of the three penholders on the
humanitarian situation in Syria.
We fully agree that we should ensure with the utmost
urgency that the civilian population, both in Aleppo
and in the rest of the country, receives the protection
and assistance they need from impartial actors and
in full respect for humanitarian principles and under
the leadership of the United Nations. Of course, there

16-264829/24

S/PV.7757

The situation in the Middle East

should be an immediate cessation of all attacks on
medical personnel and on civilian infrastructure — such
as schools, camps for internally displaced persons and
hospitals. In addition, there should be immediate and
unrestricted access to medical and surgical equipment
for those who need it, as set forth in resolution 2286
(2016). I believe that the recommendations that the
Secretary-General is preparing on the protection of
personnel and medical facilities will help to put an end
to such attacks as soon as possible.
The situation on the ground continues to be
extremely serious, as the Secretary-General’s latest
monthly report (S/2016/714) on the implementation
of the humanitarian obligations of the parties to the
conflict leaves very few words to express the suffering
of the Syrian people. In his report, the SecretaryGeneral stresses that it is vital to ensure that there is a
48-hour humanitarian pause in Aleppo as well as safe
and lasting humanitarian access to the city. We welcome
the fact that, at the meeting of the Humanitarian Task
Force in Geneva on 18 August, the two Chairs of the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) agreed to
support Special Envoy De Mistura’s initiative for a 48hour humanitarian pause.
It is of the utmost importance that such pause
be put into practice on the ground and that it should
be done on a weekly basis so that there is access for
humanitarian workers and medical personnel to the
civilian population in order to provide assistance to that
population and, if necessary, voluntary evacuation with
appropriate security and neutrality guarantees. It is also
important that the water and electricity supply systems
be repaired, which is urgently required. We therefore
urge the Chairs of the ISSG and all those States that
have any influence on the parties to the conflict to
make every effort not to miss this opportunity to ensure
that the parties respect the ceasefire and thereby allow
humanitarian access to the population, in compliance
with their obligations under international law.
Finally, we hope that the talks between the parties
can soon be renewed in order to put an end the conflict
under the terms set forth in resolution 2254 (2015). But
we should not forget that the obligations of the parties
under international humanitarian law are independent
of any other consideration. The fact remains that we
must continue to work urgently to ensure that resolution
2254 (2015) is fully implemented. For our part, we will
continue to support the work of the ISSG Chairs with
concrete proposals, as we have been doing so far.
10/24

22/08/2016

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for his
customary detailed and moving account of the situation
in Syria. I assure him that Ukraine fully supports his
urgent call for 48-hour humanitarian pauses in that
country.
Before going directly to the subject, I would like
condemn in the strongest terms the recent terrorist
attack in Gaziantep and to express Ukraine’s sincere
condolences and solidarity with the people and the
Government of Turkey.
The latest report (S/2016/714) of the SecretaryGeneral on today’s subject does not, as usual, leave
much room for optimism. We continue to see the same
parade of horrors and breaches of commitment. The
image of Omran Daqneesh, a little boy in Aleppo who
managed to escape death despite the raining down on
him of shelling and bombs reportedly launched by the
combined Syrian and Russian forces, is going to haunt
us all as a sign of our collective failure to bring peace to
Syria and prevent the unfolding tragedy in Aleppo — or,
in the words of Under-Secretary-General O’Brien, as a
sign of humanitarian shame upon us all.
According to independent non-governmental
organizations present on the ground, 233 civilians,
including 142 children, were killed in indiscriminate
exchanges of fire between the rebels and Government
forces in the first two weeks of August alone. It is
impossible to comprehend that the Syrian Government
continues to bomb its citizens. Mr. Al-Assad is still
keeping the Syrian people hostage to his own and his
allies’ plans to change the equation on the ground. How
long can we allow the Syrian regime to kill its own
people in the name of fighting terrorists?
The deteriorating security environment in
Syria continues to have a negative impact on the
humanitarian situation. Military activities, air strikes
and shelling go unabated on all active fronts of the
Syrian battlefield — Aleppo, Idlib, Homs and Hama,
among other places. It all results in a further increase
in the number of people living in besieged and hard-toreach areas. We therefore welcome all efforts exerted to
alleviate the situation, particularly the resumption and
due functioning of the Al-Ramtha border crossing on
the Jordanian-Syrian border.
Like the delegation of the United Kingdom, we are
increasingly alarmed by accounts of the extensive use
of incendiary weapons by Russia. Especially revealing
16-26482

22/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

was the report published by Human Rights Watch on
16 August, mentioned previously, according to which
these devastating weapons were used at least 18 times
over the past nine weeks, including recent attacks on the
opposition-held areas in Aleppo and Idlib on 7 August.
There is no shortage of data with regard to the use of
such weapons in Syria, and we repeat our call on the
Secretariat to follow up on this matter and to present its
findings to the Security Council.
It is equally extremely alarming that the Russian
Federation is moving a new types of arms- and
bomb-carriers to bases in closer proximity to Syria.
This positioning can hardly be interpreted as the
confidence-building measure needed to bring the
parties back to the negotiating table.
We are also concerned about the cruise-missile
strikes carried out by the Russian Black Sea Fleet
warships from the waters of the Mediterranean at
targets near Aleppo on 20 August. The efficiency of
those air strikes is doubtful, since it is not yet known
whether militants from the Jabat Fateh Al-Sham
or those who are considered to be members of the
moderate opposition were targeted. We look forward to
the Russian Federation providing the Security Council
with all the necessary information in that respect.
Finally, we join the United Nations and our
colleagues in calling on all the parties to the conflict
to immediately provide unconditional, unimpeded and
sustained access to the people in besieged and hard-toreach areas across Syria. As I already mentioned, we
support the United Nations-led efforts to impose a 48hour pause in fighting in Aleppo province. It needs to
be stressed that this pause should not be a window of
opportunity for the regime and its allies to regroup their
forces, but rather a vital chance and opportunity for
humanitarian relief to reach the population of Aleppo.
The decision of Special Envoy De Mistura to adjourn
the International Syria Support Group Humanitarian
Task Force in Geneva on 18 August is a strong sign of
concern in that respect.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank Mr. O’Brien
for his comprehensive briefing and for his continuing
commitment to the humanitarian relief efforts in Syria.
In the past few weeks, we have reiterated on
numerous occasions our collective resolve to address
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria, with
particular regard to the situation in Aleppo.

S/PV.7757

Unfortunately our calls for immediate, unhindered
and complete humanitarian access to all areas of Syria,
including Aleppo, continue to fall on deaf ears. Even
Special Envoy De Mistura decided to cancel his latest
meeting with the International Syria Support Group
(ISSG) humanitarian task force out of frustration for
lack of significant change on the ground. It is crucial
that the ISSG members, as well as members of the
Security Council continue to make comprehensive
efforts to get all the parties to the conflict to accept
the proposal for recovering substantial pauses in the
fighting, which would ensure sustained humanitarian
deliveries via cross-line and cross-border convoys to
areas most in need, notably Aleppo. The humanitarian
and political track are intrinsically linked, and it is
therefore important to continue these efforts because
the pauses can lead not only to improved humanitarian
assistance but also to more room for constructive
dialogue on potential long-term cessations of hostilities.
To conclude, we wish to offer our support to the
proposed initiative by Mr. O’Brien for allowing more
humanitarian corridors and assistance to Syrians in
need. We sincerely hope that all sides to the conflict will
be receptive to those proposals and allow for civilians
to escape the fighting by guaranteeing voluntary, free
movement, including for those in besieged and hard-toreach areas.
We also reiterate our support for the humanitarian
task force of the ISSG and hope that the parties to the
conflict will cooperate with efforts to ensure immediate,
unhindered and complete humanitarian access to the
people of Syria. It is important that we redouble our
efforts to ensure that our proposals are met, in particular
concerning the cessation of hostilities, considering the
growing threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusrah Front and all other
individual groups, undertakings and entities associated
with Al-Qaida or ISIL, and other terrorist groups, as
designated by the Security Council.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): First of all, I would like to
thank Mr. Stephen O’Brien for his briefing and for his
commitment to and engagement in saving the lives of the
people of Syria. Last December, the Council gathered
in this Chamber to unanimously adopt resolution 2254
(2015), and expressed hope about advances in the
political process (see S/PV.7588). Then, in February, we
adopted resolution 2268 (2016), endorsing the cessation
of hostilities agreement. And now, six months later, it

16-2648211/24

S/PV.7757

The situation in the Middle East

is hard to believe that only half a year ago, we were
discussing a cessation of hostilities for all of Syria.
Today, the picture is terribly different. For the
past month, our attention has centred on Aleppo, and
Castello Road in particular. We are far from being able
to discuss a nationwide cessation of hostilities, and
instead find ourselves focused on a very particular
area. It pains me to see how badly the situation in Syria
has deteriorated. Many of us have been reminded of the
scope of the tragedy through the heartbreaking image
of five-year-old Omran Daqneesh. I was horrified to
see the dust and blood covering Omran’s young face,
but the brave hospital and aid workers on the ground
tell us that there are many, many more children just like
Omran in Syria today.
So what can we do? Humanitarian efforts are under
way, and we are urging all influential parties to do their
part. But we should all be deeply troubled to see such
a catastrophe continue unresolved. In his latest report
(S/2016/714), the Secretary-General urges the United
States and the Russian Federation, the International
Syria Support Group (ISSG) co-chairs, to rapidly reach
an agreement for a ceasefire in Aleppo and beyond.
Japan appreciates the co-chairs’ efforts to improve
the situation on the ground, and joins the SecretaryGeneral in urging an agreement as soon as possible.
At the same time, I also want to urge all parties to
redouble their efforts to prevent the tragedy in Syria
from getting any worse. United Nations humanitarian
aid must move firmly forward, and the Four Towns
agreement must be implemented. This is the time for
influential countries in the region to play a leading role.
I also want to take a moment to express my profound
gratitude to our United Nations and non-governmental
organization colleagues on the ground, who are risking
their lives to help the people of Syria even as the
fighting worsens. I also urge the Syrian Government
and all related parties to use caution to ensure the safety
of the people.
I understand that the Russian Federation has
expressed its readiness to support a 48-hour military
pause in Aleppo. That would be a hugely important step
in changing the situation in Aleppo. In order for that to
happen, and for United Nations and non-governmental
organizations to safely access the area, the cooperation
of opposition forces is also essential. We should appeal
to the Syrian Government, opposition forces and all
influential parties in that regard. The international
12/24

22/08/2016

community is watching to see whether the Security
Council and the ISSG can improve the situation on the
ground. Our credibility is on the line.
The besieged areas and parts of Aleppo will demand
our attention for some time to come. However, once a
pause or ceasefire is attained, and in parallel with the
pursuit of a political solution, we also should consider
how we can support early recovery and strengthen the
resilience of Syrian society. Most importantly, we should
provide livelihoods, rehabilitate social infrastructure
and strengthen social cohesion, thereby providing hope
to individuals and communities in Syria facing very
difficult challenges. The international community must
invest in preparedness and resilience in Syrian society
in order to prevent recurrent crises.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Stephen O’Brien, and his team for their work in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomes
the humanitarian progress registered in Syria in
the month of July. Over 480,000 people received
humanitarian assistance, amounting to 40 per cent. It
is also important to highlight that since the beginning
of the year, humanitarian agencies have been able to
access 68 per cent of the besieged populations on more
than one occasion, benefiting over 400,000 people. Of
particular interest is the work carried out by UNICEF
in helping 214,000 Syrian children who are in hard-toreach areas, as well as the immunization campaigns
carried out by the World Health Organization.
We understand that the situation is not ideal, given
that clashes continue in various parts of Syria, in
particular in Aleppo besieged by armed groups linked
to Al-Qaida. We condemn the criminal activities that
have led to the loss of human life. We are concerned that
the situation on the ground could threaten the progress
made since the cessation of hostilities was declared.
In that regard, we are convinced that the humanitarian
issue must be addressed impartially and deliberately
in order to avoid its politicization. It is a question of
ending the siege of the civilian population. We reiterate
that the Government of Syria has the responsibility to
protect its citizens, as it has been doing in the areas
under its control and even beyond. The Council should
therefore step up its efforts to find a political and
peaceful solution to the armed conflict.
16-26482

22/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

We hope that both Russia and the United States, as
referenced in the Secretary-General report (S/2016/714),
can continue to find areas of understanding to bring
about a strong and lasting peace in this Arab country.
Under the Venezuelan presidency (see S/PV.7634), the
Council adopted resolution 2268 (2016), creating the
political space to help the civilian population with its
most urgent needs. We call upon the co-chairs of the
International Syrian Support Group to pursue their
bilateral consultations aimed at implementing the
provisions of the resolution. The text of the resolution
points out that terrorist organizations should not be
protected by the cessation of hostilities but fought by
all means necessary under international law.
We also welcome the proposals of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
concerning 48-hour pauses, as well as the recent
announcements made by the Russians concerning the
establishment of humanitarian corridors in Aleppo and
other parts of Syria. We stress the importance of raising
the sieges on all affected cities in accordance with
resolution 2268 (2016). We condemn sieges because
they run counter to international humanitarian law. In
that context, we are aware that in some cases, conditions
on the ground make it difficult for humanitarian
organizations to do their work. We therefore pay tribute
to their efforts in such adverse and very dangerous
conditions. We reiterate that they cannot be allowed to
become military targets, much less actors in the armed
conflict. Their sole task is to provide humanitarian
assistance to those in need, in accordance with the
provisions of international humanitarian law. Their
work however must be coordinated with the State
concerned in conformity with international law.
In the context of intense armed confrontations, we
condemn the destruction of basic infrastructure, such
as hospitals and water and electricity installations.
Despite the adoption of resolution 2268 (2016),
attacks continue against hospitals and basic services,
exacerbating the difficult humanitarian situation
already being endured by those affected by the armed
conflict. We also recognize what has been done to
remedy the situation by the Syrian Government and
the World Food Programme, which benefit 4.1 million
people and completed 87 parachute drops, to help the
people in Deir ez-Zor.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report,
Al-Raqqa is also one of the areas where humanitarian
needs have increased. We reiterate our condemnation of

S/PV.7757

the systematic practices of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) involving the denial of civilian access
to humanitarian aid, forced executions, criminal actions
perpetrated against members of ethnic minorities
and women, and the recruitment of children in areas
under its control. Such actions violate international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
and constitute war crimes for which their authors must
be brought to justice.
ISIS, the Al-Nusrah Front and their associates have
become a serious threat to peace and stability in the
region. Their influence must be fought by all means
possible. We reiterate that humanitarian assistance
operations are linked to the end of the conflict.
Accordingly, we reiterate our support for the peace
efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura to find a
political and peaceful solution to the armed conflict
in Syria. The complex humanitarian situation in Syria
requires that the parties sit down to negotiate without
preconditions for the benefit of the people of the country.
Finally, we call on the parties and those actors
who have an influence upon them to resume political
negotiations as soon as possible. As has been reiterated
by all members of the Council, the solution is political
and therefore efforts must be redoubled to make this
goal a possibility. If the conflict is not settled, there
will only be more suffering and the further resurgence
of terrorism in Syria.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Under Secretary-General O’Brien for his briefing. As
we have heard from Under Secretary-General O’Brien
and other colleagues, last week the world’s attention
was indeed transfixed by the shocked, blank stare of
5-year-old Omran Daqneesh, who looked out from the
back of an ambulance after having been pulled from
the rubble of his family’s destroyed apartment building
in eastern Aleppo. Perhaps, most striking, however,
was Omran’s silence. Even as the dust, debris and dried
blood covered the young boy’s face, he did not cry out,
scream out for help and did not even call for his parents.
All that Omran could do was look straight ahead and
wipe the dirt from his hands on the ambulance seat.
Let us just pause and consider for a moment how
much trauma little Omran must have experienced to
react to the collapse of his home without even making a
single sound. But let us also consider what will happen
next for Omran and a generation of Syrian children
like him, who have known nothing but war. Omran

16-2648213/24

S/PV.7757

The situation in the Middle East

22/08/2016

may now be discharged from one of the few remaining
hospitals in eastern Aleppo, but he still faces the horror
of Russian and Syrian air strikes that pummel his
neighbourhood daily. As we learned over the weekend,
Omran’s older brother Ali died from the injuries that he
received in the air strike, the result of the Al-Assad’s
regime wilful attacks to cut off eastern Aleppo.

threat of a double siege, with the regime bombarding
the east and the opposition forces attacking the west.
Some 1.8 million people, living in both sides of Aleppo,
could be trapped and cut off from assistance unless all
parties take immediate steps to allow for unfettered
humanitarian access and unfettered humanitarian
deliveries.

Across Syria, the Al-Assad regime is drawing
upon Russian assistance to escalate the conflict. Fronts
that have been relatively quiet in recent months are
once again being bombed by the regime. In Daraa
governorate, for example, air strikes destroyed the
town of Jasem’s only hospital, and strikes against Busra
al-Sham displaced thousands of people. In Idlib and
Aleppo, Human Rights Watch has reported at least 18
attacks with incendiary weapons between 5 June and
10 August, which one resident of Idlib described as
“blocks of flame falling from the sky”. In the besieged
community of Darayya, where it has been 74 days since
the town’s 4,000 residents have received a delivery
of food or medicine from the United Nations, there
are reports of civilians with burns that are consistent
with napalm exposure, and we recall that yesterday
marked the three-year anniversary of the gruesome
chemical-weapons attack in Ghouta for which the United
States remains determined to pursue accountability.

Last week, Russia announced its support for the
United Nations proposal to organize 48-hour weekly
pauses in Aleppo, the bare minimum amount of time
the United Nations needs to deliver aid. The United
States supports such pauses, which could give Aleppo’s
residents a reprieve from daily bombardments and
allow aid to get in. It is imperative that all armed groups
in Aleppo respect the pauses and work with the United
Nations to provide access to both sides of the city. We
need to see Russia follow its unilateral declaration with
genuine steps to support regular and sustained access to
Aleppo. The pauses are not the solution to the problem
of humanitarian deliveries. That requires a more
comprehensive arrangement that revives the cessation
of hostilities and ensures unimpeded humanitarian
access nationwide. In the meantime, the people of
Aleppo need the help of the United Nations right now.

The Al-Assad regime has shown no hesitation
whatsoever to employ the most gruesome tactics in
pursuit of military gains, from launching starve-andsurrender sieges to shoving crudely made barrel
bombs from helicopters. This is the regime that Russia
is supporting with its own air strikes and military
advisers. The fighting is getting worse and so are the
humanitarian consequences. The Al-Assad regime
has failed month after month to provide for unfettered
humanitarian access. This month, no United Nations
conveys have departed, largely because of the Al-Assad
regime’s absurd bureaucratic obstructions. The regime
has allowed no assistance for the people of eastern
Aleppo this month. That affects up to 275,000 Syrians
under siege. It has been nearly four months since
Madaya, Zabadani, Al-Fouah and Kefraya received
aid. More than two months have passed since aid has
reached the besieged community of Al-Waer.
While the United States condemns all parties to
the conflict who use siege tactics, we must be clear
that the Al-Assad regime and international backers
are responsible for 78 per cent Syrians living under
siege, the overwhelming majority. Aleppo is facing the
14/24

Another key factor that compounds Syria’s
humanitarian suffering is the Al-Assad regime’s
repeated destruction of hospitals and medical facilities.
We have heard of six health-care centres, hospitals
and laboratories hit by air strikes in the past five days.
In Dara’a, one of the first buildings struck after the
regime’s escalation of air strikes in late July was the
Al-Radwan field hospital, which served more than
400,000 people, many of whom had fled violence in
other parts of Syria. Air strikes had already destroyed
the hospital twice, and the resilient people of Dara’a
invested what little they had to rebuild the hospital both
times. Local leaders must again make a gut-wrenching
choice — try to rebuild the hospital a third time, only to
see those resources potentially squandered by a future
air strike, or give up and leave the people of Dara’a
without critical medical care.
The shortage of medical care in eastern Aleppo
is prompting calls for medical evacuation, which the
Al-Assad regime persistently ignores. In July, five of
eastern Aleppo’s nine hospitals were struck, and only
35 doctors are left working. Those heroic doctors simply
do not have the tools, the equipment or the medicine to
provide the care that so many Syrians injured by the
fighting desperately need.
16-26482

22/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

On 8 August, Dr. Zaher Sahloul, of the Syrian
American Medical Society, told members of the
Security Council about 10-year-old Shahad, a little girl
critically injured when the Al-Assad regime dropped
a barrel bomb on her house. While Shahad’s wounds
were serious, the doctor believed at the time that she
could be saved with proper treatment, including a
computerized tomography scan for diagnostics, which
was not available to anyone in eastern Aleppo. Just one
day after Dr. Sahloul talked with us about the urgent
need for Shahad to be evacuated, the little girl died. She
was just one among countless men, women and children
who might have been saved but for the Al-Assad
regime’s siege tactics.
The steps that the parties need to take to fix this
situation are well known. The Al-Assad regime must
recognize that there is no military solution to the
conflict. Those who enable and support Al-Assad’s
attacks, including Russia, must use their influence to
bring the bombardments to an end. While we continue
to negotiate for a resumption of the cessation of
hostilities, Al-Assad’s sieges, barrel bombs, strikes
on medical facilities, obstruction of aid and use of
incendiary weapons will make that goal ever-harder to
attain. Negotiations require a show of good faith, but
the Al-Assad regime has instead chosen to expand the
fighting on the ground and deepen the suffering of the
Syrian people.
I would conclude with just one more thought. Last
Friday, 19 August, was World Humanitarian Day, a day
on which we honour those who have been killed trying
to help others and those who risk their lives every day to
relieve suffering. In Syria, hundreds of United Nations
staff, Red Crescent staff and volunteers, workers in
non-governmental organizations, doctors, nurses and
White Helmet first-responders, like the late Khaled
Omar Harrah, whose death Stephen O’Brien just noted,
have all paid the ultimate price for their selflessness
and bravery in the line of duty. At an event in the
General Assembly Hall last Friday evening to mark
World Humanitarian Day, Hala Kamil, a brave Syrian
mother, whose family of four children fled Aleppo and
who is featured in the Frontline: Children of Syria
documentary, spoke to a jam-packed Hall. Hala said,
“I do not agree with those out there who say
that there are two worlds, one for the political
decision-makers and one for those who bear the
consequences of their decisions. We who suffer

S/PV.7757

those consequences must have some bearing on the
actions or lack of action of the powerful.”
We should be guided by Hala’s voice and the
voices of the many Syrians who stand up every day
to demand peace and help those who are suffering. To
honour their sacrifices, we cannot continue to relay the
same list of horrors, the same list but with different
names, month after month, while Syria is descending
into an irreparable state. Instead, there must an end
to the sieges, an end to the barrel bombs and an end
to the strikes on civilians. Only then will Syrians like
Hala Kamil and her children, Sara, Farah, Helen and
Mohammed, be able to contemplate a different and
more humane future.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to begin my statement with the
idea that Mr. O’Brien used to finish his statement.
Mr. O’Brien said that the humanitarian tragedy was the
consequence of a political failure. We can only agree
with that idea. Did they think of the consequences
when they invaded Iraq, which led to the formation of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)? Did
they think of the humanitarian consequences when
they created a spiral of violence in Syria, or when they
filled the country with weapons, not shying away from
giving support to terrorists, who turned into the main
anti-Government forces?
The humanitarian situation continues to be very
difficult. The Syrian Government, under very difficult
military conditions caused by a war that is being waged
by terrorist groups and other illegal armed groups
incapable, or unwilling, to dissociate themselves from
them, is doing everything it can to ensure that the
civilian population has a more or less normal life. It
is doing this despite the unilateral economic sanctions.
We can only call heroic the work of the Syrian
Red Crescent. Significant work has been undertaken
by specialized United Nations agencies and through
bilateral cooperation with new countries that have
become involved. Russia continues to provide active
humanitarian support to the Syrian people. Last
week, poor families in the town of Marmarita, Homs
province, received 2 tons of humanitarian aid, 6 tons
was given to a home for children in Aleppo and an
airdrop provided 17 tons of United Nations aid to the
town of Deir ez-Zor, which has been besieged by the
terrorists. Work is under way to define the parameters
for humanitarian pauses, including a 48-hour ceasefire

16-2648215/24

S/PV.7757

The situation in the Middle East

in Aleppo, together with the participation of United
Nations specialized agencies. Nevertheless, we strongly
believe that the humanitarian pauses must not be used
by fighters to replenish their resources and regroup, as
has taken place in the past. We hope that the sponsors
of the opposition will be able to ensure that those
groups show willingness to negotiate and respect the
conditions of any future agreements.
We continue to work for intra-Syrian reconciliation.
According to data from the Russian centre for
reconciliation of opposing sides in Hmeymim, the
number of towns that have joined the reconciliation
process has now increased to 444. In the past 24
hours, agreements were signed with representatives
of five towns in the provinces of Latakia and Homs.
The number of armed groups that have indicated their
commitment to the cessation of hostilities has remained
unchanged at 69. The agreement has been respected in
most provinces of the Syrian Arab Republic. However,
its full implementation continues to be impeded by
terrorist organizations such as Jabhat Al-Nusra, ISIL
and those cooperating with those terrorist groups.
It is still obvious to us that radically altering the
humanitarian situation in Syria will be impossible
unless we continue the fight against the terrorists. We
must ensure that the moderate opposition is uncoupled
from the ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra terrorists. Back in
February, our American colleagues promised to do
that, but they have not yet done so. Jabhat Al-Nusra
has changed its name to Jabhat Fateh Al-Sham, but
nothing has changed in substance. In that respect,
we are very concerned at the statement of the socalled High Negotiations Committee welcoming
this step, which shows there are links between them
and terrorists. The Security Council has, on many
occasions, taken decisions according to which those
who are on the side of terrorists or support them should
themselves be considered terrorists. That is a basic
principle. We stress that focusing efforts on countering
terrorism does not mean that we should underplay the
importance of providing humanitarian aid or prevent it
from happening.
I would like to recall that, working with the Syrian
Government, we have established six humanitarian
corridors for the peaceful population, who, if they
wish, can leave eastern Aleppo. However, in order
to ensure a lasting resolution to the humanitarian
situation in Aleppo, it is vital not to allow the use of
the humanitarian channels to supply terrorists with
16/24

22/08/2016

fighters, munitions and weapons. Unfortunately, we
have encountered such misuse in the past, when, during
pauses, extremists have resupplied and restocked their
stockpiles. Therefore, we also need to strengthen
control over freight movements across the TurkishSyrian border.
The difficult situation facing the civilian population
in Syria is the result of a long-running war, and it can
be ended only through political means. But how is
the situation any better for, for example, the civilian
population in Yemen? It is clear that weeping over some
tragedies while fuelling others is a deliberate approach
utilized by certain capitals. What have those who talk
loudly about the humanitarian situation in Syria done
in order to resolve it? We do not hear any accounts from
them of what has been done to achieve specific results
in that country. Where is the pressure on the opposition
to stop the use of such horrible methods for waging war
and the use of hellish explosive devices and suicide
bombers? When has the opposition been called upon to
enact a ceasefire, in Damascus for example? What work
is being done with supporters of Ahrar Al-Sham to have
them cease their actions and implement the Istanbul
four towns agreement and allow aid to enter areas that
are besieged? Have they demanded that the opposition
put an end to preventing civilians from leaving eastern
Aleppo through the humanitarian corridors set up under
the Russian initiative? The Islamists are not allowing
the civilian population to leave and are targeting the
corridors. Rather than putting practical pressure on the
fighters, some are putting up a media curtain around
the terrorist and criminal activity taking place.
Unfortunately, some members of the Security
Council at times conduct their discussions improperly,
dishonestly, making provocative insinuations in the
Council with regard to Russian Air Force operations,
but they do not mention their own illegitimate actions.
As is well known, on 19 July, aircraft of the coalition
led by the United States bombed a town in the area
of Manbij, with more than 90 strikes, resulting in the
deaths of dozens of people and injuries to hundreds of
others, including women and children. Armed groups
of the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces besieged the
town, with street fighting in residential areas, and no
assistance was given to the Syrian population. The only
way they could get out on 19 July was to pass through
the firing directed against them, and approximately
200 people were killed.
16-26482

22/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Nevertheless, no steps to avoid the death of civilians
have been taken by the coalition. On 28 July, coalition
air strikes against Al-Ghandour led to the death of 28
civilians, including seven children, and left 10 more
wounded. Since then, and for the second time, we have
been discussing the humanitarian situation in Syria,
but not a word has been said about the events and the
participation of the opposition. We would like to call on
our Western partners to stop their rhetoric and to look
in the mirror more often, look at what they are doing
and what the people they sponsor are doing. If they do
that, then maybe the tragedy will end.
In conclusion, it is necessary to continue efforts to
encourage parties to reach a peaceful solution on the
basis of international agreements. We call upon all those
who have any influence on the opposition to convince
them to adopt a negotiating position that will allow them
to truly move forward to a political settlement. Without
that, and without effectively combating terrorism, the
necessary radical improvement in the humanitarian
situation in Syria is impossible.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me,
at the outset, to congratulate Mr. Stephen O’Brien
for his efforts in addressing the Syrian crisis and to
thank him and all humanitarian workers who make
daily sacrifices in that connection. I would also like
to thank Mr. O’Brien for the clarity with which he
presented the thirtieth report of the Secretary-General
on Syria (S/2016/714), which enables us to look beyond
the humanitarian situation and consider the difficult
political and security situation in that country.
As my delegation pointed out during the
previous briefing, the cessation of hostilities, which
is fundamental for the provision of humanitarian
assistance and a prerequisite for finding a political
solution, seems seriously compromised. In that
connection, our primary concern continues to be
possible clashes between the Syrian army and the
armed opposition groups, particularly in several
governorates — for instance, Deir ez-Zor, Idlib, Rif
Dimashq and Aleppo — where bombardment continues
to claim many victims, including women, children, the
elderly and the vulnerable. Moreover, it is worth noting
that, in addition to claiming hundreds of victims, the
violence has led to the displacement of tens of thousands
of people, particularly in Idlib, where 45,000 people
have fled aerial bombardments.

S/PV.7757

Air strikes threaten to put between 250,000 and
275,000 people in Aleppo in a state of siege, owing
to the 7 July closing of the Castello Road, the only
access route to the eastern part of the city, a situation
that has led to a significant hike in the prices of basic
food supplies. It has also led to disastrous effects on
children, who increasingly suffer from malnutrition
and diseases associated with it.
Additionally, the escalation of clashes between
Kurdish forces and the Government at Hasakah, in
northern Syria, has resulted in more civilian victims and
the displacement of many, while further complicating
a conflict that is already difficult to resolve owing to
the very many parties already involved. The besieged
suburb of Al-Wair, inhabited by 100,000 people, is
currently being targeted by Government forces, which
have issued an ultimatum. Al-Wair has been lacking
humanitarian assistance since last month and must
continue to be on our radar.
I would also note the destruction of public
infrastructure, such as markets, schools and health
centres, 44 of which were targeted in July alone,
in flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law and resolution 2286 (2016). In that regard, my
delegation would like to take this opportunity to once
again remind the parties to the conflict, in particular
the Syrian Government, of their obligation to respect
human rights and international humanitarian law.
In the light of what I have said here, and in
recognition of current efforts, particularly those
undertaken by the Russian Federation, we reaffirm our
support for the humanitarian agencies of the United
Nations to implement weekly 48-hour ceasefires in
order to take care of those in need. Furthermore, we urge
the International Syria Support Group, in particular
its co-chairs — the United States and the Russian
Federation — to continue to bring their influence to
bear on the parties, especially the Syrian Government,
to effectively implement the ceasefires, which are so
crucial to humanitarian efforts.
Although we commend the sustained efforts of
humanitarian actors, particularly of United Nations
agencies and the Syrian Red Crescent, in ensuring
the provision of humanitarian assistance to thousand
of Syrians, we must remember the major constraints
that keep them from fully meeting the needs of the
affected population. Moreover, the sharp increase in
the number of people living in besieged and hard-to-

16-2648217/24

S/PV.7757

The situation in the Middle East

reach areas is regrettable. That number has gone from
4.6 million to 5.47 million, a significant increase of
900,000 people — primarily owing to violence, but also
to administrative red tape and the obstruction on the
part of the belligerent parties.
While we welcome progress in supplying aid to
besieged and hard-to-access areas — particularly
because access has been granted by the Government — we
urge the Government to work towards ensuring that the
goal of providing humanitarian access to 1.2 million
people by August this year is reached. It is essential
that the United Nations be granted ongoing access,
as providing humanitarian assistance to people in
need is — I would recall — an obligation under
international humanitarian law. While we welcome
the medical evacuation of 39 people from the besieged
towns of Madaya and Fo’ah, among them children and
the elderly, by the Syrian Red Crescent, we point out
that numerous civilians, particularly children, in the
four besieged towns — Fo’ah, Kafraya, Madaya and
Zabadani — still remain to be evacuated under the
humanitarian agreement on those towns. We continue to
condemn the systematic practice of removing medical
items from humanitarian convoys that are destined for
people in critical condition, especially pregnant women.
In addition to those problems we should mention
the dislocation of families, the early marriages and the
child soldiers, problems that continue to affect Syrian
children. On that subject, my delegation welcomes the
ongoing efforts of UNICEF and its partners, which
managed to provide multidimensional assistance to
214,000 children in July. We also welcome the ongoing
vaccination campaign of the World Health Organization
and UNICEF, a campaign that has made it possible to
reach 1.07 million children. So far, approximately 86 per
cent of the population still needs to be vaccinated.
The sacrifice on the part of medical and humanitarian
staff for the Syrian people can be seen once again in
the tragic losses and deaths that have occurred among
the staff of the United Nations Relief and Work Agency
for the Palestine Refugees in the Near East. On 16 July
a humanitarian worker, Mr. Yaser Mahmoud Shuaeeb,
was killed. We would like on this occasion to pay tribute
to those brave men and women and call for the freeing
of those who are still in detention.
In conclusion, the humanitarian and security
situation in Syria is unacceptable, with more than
30 million people affected. That should speak to our
18/24

22/08/2016

collective conscience and lead us to take decisive
action once and for all in order to bring about a lasting
solution to the crisis that will, above all, enable the
affected population to be able to return to their homes
in security and dignity. I would also like to reiterate my
delegation’s call to those with influence, particularly
the International Syria Support Group and its co-chairs,
to concentrate more on the humanitarian situation,
because we cannot stress enough that the unprecedented
humanitarian situation in Syria is only a symptom of
the political situation, which is getting worse day by
day. It is also important to give every possible chance
to the political process, pursuant to resolution 2254
(2015).
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General O’Brien
for his briefing.
The conflicts in some parts of Syria have intensified
lately, and the situation in Aleppo has escalated, causing
extensive civilian casualties, which have summoned
the attention of the international community. China
is gravely concerned about the civilian casualties
and the humanitarian crisis in Syria. We welcome
Russia’s support for the United Nations proposal for
a weekly 48-hour humanitarian pause in Aleppo. We
commend the efforts of the International Syria Support
Group co-chairs — the United States and the Russian
Federation. We hope that the parties concerned will
urge the Government and the opposition in Syria to
implement the cessation of hostilities agreement in
good faith and facilitate the efforts of United Nations
aid agencies to ease the humanitarian situation in
Aleppo without delay.
China has been actively supporting the mitigation
of the humanitarian situation in Syria and has
provided, through multiple channels, several tranches
of humanitarian aid, including food and supplies, for
Syria and other countries in the region.
A political settlement to the Syrian situation is
the ultimate way out for resolving the set of issues
related to Syria, including the humanitarian problem.
The international community should stay the course
in the general direction of moving towards a political
settlement, with an intensified effort to move the
political settlement forward. Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura is actively pushing for a new round of Geneva
peace talks as soon as possible. All parties in Syria
should put Syria’s national interests and the interests
16-26482

22/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

of its people first and attend the Geneva peace talks
to find a solution acceptable to all parties based on a
step-wise approach. The international community,
including other countries in the region, should support
the leading role of the United Nations in the area of
good offices and support the Special Envoy in his work,
so as to sustain the momentum for a political settlement
and ensure that the process can come to fruition.
Counter-terrorism is a challenge that must be
confronted in the course of addressing the Syria issue.
Terrorism in the region at large and in the Syrian
territory in particular causes civilian casualties and
hampers international relief efforts. The international
community should strengthen coordination, uphold
uniform standards and join forces to combat all the
terrorist organizations in Syria that have been so
designated by the Security Council in order to create
enabling conditions for the achievement of a political
solution.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Malaysia.
I join earlier speakers in thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien for his briefing.
It has become all too familiar for us to hear the
desperate plea of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs calling for us to respond to the
critical humanitarian needs of civilians in the besieged
and hard-to-reach areas in Syria, particularly the dire
situation in Aleppo. On Friday, we commemorated
World Humanitarian Day, a day designated to serve
as an annual reminder for us to work to alleviate
the suffering of innocents. It is a day that should
strengthen our resolve, a day to honour the bravery of
humanitarian actors delivering such needed assistance.
It was indeed horrifying that what preceded that day
was a stark reminder of how the world had slid into
further disarray. The footage depicting young Omran
Daqneesh, a 5-year-old Syrian boy, sitting impassively,
despite his bloody face, has become a symbol of the
struggling and the tragic consequences that the conflict
has had for civilians, particularly children. It was a
shocking and numbing experience. The significance of
World Humanitarian Day came ironically with an ugly
twist and a powerful reminder that more needs to be
done in the Syrian context.
The Council has yet to pronounce itself on a
weekly, 48-hour humanitarian pause in Aleppo,
almost two months since it was first requested by

S/PV.7757

the United Nations. The continuing silence from the
Council runs contrary to its demand for a political
solution as violence continues to escalate in Aleppo
and beyond. An immediate response in support of a
weekly humanitarian pause and a full endorsement
for its implementation would have been ideal. Seven
weeks on, the Russian Federation has expressed
support for a humanitarian pause. We must urgently
seize the opportunity to set our differences aside and
pronounce an undivided validation or endorsement of
the humanitarian pause to begin this week.
The agreement, however, is just the first step, as
we continue to hope for the warring parties to respect
and implement a two-day truce. It is also important to
stress that the humanitarian pause must not be a one-off
event, it has to be sustained in the long run.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
remind the parties to the cessation of hostilities of their
responsibilities in connection with the terms signed in
February. We hope that eventually talks will prevail
and the bloodshed in Aleppo and other cities in Syria
will end. While the insurgent fighting in Aleppo has
shifted our focus from other cities in Syria, I would be
remiss not to echo the sentiment expressed by UnderSecretary-General O’Brien about the challenges for
the delivery of assistance to other besieged and hardto-reach areas. We urge all the parties to ensure that
humanitarian access be provided to those towns. As
often seen in recent weeks, such access should not be
deliberately impeded.
This week is a crucial week for Syria. In addition
to the all-important humanitarian pause in Aleppo,
which hopefully will pave the way for an increase in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilians, Mr. De
Mistura is also scheduled to resume the intra-Syrian
peace talks in Geneva. We have repeatedly underscored
that a political solution is the only way forward, and we
reaffirm our support for the United Nations-facilitated
talks towards a political solution to the Syrian
conflict. We are hopeful that a greater push could be
made for the resumption of political dialogue without
preconditions. We hope that a more sustained truce
or cessation of hostilities among the various parties,
particularly between the Government and opposition
forces, could be worked out urgently. As articulated by
many stakeholders, a reduction in violence essentially
would alleviate the dire humanitarian crisis faced by
ordinary Syrians — a goal that to date, unfortunately,

16-2648219/24

S/PV.7757

The situation in the Middle East

22/08/2016

has eluded us, and the consequences of which led to
untold human sufferings. We must put an end to this.

of this international organization. I will return to this
issue later.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The victims who fell in Khaled are Syrian civilians.
The victims who fell in Damascus are Syrian civilians
as well. And the victims who fell in Idlib and Dar’a,
Raqqah, Deir ez-Zor and other cities and towns are
also Syrian civilians. No one in the world cares for the
lives of those Syrians or feels their pain more than us,
the people and the Government of Syria. No one but
us is paying the heavy toll for this terrorist war that
has been imposed against my country. The question
that should be raised is, Why are those civilians being
targeted? Who is killing them? And why, in fact, is
there a humanitarian crisis in Syria? Before I answer
that question, I would like to read Council members
the text of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the
United Nations:

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arabic Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Before I begin my statement, I would like
to say to the members of the Security Council that
we reject those who consider us responsible for the
bombing of the Katarji neighbourhood in Khaled. The
Russian Government has also rejected that accusation.
Therefore, the perpetrator must be elsewhere. I
would like to shed light on the fact that the tragedy
in that neighbourhood is directly linked to what some
colleagues mentioned with regard the little Syrian
boy Omran, who came from Venus or from Mercury.
That Syrian boy is just like all other Syrian children
who dream — and like the scores of others who have
suffered, directly or indirectly, from the conflict in
Syria and the conspiracy against it.
Also before going into the substance of my
statement, I would like to recall certain incidents
that may refresh the memory of some members of the
Council in order that they can distinguish between what
is true and what is not.
On 30 April 2014, aerial forces of the socalled international alliance destroyed a centre for
the deaf and mute in Raqqah, causing the deaths
of dozens of children. On 7 July 2016, the same socalled international alliance inaugurated the socalled liberation operation Manbij, using heavy aerial
bombardment targeting the inhabitants of the city and
leading to the death or injury of hundreds of men,
women and children, all civilians. On 12 July 2016, the
fighters of the so-called international alliance bombed
the town of As-Susa in Deir ez-Zor, causing the deaths
of over 80 people, including women and children. On
26 July 2016, the French Air force, a partner in the socalled international alliance, bombed greater Tokhar, a
village in the Khaled area, causing the deaths of more
than 180 civilians, many of whom were women and
children. The self-proclaimed international alliance did
not request any approval from the Syrian Government to
conduct air operations; nor did the Syrian Government
invite it to come to our country — on the contrary. That
is a flagrant violation of the fundamental principles
20/24

“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations.”
Five-and-a-half years ago, Syria was one of
the world’s safest and most stable countries. It was
self-sufficient in terms of basic needs, such as food,
medication, health and education. Syria was one of the
foremost hosts of refugees, for whom we did not build
camps or tents and whose pain and suffering we did
not exploit. We did not use their tears and suffering in
those so-called international pledging conferences. We
hosted them in our homes. We sent them to our schools
and treated them in our health-care centres, until some
of them returned to their homes, while others remained
in Syria. They were Iraqi refugees, our brothers and
sisters from Iraq, who left their country and took asylum
in Syria because of the Anglo-American invasion of
that country, as members well know.
That situation changed dramatically when Arab,
regional and international States met in Tunisia on
24 February 2012 under the so-called “friends of the
Syrian people”. That “friendship” with the Syrian
people resulted innovative means of murder, from
decapitation to the eating of human parts, the slaughter
of archeologists, various forms of destruction,
displacement, the plunder of factories, crops, grain
silos, oil and gas facilities, monuments and other
infrastructure, as well as the siege of the Syrian people.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank those
16-26482

22/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7757

who brought us this fatal friendship, which will never
be forgotten by the Syrian people.

that have exacerbated the suffering of Syrians, forcing
them to flee their homes for better lives.

Following that, the so-called international
alliance was formed on the pretext of fighting
terrorism — without United Nations approval or that
of the Syrian Government. It began to target innocent
civilians and infrastructure in Syria, including roads,
bridges, refineries, schools and hospitals. The cost
of the destruction as a result of those attacks by the
international alliance in terms of just oil and gas
facilities amounts to at least $2 billion. In fact, an attack
in Aleppo against the sole electrical plant — which cost
the Syrian people €1.3 billion — resulted in its total
destruction, by the American doves of peace in a single
air strike.

Allow me to briefly refer to the “moderate
opposition” in order to tell the Council of some
elements of such “moderate” opposition — genetically
altered in the laboratories of the intelligence agencies
of certain well-known countries. I would mention
Abou Omar Al-Shisheni, Abou Al-Meqdad Al-Turki,
Abou Moussab Al-Saudi, Abou Souhaib Al-Libi, Abou
John Al-Britani, Abou Mohammed Al-Tunsi, Abou
Hourrairah Al-Ameriki, Abou Mouath Al-Turkistani,
Abou Hassah Al-Misri, Abou Abdelrahman Al-Canadi,
Abou Abdallah Al-Urduni, Abou Talha Al-Kuwaiti,
Abou Murrah Al-Fransi, Abou Aoud Al-Belgiki and
Abou Walid Al-Walid Al-Australi. I would also mention
the religious mufti of the Al-Nusra Front, Abdulaha
Mohassini, who is Saudi. Those are the faces of the
“moderate armed opposition” in Syria.

As a matter of fact, the party foremost responsible
for the suffering of Syrian civilians are the Governments
that have falsely claimed — from the very beginning of
the war against Syria — to be friends of the Syrian people.
Some have opened their borders to tens of thousands
of mercenary terrorists from all over the world. Others
have recruited those mercenary terrorists — either by
using money or promising them paradise and heavenly
maidens for their jihad — who abuse women in the most
shameful way, for the first time ever in history under
the banner of “fornication jihad”. Other countries have
smuggled thousands of tons of every sort of weapon
to terrorists, set up training centres for them, recruited
children for them and taught them how to carry out
the most horrible terrorist operations. Yet others have
opened up their coffers to them, their oil and gas
resources, providing billions of dollars in order to
finance the terrorist war against Syria. Still others have
instructed the scholars of strife to issue Wahabi edicts
to legitimize branding othes as infidels the killing of
civilians, the plunder of their property and the defiling
of their women and desecration of their holy places. Still
others have dedicated their media and political forums
to legitimizing those groups by sometimes calling them
the “moderate opposition”, and at other times “armed
moderate opposition”; whereas now they are termed
“non-State armed groups”, as referred to by Mr. O’Brien
in his briefing. Most recently, they have been called the
“vetted Syrian opposition”. Perhaps that nomenclature
will soon change to “groups of armed angels”.
Those States did not stop at supporting the terrorism
against Syria, they complemented it with despicable
economic terrorism via unilateral coercive measures

Aleppo remained safe and stable for more than a
year and a half following the beginning of the so-called
crisis in Syria — until the Governments of Turkey, Qatar
and Saudi Arabia prompted armed terrorist groups to
attack the city, wreak havoc on people and property and
use the population as human shields. Destruction has
reigned. They have obliterated cultural, religious and
historic property. They burned Souk Al-Medina — the
city’s ancient marketplace, the oldest in the world.
They targeted the Umayyad Mosque, one of the oldest
in the Islamic world. They destroyed the Carlton Hotel
and tried to wreck the city’s citadel as well. Those are
all “achievements” by the opposition to the Syrian
regime — the regime, not the Government and not the
State. What did escape the terrible destruction was
plundered, dismantled and transferred to Turkey — an
instance of overt theft unprecedented in history. We
have provided the Council with numerous documents
to prove those despicable acts by the gangs supported
by the Turkish intelligence services.
Aleppo having been destroyed — over which
some shed crocodile tears today — was once home to
4 million civilians. Today there are only neighbourhoods
in which armed terrorist groups are active. A mere
250,000 people remain in the city. After the terrorist
forces began to target the inhabitants, 1.75 million
fled Aleppo to seek refuge in areas under the control
of Syrian Government institutions in various cities,
where they found protection and assistance. Civilians
do not flee to areas controlled by the terrorists, but to
areas controlled by the State, which provides 75 per

16-2648221/24

S/PV.7757

The situation in the Middle East

cent of all the humanitarian assistance to the Syrian
people — it is not the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.
The efforts of the Syrian Government in Aleppo
today, with the support of its friends and allies, is a
constitutional duty to protect civilians from the actions
of armed terrorist groups that have violated the cessation
of hostilities from the first day. Groups allied with the
Al-Nusra Front, which was not originally involved in
the cessation of hostilities, have daily rained hundreds
of rockets and mortars down on Aleppo, some weighing
more than a ton, causing the deaths of hundreds of
men, women and children and the destruction of
infrastructure and public and private property.
Against that backdrop, before taking any military
action, the President of the Republic issued decree
No.15 on 28 July 2016 to the effect that general amnesty
would be granted to all those who bore or owned arms
for any reason, or were fugitives or in hiding. On
26 July, the General Command of the Army and the
armed forces sent several messages to civilians and
armed actors in the eastern neighbourhoods of Aleppo,
calling on them to join the national reconciliation
and expel the foreign mercenaries. It established safe
humanitarian corridors and temporary housing for
them, particularly for those who want safe egress so
as to protect their lives and provide for their needs.
The Government also called upon the armed actors to
lay down their weapons and resolve their issues. As a
matter of fact, that has enabled hundreds of families
to leave the eastern neighbourhoods of Aleppo, to
whom the Syrian Government has provided temporary
housing and basic needs. Regrettably, other families
were not able to leave because they were prevented
from doing so by armed terrorist groups. Those groups
have intentionally used families as human shields and
have booby-trapped access to the safe corridors. They
have also used snipers to target them, as other terrorist
groups have done, in cities such as Raqqa, Mambij,
Al-Bab and Deir ez-Zor.
My Government questions the continued and
deliberate distortion of facts and the use of unreliable
sources in the reports of the Secretariat on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Any report issued by
the United Nations is expected to be based on neutral
and reliable sources, not on what are known to be “open”
sources or centres of opposition located outside of the
country and run and financed by foreign intelligence
entities that have taken a hostile position vis-à-vis the
22/24

22/08/2016

Syrian Government in an attempt to distort its image
internationally and level false accusations against it
without any tangible proof. Those reports, deliberately
or not, also cover up actions carried out by armed
terrorist groups by continuing to call them — as I
have mentioned — “armed opposition”, at times, and,
at other times, referring to them as ‘non-State armed
groups”, among other names.
Regrettably, the Secretariat has created a historic
precedent within the United Nations by justifying the
egregious terrorist crime perpetrated by Nour al-Din
al-Zenki, which decapitated a Palestinian child in
Aleppo. The report attempts to convey legitimacy
on that group by mentioning that it had issued a
communiqué comdemning the act and stating that
those responsible for it had been detained and handed
over to an investigation committee. It is as if the report
is saying that the practices of such terrorist groups,
through their recruitment and killing of children,
is allowed and its leaders are bound by international
law and human rights law, having become party to the
International Criminal Court.
Please allow me to quote from a recent book by the
Australian writer Tim Anderson, entitled title The Dirty
War on Syria. The book was published in Australia, not
Damascus.
(spoke in English)
“Although every war makes ample use of lies and
deception, the dirty war on Syria has relied on a level
of mass disinformation not seen in living memory.
The British-Australian journalist Philip Knightley
pointed out that war propaganda typically involves
‘a depressingly predictable pattern’ of demonizing
the enemy leader, then demonizing the enemy
people through atrocity stories, real or imagined.
“In Syria the big Powers have sought to hide their
hand, using proxy armies while demonizing the
Syrian Government and army, accusing them of
constant atrocities and then pretending to rescue
the Syrian people from their own Government. Far
fewer Western people opposed the war on Syria
than opposed the invasion of Iraq, because they
were deceived about its true nature.”
(spoke in Arabic)
The Government of my country reiterates its firm
position that the only solution to the crisis in Syria is
a political one within a dialogue among Syrians, under
16-26482

22/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7757

Syrian leadership and without any external interference
or preconditions. My country reiterates that the political
path runs parallel to the path of fighting terrorism,
which will continue until all active and deployed
armed-terrorist groups in Syria are eliminated.

and the need to return to the cessation of hostilities.
I would have liked to hear him speak about the real
issues — the issues that affect Syrians today and that
brought us together — not to hear his absurd ranting, on
which I think we need not waste time.

In conclusion, I would like only to recall that
the well-known French journalist Richard Labévière
recently wrote an opinion piece in which he criticized
Le Monde’s fabricated coverage of events in Syria. He
stated that Le Monde journalists got their news about
Syria from the book Alice in Wonderland. He addressed
the editorial board of the newspaper by writing to the
journalists as his colleagues — journalists who are part
of the tradition of Le Monde dating to historic times,
people such as Hubert Beuve-Méry, André Fontaine
and André Laurent. He wrote that they needed to wake
up and that something was amiss in their newspaper.

The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.

French journalists Georges Malbrunot and Christian
Chesnot wrote an important book to which I alluded in
one of my previous statements, entitled Les Chemins
de Damas In their book, those two known French
writers uncovered the fact that Laurent Fabius, former
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of France, was
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria
in August 2013, when Mr. Sellström was on his way
to Aleppo to investigate the use of chemical weapons
in Khan Al-Assal. The use of chemical weapons in the
Damascus area was meant to prevent Mr. Sellström from
going to Aleppo to investigate because, at that time, the
former Prime Minister knew who had used chemical
weapons in Khan Al-Assal in Aleppo. He wanted to
prevent Mr. Sellström from reaching Khan Al-Assal by
any means. Therefore, they used chemical weapons in
Damascus with the involvement of French intelligence
services and the former French Prime Minister. There
are so many scandals that I could expose to the Security
Council. But rather than take up more of the Council’s
time, I will stop at this point.
The President: The representative of France has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I will
not revisit the grotesque and insulting musings of the
Permanent Representative of Syria. I simply wanted
to share — not my surprise, because, really, I was not
expecting miracles from him — that I would have liked
to hear the Permanent Representative of Syria speak
about today’s topic, namely, the humanitarian situation
in Syria, the need for the 48-hour humanitarian pauses

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I had not planned to take the floor again.
But the intervention just made by my colleague the
representative of France compels me to request the
floor once more.
What he describes as absurd and heresy is a
perfect description of the policies of successive French
Administrations towards my country, including that of
Sarkozy near the end of his mandate and the term of
François Hollande. Members will note that I will not
use terminology such as “the French regime” here in my
statement because I am a maven diplomat and I know
that those words are not fit for use in the Chamber. That
is why I say “the French Government” and “the French
Foreign Minister”, and not “the French regime” or “the
Minister of the French regime”.
France has been hostile to my country for decades.
We will never forget the colonial era, when France
occupied my country following the sinister SykesPicot Agreement. However, the fact that the French
representative says that I have not touched upon the
humanitarian situation is means that he did not listen
to a word of my intervention. Any diplomat in this
international Organization who listened to what I said
today would realize that I spoke about the humanitarian
situation in my country and of the obstacles to the
resolution of the crisis, both political and humanitarian.
That is why I deeply regret that a representative of a
permanent member of the Security Council spoke in a
way unrelated to the topic at hand, as though he were
politically illiterate.
The games and terrorism that happened in my
country are over. The masks have come off. Today
public opinion in France, the United States and the
United Kingdom knows that their Governments’
policies towards my country are wrong. I have just
cited a work by an Australian author. His country is
14,000 kilometres from mine, but he understands the
truth of what is happening in Syria, which is why he
wrote a book describing what is taking place there:

16-2648223/24

S/PV.7757

The situation in the Middle East

terrorist aggression without precedent in the annals of
international relations.
How far will we go in destroying Member countries
of the Organization, sovereign States? Korea was
invaded on the basis of a lie. Viet Nam was invaded on
the basis of a lie. Then Iraq was invaded on the basis
of a lie. And then Libya. How long will we continue to

24/24

22/08/2016

perjure ourselves, to be witnesses to the destruction of
States Members of this international Organization based
on lies, absurd ranting and absolute political ignorance?
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

16-26482
