ReeolutioDll adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Article 6
1. The present Convention shall come into force on the
ninetieth day following the date of deposit of the eighth instru-ment of ratification or accession.
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the Convention
after the deposit of the eighth instrument of ratification or
accession, the Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth
day after deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification
or accession.
Article 7
1. Any Contracting State may denounce the present l 'onvention by written notification to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. Denunciation shall take effect one year after the
date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.
2. The present Convention shall cease to be in force as from
the date when the denunciation which reduces the number of
parties to less than eight becomes effective.

Article 8
Any dispute which may arise between any two or more Contracting States concerning the interpretation or application of
the present Convention which is not settled by negotiation shall,
at the request of all the parties to the dispute, be referred to
the International Court of Justice for decision, unless the parties
agree to another mode of settlement.

Article 9
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify all
States Members of the United Nations and the non-member
States contemplated in article 4, paragraph 1, of the present
Convention of the following:
(a) Signatures and instruments of ratification received in accordance with article 4;
(b) Instruments of accession received in accordance with
article 5;
(c) The date upon which the Convention enters into force in
accordance with article 6;
(d) Notifications of denunciation received in accordance with
article 7, paragraph 1 ;
(e) Abrogation in accordance with article 7, paragraph 2.

Article 10
1. The present Convention, of which the Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts shall be equally authentic,
shall be deposited in the archive; of the United >Jations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shalI transmit a certified copy of the Convention to all States Members of
the United Nations and to the non-member States contemplated
in article 4, paragraph 1.

B
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION ON CONSENT TO MARRIAGE,
MINIMUM AGE FOR MARRIAGE AND REGISTRATION
OF MARRIAGES

The General Assembly
Requests the Economic and Social Council to ask the
Commission on the Status of Women to consider the
draft Recommendation on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Registration of Marriages 2
in the light of the discussions in the General Assembly
on the draft Convention relating to the same subject,
and to report back in time for consideration of the
draft Recommendation by the Assembly at its eighteenth
session.
1167th plenary meeting,
7 November 1962
2 See Economic and Social Council resolution 821 III B
(XXXII) of 19 July 1961.

1772 (XVII).

29

Committee on Housing, Building
and Planning

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 903 C (XXXIV) of 2 August 1%2 establishing a
Committee on Housing, Building and Planning,
Noting further that many Member States have expressed interest in the new Committee,
1. Welcomes the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to establish a Committee on Housing, Building
and Planning whose terms of reference and reporting
procedure provide a new instrument for consideration
of the problems involved and appropriate integration of
housing and urban development programmes with economic, social and industrial development programmes;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
resumed thirty-fourth session to consider enlarging the
membership of the Committee from eighteen to twentyone.
1187th plenary meeting,
7 December 1962.

1773 (XVII).

United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Rights of the Child
adopted by the General Assembly on 20 November
1959,3
Mindful of the interrelation of economic and social
progress,
Considering the interest of the United Nations Children's Fund, in collaboration with other United Nations
bodies, in all aspects of the child's physical, mental and
social development,
Considering further that the United Nations Development Decade offers an opportunity to promote the health,
education and welfare of children and youth as part of
the broader effort to accelerate economic and social progress in the developing countries,
1. Takes note with approval of the decisions of the
Executive Board of the United Nations Children's
Fund for orienting the work of the Fund towards the
economic and social development efforts of the United
Nations Development Decade;
2. Recommends that Member States, as appropriate,
should:
(a) Take account of the needs of children and youth
ih the planning and administration of public health, education, social welfare, preparation for employment, housing, industry and agriculture, bearing in mind the need
for the strengthening of family life, and make such
plans part of over-all development programmes ;
( b) Give due importance, in working towards the
objectives of the United Nations Development Decade,
to their own programmes for children and youth in
allocating their available resources, and take account,
in their international aid programmes, of the needs of
children and youth;
( c) Take full advantage of the services which the
United Nations Children's Fund can offer, especially in
planning for children and youth and in training appropriate personnel in collaboration with the Bureau of
3 Resolution 13F:6 ( \~ l V 1.

30

General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

Social Affairs, the specialized agencies, other United
Nations bodies and non-governmental organizations.
1187th plenary meeting,
7 December 1962.
177 4 (XVII). International control of narcotics

The General Assembly,
Taking note of &onomic and Social Council resolutions 833 B (XXXII) of 3 August 1961 and 914 C
and D (XXXIV) of 3 August 1962,
Considering that the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1%1, represents the greatest common measure
of agreement with regard to the consolidation and improvement of the international control system set up by
the existing international treaties, including particularly
the Conventions of 1925 and 1931 and the Protocols of
1946 and 1948,4 and that general acceptance of the Convention would, in many respects, facilitate international
narcotics control,
Noting that by 12 October 1%2 sixty-four Governments had signed the Convention and eleven had ratified
or acceded to it,
Invites Governments to which the above-mentioned
resolutions were addres~ed to take such steps as may be
necessary for ratification of, or accession to, the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961.
1187th plenary meeting,
7 December 1962.
1775 (XVII). Fifteenth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Noting that 10 December 1963 will be the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption and proclamation by the
General Assembly of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard of achievement for
all peoples and all nations,

Taking into account the fact that, since the adoption
of the Declaration, definite progress has been achieved
in the affirmation and development of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and in the attainment of independence by a number of countries whose peoples had
been under colonial rule,
H aping that all States will implement General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, so that
the fifteenth anniversary of the Universal Declc\ration
of Human Rights will witness a decisive step forward in
the liberation of all peoples,
Recognizing that, notwithstanding some progress, the
situation regarding compliance with the recommenda4 Convention of 1925 : International Opium Convention signed
at Geneva on 19 February 1925, as amended by the Protocol
signed at Lake Success, New York, on 11 December 1946.
Convention of 1931: Convention for limiting the manufacture
and regulating the distribution of drugs, signed at Geneva, on
13 July 1931, as amended by the Protocol signed at Lake Success, New York, on 11 December 1946.
Protocol of 1946: Protocol, signed at Lake Success, New
York, on 11 December 1946, amending the Agreements, Conventions and Protocols on Narcotic Drugs concluded at The
Hague on 23 January 1912, at Geneva on 11 and 19 February
1925 and 13 July 1931, at Bangkok on 27 November 1937 and
at Geneva on 26 June 1936.
Protocol of 1948: Protocol bringing under international control drugs outside the scope of the Convention of 13 July 1931
for limiting the manufacture and regulating the distribution of
drugs, as amended by the Protocol signed at Lake Success,
New York, on 11 December 1946.

tions made in the Declaration remains unsatisfactory in
many parts of the world,
Recalling its resolution 217 D (III) of 10 December
1948, recommending Governments of Member States to
show their adherence to Article 56 of the Charter of the
United Nations by using every means within their power
solemnly to publicize the text of the Declaration,
Bearing in mind its resolution 423 (V) of 4 December 1950, inviting all States and interested organizations
to adopt 10 December of each year as Human Rights
Day,
Bearing in mind that the application oL suitable measures to mark the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of the Declaration might further promote universal
respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, as enunciated in the Declaration,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Committee to prepare plans for the celebration of
the fifteenth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, including suggestions as to forms
which the celebration might take and as to information
materials which would be useful at the national and
local levels, and to consult with the appropriate authorities of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and other specialized agencies
concerned in the preparation of such plans, as well as
with interested non-governmental organizations in consultative status ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to present these
plans to the Commission on Human Rights at its nineteenth session.
1187th plenary meeting,
7 December 1962.
In pursuance of the above resolution, the Secretary-General
appointed the members of the Special Committee.
The Committee is composed as follows: ARGENTINA, CANADA,
CEYLON, COLOMBIA, COSTA RICA, ECUADOR, FRANCE, GREECE,
GUINEA, IRAN, ITALY, JAPAN, JORDAN, MALI, MAURITANIA,
SAUDI ARABIA, THAILAND, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and URUGUAY.

1776 (XVII). The further promotion and en•
couragement of respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that one of the basic purposes of the
United Nations, reflected in the Charter of the United
Nations and in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, is to promote universal respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction
of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion,
political or other opinion, national or social origin,
property, birth or other status,
Recalling that the Universal Declaration proclaimed
human rights and fundamental freedoms and called upon
all peoples and all nations for their universal and effective recognition and observance,
Considering that Member States have pledged themselves to co-operate with the United Nations in promoting universal respect for such human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Taking into account the provisions of the Declaration
on the granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples,
