.dverse j
mefuI i
e shall !

rected ;
awards
of the I

UNITED

NATIONS

,‘.‘fi
i,jR’,!!

TWENTY-THIRD

‘,
,’ Ii.

“J’,”

,ji.f

‘,‘..,1

YEAR

th
MEETING:

27 APRIL

1968

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. .. . . . ,. , . .. .. ,. .. . .. .. . .., , ..

Page
1

. .. . . . . . . .. . . . .. . .. . .. .. ,. , .. ,. . .,. . ..

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8560) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

Adoption

of the agenda

1417)

S/PV.1417

,“’

i (,X/J
,‘I/

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutionsand Decisionsof the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date,

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH MEETING
Held in New York on Saturday, 27 April 1968, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

the situation as a result of fresh annexations. There is
hardly any need to draw up a list of the political
day-dreams of the Israel authorities and the hard-core
extremists. We hear, for instance, that at its meeting in Tel
Aviv the World Congress of Orthodox Communities decided
unanimously to ask the Government to proclaim what they
called the cease-fire lines as the permanent frontiers of
Israel. The Congress also passed a resolution calling for
Israel citizens to be settled in the occupied territories. Then
again we hear that the Chief Rabbi, Yizhak Nissim, will
leave Israel to tour the United States and Canada for the
purpose of urging Americans and Canadians of the Jewish
faith to emigrate to Israel, The Chief Rabbi will launch this
appeal for immigration-a vital religious need at the present
time-in synagogues, theological seminaries and Jewish
cultural centres. Another report that we have received is
that the Zionist authorities, after long hesitation about
establishing Jewish settlements in Hebron because no Jews
had lived there for a very long time, have, despite their fears
about the reaction in foreign capitals to such an unfortunate step, decided to authorize seventy persons, mostly
ecclesiastics, to establish themselves in a hotel in the town.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l41 7)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8.560).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East

5. The latest move of this kind is the recent decision to
hold a military parade in the Holy City of Jerusalem, in
order to intimidate the inhabitants and create a climate of
religious tension. No one can foresee the repercussions this
will have, since they will go far beyond the political aspect
of a problem which is still unsolved.

Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8560)
1, The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In accordance with the decision taken by the Council [1416th
meeting], 1 shall invite the representatives of Jordan and
Israel to take places at the Council table and to participate,
without the right to vote, in the discussion of the item on
the agenda.

6. Notwithstanding these moves, which give a clear indication of their immediate and long-term objectives, the Tel
Aviv authorities continue to claim with their usual cynicism
that they want peace and that the only obstacle to the
endeavours to achieve an acceptable settlement lies in the
alleged intention of the Arab Governments to destroy
Israel.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan] and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table.

7. It is not difficult to refute claims of that sort and to
demonstrate that the only obstacle to such a settlement lies
in the measures taken by the Zionist authorities to
challenge the sovereignty of the Arab States. One measure
worthy of particular attention is this plan to lure foreign
citizens away from their countries on a massive scale. It
implies that Israel considers the territories it has wrongfully
occupied to be too large for the local population. In that
case, should it not be suggested that the only proper
immigrants would be the Palestinian citizens unlawfully
driven out of their country. But perhaps the Tel Aviv
authorities are unaware of their existence and, to use their
spokesman’s favourite word, should be invited to “recog
nize” the existence of the Palestinian population without

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The Council will continue its consideration of the question on its
agenda.
3. Mr.
BOUATTOURA
(Algeria)
(translated from
French): There is a well-known saying that whom the Gods
would destroy they first make mad, and in our opinion it
applies quite well to the present euphoria of the leaders in
Tel Aviv, who, in their short-sighted Machiavellianism, have
been taking the maddest decisions.
4. Every time the Palestine question comes before the
Security Council we are faced with a further worsening of
1

perhaps understand why the people of Palestine have reason
to fear the fate that befell the indigenous inhabitants of
certain territories we all know of when they were colonized. In the latter case, however, there were mitigating
circumstances in so far as the universal Declaration of
Human Rights had not yet been adopted, nor had respect
for man become a guiding principle in international
relations.

delay. The fact remains, however, that while it is fond of
the word “peace” Israel appears to be totally unaware of
the very existence of the word “justice”.
8. A little while ago I used the word “day-dream”, and it
is a fact that Israel’s expansionist policy has brought about
a situation which seems to have put the clock back by a
hundred years to the days of colonial aggrandizement,
when a few great Powers settled international disputes
through peace treaties, or partition agreements with no
regard for the indigenous population, or by conventions
containing very rigorous stipulations and based on the
doctrine that might is right.

14. Accordingly, the Council’s first duty is to condemn
soundly and put an end to Israel’s current retrograde
policy. First of all it should prevent the situation from
deteriorating as a result of the annexation of Jerusalem,
which is certainly in the offing; in particular it should put a
stop to deliberate acts of provocation. Following its
traditions, the Council ought to ensure that aggressive
military parades cannot take place in the Holy City of
Jerusalem.

9. Seen against such a background, the methods employed
by Israel become clear; they reflect the philosophy of
Machiavelli and other thinkers who inspired the imperialistic policies of the nineteenth century, policies which were
thought to have been finally discarded after the Second
World War.

15. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): The Security Council
has again been convened to deal with the latest Israeli
challenge to the authority of our Organization. As the letter
addressed by the representative of Jordan to the President
of the Security Council properly puts it: “The Israel acts of
violation are culminating now in the Israel military parade
to be held in Jerusalem on 2 May 1968, and which will start
in the occupied City of Jerusalem.” [S/8560.]

10. It need hardly be added that the very existence of the
United Nations, the principle of self-determination and the
rejection of the use of force were intended to create a new
world and to banish such anachronistic notions for ever
11. We are now about to witness a tragi-comic spectaclethe military parade that Israel intends to hold in Jerusalem.
It is meant to be provocative and intimidating, and can be
expected to have very serious consequences; especially in
view of the fact that Zionism bases its territorial ambitions
largely on a fanciful interpretation of the Bible and itself
adds a religious note to this latest step towards total
annexation. Adding a religious dispute to a political and
military situation which is already serious enough can
hardly fail to make the existing dispute almost insoluble.
Perhaps, however, that is Tel Aviv’s intention. Perhaps,
relying on a dubious long-term military superiority, it plans
to use every conce&able method to drive out the local Arab
population for ever. If the parade does, in fact, take place,
it is bound to introduce an clement of sacrilege into the
dispute that no political move will ever obliterate. Furthermore, as the Secretary-General himself has just reaffirmed,
the parade violates all the resolutions on the subject of
Jerusalem adopted by the United Nations since 1948.

16. The policy of Israel with regard to Jerusalem has
perhaps been the best illustration of what kind of peace and
coexistence Israel has been offering to its Arab neighbours.
As is well known, the status of Jerusalem was established
by the General Armistice Agreement signed by the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and Israel on 3 April 1949 at
Rhodes. In article IV of that Agreement, we read:
“The basic purpose of the Armistice Demarcation Lines
is to delineate the lines beyond which the armed forces of
the respective Parties shall not move.“1
17. It is common knowledge that Israel had started to
erode the provisions of the Agreement by gradually shifting
its governmental organs to Jerusalem, a policy which large
numbers of Governments have refused and continue to
refuse to recognize.

12. The long series of violations and the refusal by Israel
to implement those resolutions, particularly those of 4 and
14 July 1967 /2253(ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V)], demonstrate once again what Tel Aviv thinks of its international
obligations.

18. Everyone well remembers that in June 1967 the armed
forces of Israel did move beyond the demarcation lines
delineated in an agreement signed by the representatives of
Israel. Not only did they move across the demarcation lines,
but official representatives of Israel, such as Prime Minister
Eshkol and others, openly stated that Israel had decided to
annex the Jordanian part of Jerusalem acquired by armed
conquest. It is for that reason that the fifth.emergency
special session of the General Assembly deemed it necessary
to adopt, by an overwhelming majority, two resolutions on
Jerusalem.

13. It may well be that at some future date Israel will
really desire peace, but that will not be before it has
satisfied its territorial ambitions, or before all the immigrants it can manage to lure into this adventure have been
settled in the annexed territories. The only right and
legitimate reaction for the peoplp of Palestine is therefore
to take up arms in self.defence in order to avoid extermination. If extermination seems too strong a word, anyone
interested in the matter should reread the copious literature that the Zionist leaders have been good enough to
supply us with during the past decades. They will then

19. In the first of these, resolution 2253 (ES-V), the
General Assembly considered that the measures taken by
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, FOUrlIz
Special Supplement No. 1.

2

year,

sve reason
bitants of
vere colomitigating
oration of
rd respect
:rnational
condemn
‘etrograde
tion from
erusalem,
)uld put a
Wing its
aggressive
r City of
r Council
st Israeli
the letter
President
d acts of
y parade
will start
alem has
reaceand
ighbours.
tablished
Hashem.
1949 at
ion Lines
forces of
arted to
r shifting
ich large
tinue to
re armed
on lines
atives of
on lines,
Minister
tided to
y armed
lergency
.ecessary
.tions on
.V), the
aken by
rth Year,

Israel to change the status of the City were invalid, and
called upon Israel to rescindall measures
alreadytaken and
to desist forthwith from taking any action which would
alter the status of Jerusalem.In view of the continuing
Israeli violations of the status of Jerusalem,the special
sessionof the General Assemblywasobliged,ten dayslater,
to adopt another resolution /2254 (ES-V)] by an equally
heavy majority, which deplored the failure of Israel to
implement the earlier resolution and reiterated the call to
Israel contained in that earlier resolution to rescind all
measuresalready taken and to desistfrom any action which
would aIter the status of Jerusalem.Finally, both resolutions requested the Secretary-Generalto report to the
Security Council and the GeneralAssemblyon the situation
and on the implementation of the resolutions.

parties to the Agreement which resultedin the revision or
suspensionof the provisions of that Agreement. Israel,
however, hasneverstatedthat the partiesto the Agreement
have ever availed themselvesof this provision. Consequently, it is not the GeneralArmistice Agreementthat is
null and void, but the Israeli position that statesthat the
Agreement is dead. So the situation is clearfor everyone:
Israel feelsthat international agreements
arevalid solong as
they serveits interests,and becomenull andvoid if Israel’s
presumedinterests so require. This is a concept which no
Member of this Organization can acceptwithout giving up
everything the Organization standsfor,

23. We should be interested if the representativeof Israel
would inform the Council of the mutual consentof the

2Ibid., Sixteenth Year, Supplement for January, February and
March 1961, document
S/4776.

24. The latest of the Israeli violations of the General
Armistice Agreementand of the resolutionsof the Security
Council and the General Assemblyinvolves the proposed
20. The Secretary-Generalin his report of 12 September military paradeIsraelwishesto hold on 2 May in Jerusalem.
Apart from the fact that the GeneralArmistice Agreement
1967 stated that:
limits the presenceof defensiv&forces on eachsideto two
“In the numerous conversations which the personal battalions in the city, the proposedparadeis an open
challengeto the United Nations. As I have earlierrecalled,
representative”-Ambassador Ernest0A. Thalmann-“had
two General Assembly resolutionscalled upon Israel to
with Israel leaders, including the PrimeMinister and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, it was made clear beyond
desist from any action which would alter the status of
any doubt that Israel wastak$ngevery stepto placeunder
Jerusalem.The fact that Israelignoresall this and wishesto
its sovereignty those parts of the city which were not
go aheadwith a military paradein the territory of another
controlled by Israel before June 1967.” [See S/8146,
Member State of the United Nations cannot but evoke the
para. 33.1
indignation of all Members of our Organization. In this
connexion I wish to remind the Council that it has a
Further in that report we read that:
precedent to follow. In its resolution 162 (1961) it endorsed the decisionof the Jordan-IsraelMixed Armistice
“The Israel authorities stated unequivocally that the
Commission which found on 17 March 1961 that heavy
process of integration was irreversible and not nego- armament, in excess of that allowed in the General
tiabIe.” [Ibid., para. 3.5.j
Armistice Agreement, on the Israelsideof the Demarcation
Line in Jerusalemconstituted a breach by Israel of the
Agreement. It consequently condemnedthis act of Israel
21. The processof integration, that is, the annexationof a
part of Jordan, has sincebeencontinued by the demolition and called upon the Israeli authoritiesto take the strongest
measuresto prevent the recurrence of sucha breachand to
of Arab tenements, by the appropriation of the land of
Arab owners, by the forced resettlementof Israeli citizens refrain in the future from bringing to Jerusalemany
equipmentin excessof that allowedunder the termsof the
in the Jordanian part of Jerusalem,and soon. The terrorist
GeneralArmistice Agreement.2
actions perpetrated by the invaders have met with the
determined resistanceof the peopleof Arab Jerusalem.The
25. My delegationfeelsthat the Council can certainly do
declarations and subsequentdeportations of leadingArab
personalitiesand the police methodsused againstdemon- nothing less when such a violation of the terms of the
Armistice Agreement is coupled with a clear challengeto
strating women, asreported in The New York Timesof 26
April, all attest to the fact that the sacredright of resistance the decisionsof the various organsof the United Nations.
Israel should be made to understandthat it cannot place
is actively usedby the Arab peopleof Jerusalemagainstthe
itself above the law of nations,includingthe Charterof the
invadersof their city.
United Nations The Secretary-General,in his note of 20
22. Israel’s argument for all this has remainedthe same: April 1968, supportedthis view by stating:
the General Armistice Agreement is null and void as
“ . . . The Secretary-Generalwishesto emphasizethat
apparently are, according to Israel,all resolutionsbasedon
the holding of a military paradein this areaat the present
that Agreement. In this connexion it is not out of placeto
time will almostsurely causean increasein tensionin the
refer briefly to paragraph’3of article XII of the Agreement,
Near East and could well have an adverseeffect on the
which states that:
efforts now going forward to find a peacefulsettlement
“The Parties to this Agreement may, by mutual
of the problemsin the area.” [See S/8561,para. 3.1
consent,“-and I underline the words “by mutual consent”--“revise this Agreement or any of its provisions,or
26. Despite the outstanding clarity of the facts and their
legal background, not only did the Israelirepresentative
may suspendits application, other than articlesI andIII,
at any time.”
repeat today his noisy commentsof vilification addressed

3

to the Security Council, but, according to some newspaper
reports, his Government has rejected in a high-handed
manner the communication of the Secretary-General, who’
only reminded them of their obligations concerning Jerusalem. The Israeli attitude serves as a strong warning to the
entire international community that no effort should be
spared to curb the aggressor. What more is needed to justify
the inalienable right of the Arab population in the
Israeli-occupied territories to take up arms of resistance and
to fight for their freedom? It was for this reason that the
First Secretary of the Hungarian Socialist Workers’ Party,
J&IOS Kid&, stated on 19 April 1968, speaking before the
Congress of the Patriotic People’s Front in Budapest:
“The latest Israeli armed attacks on Jordan have proved
again that the Government of Israel continues its policy
of aggression, ignores the resolution of the Security
Council, and adds new crimes to those already committed. In this matter too we are on the side of those who
are attacked, on the side of the Arab countries, and we
support their cause.”

organizing a military parade east of the Demarcation Line
established under the Armistice Agreement and in part of
the Old City of Jerusalem, Israel is deliberately violating
important provisions of the Agreement.
34. The General Assembly has on an earlier occasion
called upon Israel to make no changes in the status of the
Holy City of Jerusalem, where the three great religious
communites have always lived peacefully side by side. We
feel that the time has now come for Israel to respect the
resolutions of the international community, and also the
property rights of the Arab population of the wrongfully
occupied territories.
35. My Government proclaims its solidarity with the Arab
peoples in general and, on the question now before US,with
the Government and people of Jordan in particular.
36. The Security Council should unequivocally forbid
Israel to hold the military parade, and my delegation will
associate itself with any proposal to that effect, in the hope
that the resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly will at last be respected by Member States and by
Israel in particular.

27. In conclusion, I wish to state the following.
28. Firstly, Israel is openly violating the Charter of the
United Nations by trying to annex the territory of another
Member State of the United Nations, including the City of
Jersusalem, and by arrogantly preparing there a provocative
military parade.

37. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN
(Ethiopia): In any
consideration of the present Middle Eastern situation the
matter that must surely be uppermost in our mind is the
fate of the delicate mission that we have entrusted to the
Secretary-General and, through him, to his Special Representative in the area. That mission is a delicate endeavour
which must be sustained and supported by all of us, and
nothing must be done that is likely to make that task more
difficult or to reduce the chance of its success, for on that
mission depends the only opportunity for peace in that
area, so long the arena for confrontation
and conflict.
Moreover, as we have had occasion to say repeatedly in
previous debates on this problem, the co-operation of the
parties concerned and their utmost restraint is a matter of
paramount importance to the success of the United Nations
peace effort. The parties need to exercise a measure of
self-discipline and restraint, avoiding all actions which are
likely to aggravate further an already grave situation.

29. Secondly, by doing so, Israel is acting in violation of
the General Armistice Agreement and of the resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council.
30. Thirdly, the Security Council cannot tolerate such an
attitude and should condemn Israel’s policy and demand
that Israel accept and implement without delay the
stipulations of the Armistice Agreement, the earlier resolutions of the Security Council-particularly
resolution
162 (1961)-and
General
Assembly
resolutions
2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V), and desist from taking any
iction which might violate them.
31. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from French): My
Government has already clearly stated its position on the
Middle East problem generally and the question of Jerusalem in particular. It now wishes most vehemently to
deplore Israel’s intention to organize a military parade in
Jerusalem. My Government believes that the evacuation of
the territories occupied by Israel would be a step which
might lead to a peaceful settlement of the unhappy
problem in the Middle East.

38. It seems to my delegation that in this particular case
of the intended military parade in Jerusalem we have an
example of the kind of action that could risk creating a
much feared aggravation of the delicate and expiosive
situation that inevitably exists in any area &at, like the
Middle East, has gone through the experience of military
tension and conflict, with all that this implies in terms of
animosity and intense emotion.

32. Israel is well aware that military parades have always
been regarded as acts of sovereignty over a territory on the
part of the holders of the parade. For that reason, and more
particularly on the account of the provocation that such a
parade might cause, my Government strongly disapproves
of military parades being held in occupied territories.

39. My delegation tends to agree with the assessment of
the Secretary-General contained in his note that
“the holding of a military parade in this area at the
present time will almost surely cause an increase in
tension in the Near East and could well have an adverse
effect on the efforts now going forward to find a peaceful
settlement of the problems in the area” [see S/8.561,
para. 31.

33. On behalf of my Government I appeal most urgently
to Israel to refrain from any act that might worsen the
already very tense situation in the Middle East, By
4

ation Line
in part of

r’ violating

occasion
tus of the
t religious
f side. We
zspect the
1 itIs0 the
vrongrlllfy

1 the Arab
rc us, with
1r.

Ily forbid
:at ion will
1 the hope
ie Genera1
tes and by

I: In any

mtion the
kind is the
ted to the
id Repreendeavour
of US, and
task more

or on that
:c it] that
~ conflict.
xtedly in
011 of the
mat

tcr

of

d Nations
msnre of
which are
III.
cdor case
*r have an
mating a
explosive
I like the
F military
terms of
ssnicnt of
ea at the
crease in
II adverse
t pc ncchl
S/8561,

40. In view of this assessment
of the Secretary-General,to
which we attach the greatest significance,and of our own
concern to avoid any action which would tend to spoilthe
chance of peacein the area, we find ourselvesduty bound
to endorse the wise call for moderation made by the
Secretary-Generalin his note to the Government of Israel
of 20 April 1968; likewise, we join the membersof the
Council in calling on the Government of Israel and in
appealing to that Government to abandon its plansfor a.
military parade in the Holy City of Jerusalemon 2 May
1968. The Council should and must make this call in a
single and united voice, and in the name of that noble
objective of justice and lasting peacewhich, after a&is the
universal interestof one and all.
41. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): Ever sincethe questionof
Palestine camebefore the United Nations in its very early
days there hasbeen a justified concern about the fate and
future of Jerusalemand the protection of its Holy Places.
The international community has alwayshad, and rightly
so, a specialinterest in the question of Jerusalemin all its
aspects, Accordingly, it is particularly painful that that
historic City continues to be a source of grievance,
complaint andnow potential collision.
42. Canada remains concerned, as it has been since22
November, that nothing shouldbe done which would upset
or make more difficult the efforts of Mr. Jarring “to
promote agreementand assistefforts to achievea peaceful
and accepted settlement” in accordancewith the unanimously adopted resolution of that date [resolution
242 (1967)/. My delegation has also stressed,both in
private andin public in this Council, the needfor the fullest
co-operation with Mr. Jarring by all the parties concerned
in application of the principles and provisionsof resolution
242 (1967). Furthermore, we have made it clear, and I
would like to emphasizethis again, that a key elementin
this co-operation is the acceptanceof the Council’sresolution of 22 November 1967 as a whole by all of the parties
directly concerned.
43. It is against this background that the Canadian
delegation is obliged to emphasizehere the position which
it took in the General Assembly in July 1967. It is clear
that the question of Jerusalemand the Holy Placescannot
in practical terms be consideredor resolvedas an isolated
issue. We are, therefore, opposedto any unilateralactions
with respectto Jerusalemwhich would be prejudicialto the
legitimate international concern about that city, to the
preservation of specialspiritual and religiousintereststhere,
or the settlement sought by Mr. Jarring Such actionsare
neither helpful nor acceptable,andwe cannot condoneany
steps which would either alter the status of the city of
Jerusalem or endanger the prospects for a peaceful and
agreed settlement.
44. The current discussionin the Council hasfocusedon
the forthcoming parade in Jerusalemon 2 May. We have
before us a report (S/8561] which cIearly setsforth the
views of the Secretary-General on this matter. In the
present circumstances,the paradeis inevitably provocative.
It is bound to raisetensionsin the area.By implication, it
seemsto prejudice the future of Jerusalem:Canadaregrets

the decision by the Israeli Government to mount this
parade,andparticularly the decisionto sendit through that
part of Jerusalemwhich wasoccupiedby Israelduring the
fighting lastyear.
45. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
Even before an emergencymeetingof the Security Council
wasaskedfor, the French delegationhad taken note, with
great concern,of the letter of 18April from the representative of Jordan drawingthe Secretary-General’s
attention to
“the gravesituation arisingfrom Israel’sdecisionto hold a
military paradein Jerusalem
on 2 May 1968” [seeS/8.549].
46. We cm, of course,understandthat the State of Israel,
like many other States,shouldwish to commemoratethe
anniversaryof its independence.
But that is not the issue.
According to our information and as confirmed by the
Israel pressreport cited by the Jordanianrepresentativein
his letter, half of the route of the proposedmilitary parade
in Jerusalempasses
through the sector occupiedby Israel
forcesafter the eventsof June 1967.
47. There wasa previousoccasionwhen a similardisplay
gaveriseto seriouscriticismandhad to be dealtwith by the
Security Council. At that time it was a question of a
military paradein the Israelsector of Jerusalem.Even that
paradeconflicted with the internationalstatusof the city as
defined by GeneralAssemblyresolutions,while the sizeof
the military forcesassembled
for the paradewasan express
violation of the ceilingslaid down by the Israel-Jordan
Armistice Agreement.That violation was condemnedin a
very clearresolutionby the Security Council.
48. The paradeplannedfor 2 May is far worse,sinceits
route passes
through the part of the city on the Jordanian
sideof the Armistice Line. Such a decisioncanhardly have
been lightly taken and, like similar acts that have been
carried out sincethe conflict lastJune,must surelybe seen
aspart of a generalpolicy.
49. At its fifth emergencyspecial sessionthe General
Assembly consideredthe measurestaken by Israel on 29
June 1967to “unify” Jerusalem.
In resolution2253 (ES-V)
of 4 July, it expressedits deep concern at the situation
prevailing in Jerusalemas a result of those measures;it
consideredthem to be invalid and called upon Israel to
rescind them and to desistfrom taking any action which
would alter the statusof the city. In a secondresolution
[2254 (ES-V)], dated 14 July, the Assembly took note
with the deepestregret and concern of Israel’snon-compliance with resolution2253 (ES-V). It deploredthe failure
of Israelto implementthe first resolutionand repeatedits
earlier request.
50. France hadvoted for thoseresolutions.Consequently,
assoon asit learnedabout the measuresin question, the
French Government let it be known that it could not
accept the Israel Government’sdecision.Yet, quite apart
from not complyingwith the GeneralAssemblyresolutions,
the Government of Israel decided in January 1968 to
expropriate about 500 hectaresof land in the occupied
sector to build a residentialquarterfor Israelifamilies.That
decisionarousedstrong feelingsin Jerusalem,which were

57. Mr, SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish):Over the many years during which the Middle
East questionhas been discussedin the United Nations,
Paraguayhasalways consideredthat Jerusalemshouldbe
under an international rigime, in conformity with United
Nationsdecisionsfor which we voted.

expressed in a number of communications circulated as
Council documents. In our view there is no legal basis for
such measures and they are likely to have the most serious
consequences. They can only stir up ill-will, increase
tension and complicatea problem which shouldbe solved
by peacefulmeans.

51. The Israelauthoritieshave repeatedlygivenassurances 58. To cite a further example, this position wasrecently
confirmedby the inclusionof a specialoperativeparagraph
that they would take all necessaryaction to protect the
in the draft resolutionwhich my delegation, together with
Holy Placesand to ensurefree access
by all to the placesof
other Latin American delegations,submitted at the fifth
worship of the religionsconcerned. Without wishingto
emergency special sessionof the General Assembly.3
challengetheir good intentions, we feel that the problemis
not as simple as that. There are also political and legal During that samesession,prompted likewiseby its concern
aspects.The main point is still the questionof sovereignty. to preserve the international status of Jerusalem,my
The future of Jerusalemcannot be determinedunilaterally. delegation supported resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and
Jordan, too, hasa direct interest in the matter, asdoesthe
2254 (ES-V).
international community, since,asthe United Nationshas
59. In the generalcontext of the Middle East problem,
repeatedly proclaimed,Jerusalem,being a Holy City for
this is my country’s attitude towards the specific question
three religions,must no longer be a causefor strife or a
bone of contention. In accordance with its universal of Jerusalem.But the generalsituation, particularly in the
Israel-Jordansector, is explosive and in the courseof a few
spiritual significance,it mustbecomea symbolof peace.
weeksthe Security Council hasheld a seriesof meetingsto
52. Mr. MISHRA (India): The Security Council hasonce considerit. In thesecircumstances,which arein themselves
againbeen called to considerthe tensesituation whichhas extremely serious,the military paradewhich Israel proposes
to hold on 2 May to celebrate the anniversary of its
existed in WestAsia sinceJune of last year. As members
of
the Council will recall, it was after long and strenuous independencecan only make the current situation more
efforts that the Council adopted resolution 242 (1967), dangerous.
which laid down the frameworkfor settlementof the whole 60. The hopes of the Security Council and of the
rangeof problemsin the area.My delegationstatedat that
international community are centred in the Secretarytime, and would like to reiterate, that it would be
General’speace mission, which is delicate and difficult
unrealisticto expect a stableand lastingpeacein the areain
enough already, and any aggravation of existing tensions
the absenceof a withdrawal of Israeli forces from all
would makeit evenmoredifficult. I have already on several
occupiedArab territories.
occasionsreferred to this missionin the Security Council
andthereis no needfor me to repeat myself now.
53. It is more than ever necessarythat all partiesshould
extend their co-operationto the efforts now beingmadeto
61. For the reasonsI have given, and becausewe havea
find a peaceful settlement of all outstanding problems duty to prevent any aggravationof this dangeroussituation,
through the implementationof resolution242 (1967).
my delegationconsidersthat Israel should refrain from
holding the military paradeon 2 May, and trusts that that
54. I turn now to the subjectunder immediatediscussion. country will heed the appealwe are addressingto it here
In his letter dated 25 April 1968/S/8560], the rcpresenta- andnow.
tive of Jordan, in requestinga meeting of the Security
Council, hasdrawn our attention to the proposedmilitary
62. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): The Security Council is conparadeby Israelin Jerusalem
and to the situationprevailing cerned today with a situatioil of great urgency. We have
in that city. In today’s debate,many membershavedrawn before us the note of the Secretary-General[S/8561/ to
attention to the condition of the inhabitants of occupied which, I have no doubt, the Council will attach due
Jerusalem.My delegationsharestheir concern.
attention andweight.
63. It was in dischargeof his responsibilitiesthat the
Secretary-Generaladdresseda note verbale to the Government of Israel on 20 April 1968 regarding the proposed
decisionof the Israeli authorities to hold a military parade
in Jerusalemon 2 May. The route of the paradewouldcut
acrossthe Armistice DemarcationLine and passthrough
the Old City. It is certain that such a parade would
aggravatetensionsin the areaand provoke addedbitterness.
Accordingly, the Secretary-General wrote in the note
verbale:
V. . . The Secretary-Generalwishes to emphaslzethat

55. We should also like to emphasizethat Israel must
desistfrom any and all measures
that tend to .aggravate
the
already serioussituation prevailing in the area. In the
present case,my delegationcannot but expressits anxiety
at the proposedmilitary paradein Jerusalemby Israel.Such
an act can only exacerbatethe existing tensionsand further
vitiate the atmosphere.
56. We note that the Secretary-Generalhas expresseda
similar concern in his note of 26 April 1968[S/8561].
That note clearly indicatesthe rigimes which the parade
would violate. It is therefore incumbent upon the Council
to take the immediate,although interim, step of calling
upon Israel to desistfrom holding the paradeas contemplated on 2 May 1968.

the holding of a military paradein this areaat the present
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Emergetlcy
Special Session, Annexes,
agenda item 5, document A/L.523/Rcv.l.
6

front
IC Middle
Nations,
hould be
.tt United

ted

i recently
1aragraph
thcr with
the fifth
mnbly.~
s COllCem
hi, my
V) and
probleln,
question
rly

in

the

:ofafcw
xtings to

time will almostsurely causean increasein tensionin the
Near East and could well have an adverseeffect on the
efforts now going forward to find a peacefulsettlement
of the problemsin the area”. [Ibid., para. 3./
The Council hassurely noted with regret that the Government of Israel has not chosen to favour the Secretary
General with a reply. In thesecircumstances,my delegation
regardsit asthe duty of the Security Council to reinforce
and sustain the Secretary-General’sefforts to prevent an
aggravation of tensionsin the area. There can be no doubt
that the intended military parade, if allowed to be held,
would cause a serioussetbackto the processof achievinga
peaceful settlement of the Middle East situation. The
Council would therefore be remissin its duty if it did not
call upon Israel in the plainest languageto refrain from
holding the parade.
64, It is on this basisthat I have the honour, on behalf of
A-‘*.
the delegations of India, Pakistanand Senegal,to introduce,
as an interim measure, the following draft resolution
[S/&?ti3/ which reads:

1c111Setvc5

proposes
ry of its
ion iiiorc
I of th?
;ccretary*

diflicuh
tensions
m xveral
I Council

w

have

a

situation,

from
that that

“The Security Council,
“ffming
heard the statementsof the representativesof
Jordan and Israel,

“Having consideredthe Secretary-General’snote (S/
856 l),
“Recalling its resolution 162 (1961) of 11 April 1961,
“Considering that the holding of a military paradein
Jerusalem will aggravatetensionsin the areaandwill have
an adverse effect on a peaceful settlement of the
problems in the area,

dill

kt

it here

“I. Culls upon Israel to refrain from holding the
military parade in Jerusalemwhich is contemplatedfor
2 May 1968;
“2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on the implementation of this resolution.”

tht

the

Governproposed
ry parade

{cruldcut
through
.c would
ittcrncss.
hc note

65. The draft resolution which I have just read out is
self-explanatory and needsno comment. I commendit to
the Council for unanimousadoption.
66. I have only two other observationsto make. First, we
attach the greatest importance to the integrity of the
Security Council, and we believe that this integrity demands a measure of consistency in the Council’s pronouncements on international issues.The Councilwill recall
that by its resolution 162 (1961) it forbade a military
parade by Israel even though that paradewasscheduledto
be held on the Israel side of the Armistice Demarcation
Line in Jerusalemand even though the situation at that
time was far lessexplosivethan it is today. Whenit adopted
that resolution it was the senseof the Council that the
crucial question washow the military paradewould affect
public feelings, the force of the cease-fireor Armistice

Agreementsand the attitudes of the parties towardsthem.
This questionisevenmorecrucialtoday.
6’7. Secondly,referenceshavebeenmadein the statements
this morning to the statusof the City of Jerusalem.The
Pakistandelegationregardsthat questionasoneof supreme
importance.Wetherefore reaffirm the validity andforce of
General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V), which wereunanimouslyadoptedat the fifth
emergencyspecialsessionand which calledupon Israel to
rescindall measures
already taken and to desistforthwith
from taking any action which would alter the status of
Jerusalem.
68. NO settlement of the Middle East problem which
militates in the slightestdegreeagainstthose resolutions
will be morally defensibleor politically viable.
69. As we are concernedtoday with preventing a specific
action contemplatedby Israelwhich wouId further endanger peacein the area,I shallreservemy observationson the
questionof Jerusalemfor a later occasion.b ,ffice it to say
that I couldnot agreemorewith the representativeof Israel
than when he describedJerusalemasthe focus of spiritual
elevation.At the sametime, we are compelledto ask: is it
not a sacrilegeto transformthis focusof spiritual elevation
into an arenafor an arrogant display of the panoply of
military might? The sacredcharacterof Jerusalemis not
somethingwhich belongsexclusively to the Jewishpeople.
It is also part of the immortal spiritual heritage of the
ChristiansandMoslemswhich hasexisted for thousandsof
years.
70. We believe that the Security Council will be only
showinga decentrespectfor the opinionsand sentimentsof
the overwhelmingpart of mankind if it reinforces the
efforts of the Secretary-Generalto prevent the City of
Peacefrom becominga theatre of belligerenceand the
spoilsof war.
71. The PRESIDENT (translatedjkom Russian):Thank
you for waivingconsecutivetranslation.I give the floor to
Mr. Liu.
72. Mr, LIU Chich(China): I believethe Presidentis aware
that I amspeakingasa representativeon the Council.
73. The Security Council is called into SeSSiOn On Etn
urgent basisat the instance of Jordan with a specific
request,namely, to prevent the Governmentof Israelfrom
carrying out a military paradewhich it intendsto hold in
Jerusalemon 2 May 1968.
74. In normalcircumstances
it is nothing extraordinary to
hold a paradein celebration of a national holiday. The
conditions in the Middle East, however, are anything but
normal. Moreover,the legalstatusof the areain which the
paradeis to take placeis directly at issue.A military parade
in the city of Jerusalemat the presentjuncture of affairs
cannot fail to arousethe resentmentof Jordan.In hisletter
to the Presidentof the Security Council dated 25 April
1968 [S/8.560/, and in his statementthis morning, the
representative of Jordan has made it clear that the

scheduled military parade is being looked upon by Jordan
as a wilful display of military might designed to “bring
about drastic changes in the national and historical character of the Holy City”.
75. It seems to my delegation that in a sensitive area such
as the Middle East both Israel and the Arab States are in
duty bound not to heighten the tension or increase the
dangers of armed conflict. That is particularly true in the
Israel-Jordan sector, where artillery duels have become an
almost daily routine. There is always the possibility of
escalation resulting in a renewal of fullscale hostilities. My
delegation, therefore, regards the Secretary-General’s cornmunication addressed to the Government of Israel on 20
April [see S/8561] as a timely warning, and we join in the
appeal to Israel to refrain from any provocative act such as
the scheduled military parade.
76. In resolution 242 (1967) the Security Council has set
forth what it considers to be the essential elements in ajust
and lasting settlement of the Middle East situation. The
road to peace is a long and tortuous one. Today, United
Nations efforts aimed at bringing about the necessary
conditions for peace have been hampered in various ways.
It is to be regretted that the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative in the Middle East, Mr. Jarring, has not been
as successful in bringing about agreements between the
parties as might be expected. My delegation is gratified to
note, however, that he is now renewing his contacts with
the parties. More than ever before, the parties concerned
must exercise restraint and moderation so that the efforts
of Mr. Jarring may be pressed forward in a climate
conducive to a peaceful and just settlement
77. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): My delegation can only
regret that the Security Council has to meet once again to
discuss one of the aspects of the complex of interrelated
and inseparable problems of the Middle East. In our
opinion, such discussions, however important their subjects
to the parties concerned, do not facilitate the establishment
of a just and lasting peace in accordance with the
unanimously adopted Council resolution 242 (1967).
78. The occasion for this meeting is the Israeli authorities’
plan to hold a military parade in Jerusalem on 2 May. This
has caused strong resentment in Jordan, especially as the
parade is to pass through both the old and the new parts of
the city. The representative of Jordan has made that clear
to this Council in the statement he made earlier.

Ministers emphasize that it is important that the parties
support the mission of Mr. Jarring SO that it may lead to
constructive results. By the same token, my deiegation
would like to emphasize that it is highly important that all
parties desist from any steps which might increase tension
in the area, because in that mission lies perhaps the only
hope for a peaceful solution of the problems afflicting the
Middle East.
*
81. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I should
like now to take the floor in my capacity as representative
of the UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,
82. Only a month ago, the Security Council, in a
resolution adopted unanimously on 24 March (resolutioa
248 (1968)], condemned Israel for its fresh act of agggres.
sion against Jordan. Two weeksago the Council wasforced
againto turn its attention to a situation which threatened
to upset the cease-firebetween Jordan and Israel,because
Israel had not abided by the provisions of the Council
resolutionof 24 March and had renewed military provocations againstJordan. At that time the Council expressed
deepconcern at the deterioration of the situation in that
region andacknowledgedthat the dangeroussituationthere
must be carefully watched. However, that action by the
Council has alsonot had the desired effect on the Israel
aggressors.
83. Today, the Council’s attention is again drawn to the
serious situation in the Middle East, particularly the
situation created in Jerusalemas a result of illegal and
provocative actions on the part of Israel, which continues
flagrantly to violate the General Assembly resolution
concerningthe statusof that city and the decisionsof the
Security Council relating to a political settlementin the
Middle East.
84. In his letter to the Security Council [S/8560/, and
alsoin his statement,the representativeof Jordanhasgiven
detailed and accurate data exposing the criminal and
arbitrary conduct of the Israelauthorities in Jerusalem,
85. The Security Council is again a witnessto aggression
by Israel,which, having occupied a considerablepart of the
territory of the Arab States,is continuing its aggressive
acts,
is organizingmilitary provocations againstits neighbours,is
seizingArab lands,in particular the Arab part of Jerusalem,
is evicting the indigenousArab population from their places
of birth, is destroying Arab homes, andis installingits OWI~
settlersin the Arab part of JerusaIem.

79. Irrespective of the various legal points of view, there
can hardly be any doubt that the parade as planned is going
to’ increase tension in the area. Therefore my delegation
would call upon the Government of Israel to reconsider its
position with regard to the proposed military parade, in the
light of international reactions to its intentions and in the
interest of the endeavours of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to promote agreement and assist
efforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement in
accordance with the provisions and principles of the
resolution to which I have just referred.

86. The provocative plan of the IsraelGovernmentto hold
a military paradeon 2 May in the Arab part of Jerusalem
is
a further confirmation of the expansionist policiesof those
who rule in Tel Aviv. It is an attempt to support their illegal
claimson Arab territories and the Arab part of Jerusalew
by a demonstration of military might, This is a new
provocation and alsoa new challengeto the UnitedNations
andthe Security Council.

80. In a communique issued at the conclusion of the
Nordic Foreign Ministers’ meeting in Oslo yesterday, the

87. It is common knowledge that the States Membersof
the United Nations, meetingin the fifth emergencyspecial
session
of the GeneralAssemblyto considerthe questionof

1 the

parties

may had to
y delegation
rtant that au
-ease tension
aps the only
afflicting the
‘vi): I should
:presentafivc
ULICS.
i
[resalirrio

ct of aggre
it was force

I threatene
,aeI, becaus
the Count.
lfy provoc2

il expi-essel
rtion in tha
untion then
tion by t$
n the lsrae

the Israel aggression
in the Middle East, adopted by an
overwhelmingmajority
two resolutions, on 4 July and on
14 July 1967 [2253 (ES-V) and 22.54(ES-V)], which
declaredthat the measurestaken by .the Israelauthorities to
change the status of Jerusalem were invalid. In those
resolutions the General Assembly demanded that Israel
should rescindall measuresalready taken and shoulddesist
forthwith from taking any actiohwhich would alter the
statusof Jerusalem.

that resolution today represents the fundamental and
principaI obstaclein the way of a settlement in the Middle
East. The responsibility for the present tense situation in
the Middle East and for all the difficulties and hindrances
which’ prevent Mr. Jarring from carrying out his mission
restssquarelyon the Government of Israel.
94. The discussionof this question in the Security CounciI
must serveas a new and seriouswarning to thosewho rule
Israel. It is essentialthat the Council require Tel Aviv to
stop its policy of aggressionand provocation againstthe
neighbouringArab States.

88. As several representatives have already pointed out
today, this is not the first time that the Security Council,
also, hashad to deal with the question of the illegal actsof
Israel in Jerusalem.In the past the Security Council hashad
occasion to condemn such acts by Israel, and in 1961
[resolution 162 (1961/l the decision wastaken to prohibit
Israel from holding military parades in Jerusalem in
violation of the provisions of the General Armistice
Agreementbetween Israel and Jordan.

95. The questionof demaildingthat Israel unconditionally
rescind its plans to hold a military parade in Jerusalem,
specifically in the Arab part of that city, is an urgent one,
and it requires prompt action from the Security Council.
The Soviet Union, for its part, will give its full support to
such a decision by the Council. In this connexion, the
Soviet delegation will, of course,’support the draft resolution [S/8563] which has been proposedby three members
of the Security Council, the representatives of India,
Pakistan and Senegal.We regard this resolution as a first
step.Of course,if Israelfails to comply with the decisionof
the Council, then the question of takirig further measures
Will arise.

89. Israel,however, continues $0 disregardthe resolutions
of the GeneralAssembJy and the decisionsof the Security
Council. It continues on the path of aggression
in defiance
of international law. By all its actions, andin particular by
its intention to hold a military parade in Jerusalem,Israel
has brazenly demonstrated to the whole world and to the
United Nations that there is no thought in Tel Aviv of a
withdrawal from the Arab part of Jerusalem.

96. The current events in Jerusalemand in other Arab
territories occupied by Israel brings to the fore, with new
emphasis,the most important and most urgent question,
that of the immediatewithdrawal of Israeltroops from the
territories seized by them from the Arab States. This was
demandedby the Security Council in its resolution of 22
November 1967. Thi military provocations of Israel, which
is acting in violation of decisionstaken by the Security
Council and the General Assembly, the eventsin Jerusalem,
which indicate that the aggressorintends to remainon land
which is not his and to expropriate Arab territories which
have never belonged, nor ever will belong to Israel-these
are all further alarm signals,evidenceof the extremely grave
situation deliberately created by Israel in the Middle East.
They constitute yet another confirmation of the incontrovertible fact that, so long asIsrael’stroops remain on the
Arab territories which they have seized, there cannot and
will not bepeaceand tranquillity in that region.

rawn to Le
cularly

the

illegal and
h continues
resolution
sionsof the
nent in fhe
b!FiOf, and
in has

given

iminal and
Isalem.
1aggression
part of the
rrssiveacts,
ighbours,is
.JerlKikff1,
their places
ling its own
WIt to hold
cf us&m

is

its of lhose
their illegal
. Jerusalem
is a new
.edNations
iembersof
my special
question

oh

90. Today the Security Council learnedfrom the note of
the Secretary-General[S/8561] that the Government of
Israel is evading replying to the note verbale in which the
Secretary-Generalexpressed concern at the Israel authorities’ intention to hold a military parade in the part of
Jerusalemwhich was seized from the Arabs. The SecretaryGeneral’s note to the Government of Israel reflects the
position of an overwhelming majority of the Membersof
the United Nations, who are concerned that the new
anti-Arab provocation being planned in Tel Aviv will bring
about a great increaseof tension in the Middle East and will
hamper the efforts being made to achieve a political
settlementin that region.
91. In Israel’s actions in regard to Jerusalemwe seethe
generalline adopted by an aggressorwho refusesto abide
by the decisionsof the Security Council and the resolutions
of the General Assembly concerning a political settlement
in the Middle East.

97. The Government of Israel must strictly comply with
the Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967 and
aboveall with the demandcontained therein concerningthe
withdrawal of Israel armed forces from all occupied Arab
territories. The Government of Israel must realize that the
challengeoffered by its policy of aggressionand military
provocation to the peace-lovingpeoplesand the causeof
international peace and security, a challengewhich underminesthe prospectsfor a political settlementin the Middle
East, will not remain unpunished. As long as the Israel
leaders,relying on the support of the imperialist Powers,
hold to their course of annexingforeign territories, it is the
duty of the United Nations, of the Security Council, and of
all peace-lovingStates interested in the establishmentof a
lasting peacein the Middle East to give their supportto the
victims of aggression,and thus fulfiI their commitments
under the Charter of the United Nations.

92. While the United Afab Republic and Jordan have
officially informed the United Nations of lheir readinessto
acceptand implement the Security Council resolutionof 22
November 1967 (242 (1967/l and to co-operate with
Mr. Jarring, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in t&e Middle East, whose missionis to assistin
giving effect to that resolution, Israel’spolicy has been to
obstruct a political settlement, to impose its rapacious
demandson the Arabs and to dictate its own termsfrom a
position of strength.
93. Israel, to this day, refusesto declareits agreementto
accept andimplement the Security Councilresolution of 22
November 1967. Israel’srecalcitrant positionwith regardto
9

to the Armistice Agreementsor to the earlier cease-fire
demands,The Agreementsprovide that by mutual cdnsent the signatoriescan reviseor suspendthem. There is
no provision in them for unilateral termination of their
application.This hasbeenthe United Nationsposition all
along and will continue to be the position until a
competentorgandecidesotherwise.“4

98. The Soviet Union, for its part, declares with all
firmness that, together with other peace-loving States, it
will seek to halt the Israel aggression, to eliminate all
consequences thereof, to secure the returv to their rightful
owners of the territories seized from the Arab States and to
achieve the indispensable political settlement in the Middle
East on the basis of the Security Council’s resolution of 22
November 1967.

105. What is more, Israel contradicts Israel in this case.
Foreign Minister Eban contradicts AmbassadorTekoah.
Here is what Mr. Eban said before the Special Political
Committee:

99. This is the position of the Soviet Union and it will not
change. Israel and its protectors should not cherish any
illusions that the aggressor will successfully carry out its
expansionist plans in the Middle East.

“Israel regards the Armistice Agreements as perman&“-as permanent, not provisional-“The fact that
certain mutual claimsremain unsettled would in no way
affect the existence of the Agreements or presagea
breakdownof the armisticesystemitself.“5

100. Speaking again as PRESIDENT, I give the floor to
the representative of Jordan, who has aslced to exercise his
right of reply.
101. Mr. ELFARRA
(Jordan): There is a saying: keep
repeating a lie and eventually it will stick. I regret to say
that this has been the attitude of Mr. Tekoah of Israel in
the Security Council. Following his practice, well known by
now, he chose to inject irrelevant material into our
discussion in order to confuse the issue. This intended to
divert the attention of the Council from the real and only
question before it.

That wassaidby Mr. Tekoah’sForeign Minister.
106. Mr. Tekoah said that everything was fine in Jerusalem and that only fifty women demonstrated the day
before yesterday. This is not only belied by pressreports;
apparently here again Israel contradicts Israel, and the
representative who spoke this morning contradicts his
Foreign Minister. Here is what his Foreign Minister,
Mr. Eban, said about imposinga rule from outside: “No
onehasever succeededin imposinga particular regimefrom
outside by peaceful meanson a population which did not
wishto acceptit.”

102. What is before the Council is the situation in
Jerusalem and the recent developments and violations by
the Israeli authorities. What is also before the Council is the
matter of the parade, a matter of very urgent nature. It is
the act of provocation contemplated by the Israeli authorities, in utter defiance of the Armistice Agreements and of
the 1961 resolution (162 (1961)], which now requiresan
immediateinterim measureto stop this provocation before
the situation deteriorates further. I shall have time to
answer,all the Israeli fabrications after an urgent interim
measurehas been taken by the Council to remedy the
urgent situation.

107. That is the statement of the Foreign Minister of
Mr. Tekoah. This is a viciouscircle. Is it becauseof a lack of
knowledgeon the part of Mr. Tekoah? Is it inconsistency
in the policy of the Government of Israel? No, it is nothing
of this. This is a well-plannedpolicy basedon distortion,
misrepresentationand deceit. It is aimed at usingup time
and exploiting the situation in order that they may achieve
their purposes.

103. I am sure that the Council will not indulge in the
consideration of illegal issueswhich are intended for one
singlepurpose, namely, to confuse the issueand to involve
the Council in all kinds of questions. I am sure that
Mr. Tekoahwill not be given this accommodation.
104. Mr. Tekoah referred to the Armistice Agreementasa
ghost. No one shares his view; neither the documenl
presented to us by the Secretary-General this morning
/S/8561/ -for which we are grateful to him-nor the
introduction to the Secretary-General’sreport submittedto
the twenty-second sessionof the General Assembly supports it. The Secretary-General,quite rightly, said:
L‘. . . there has been no indication either in the General
Assembly or in the Security Councilthat the validity and
applicability of the Armistice Agreementshave been
changedas a result of the recent hostilities or of the war
of 1956; each agreement, in fact, contains a provision
that it will remain in force ‘until a peaceful settlement
between the parties is achieved’. Nor has the Security
Council or the General Assembly taken any steps to
change the pertinent resolutions of either organ relating

108. Mr. Eban, the Foreign Minister of Mr. Tekoah, said
that all statementsand all declarations, even the British
Mandate for Palestineand the Balfour Declaration, arenot
binding on Israel. Here is a quotation from Mr. Eban:
“Everything dependedon whether all this could be replaced
by a geographicalreality more substantialthan this.”
109. All these are means.Your resolutions, the Balfour
Declaration, the partition resolution, the Protocol of
Lausanne,the Armistice Agreement, the cease-fireresolution-every singleoneis not binding. They representfor the
Israelisonly an opportunity to be used asa vehicle to carry
them to their goal of expansion,expulsion, oppressionand
persecution.
110. On the question of the parade, the very samepolicy
has been adopted. Mr. Ysrael Galili, a Cabinet Minister,
when the Americans,the British, the French and other big
4 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Supplement No. IA, pm. 43.
5 Thisstatementwasmade at the 79th meetingof the Ad Hoc
PoliticalCommittee
whose official record was published in summary
form.

10

cease.fke
ltual cdnI There is
1 of their
xition all
I until a
this case,
Tekoah.
Political
s permaTact that
1 no way
Iresage a

rl Jerusa.
the day
reports;
and the
licts his
Minister,
de: “NO
me from
did not
lister of
1lack of
sistency
nothing
;tortion,
up time
achieve
ah, said
British
are not
I. Eban:
eplaced
9
Balforn
1col of
resolufor the
0 carry
ion and
policy
inister,
her big
43.
Ad Hoc

llmmary

Powersrefusedto attend a parade last year, becameupset,
and he had this to say: “The day would come”-this was
last May on the same question-“when all the world’s
statesmenwould realize that Jerusalemwasthe capital of
Israel by virtue of the political fact we shallcreate,”

tonight? ” This is on a Christian shrine;it wasnot written
by us, it was written in Hebrew in the area occupied by
Israel.
118. I can give further information about the behaviour
and the practicesof the Arabs vis-&vis the Holy Shrines.In
a letter written to The Times of London published on 13
June, Canon Every, Canon of St. George’sCathedral in
Jerusalem,stated:

111. Again, it is political fact and geographicalreality that
is referred to, not United Nations resolutions,not instruments andnot declarations.
112. Mr. Tekoah said that we violate the cease-fire
resolution. This also is not true. The record of the United
Nations is very clear. The condemnationthe other day of
Israel by the Security Council is still freshin the memories
of the memberswho adopted the resolution/248 (1968)/.
The attack on Karameh is well known. Only today, the
Security Council received a report in which the Chief of
Staff, General Odd Bull, said: “El Kantara Control Centre
reported that at 0817 hours GMT ObservationPost Yellow
observed a breach of cease-fireby Israel with rifles, heavy
machine-gunsand mortars” [5/7930/Add.67/.
113. This happened this morning, and it was this very
morning that Mr. Tekoah, while Israeligunswere displaying
an intoxication of power, came and told us that Jordan is
violating the Armistice Agreement.
114. Another misrepresentation was made about land
ownership. In order to expose much of the Israeli distortions about this and other aspectsof the question of
Jerusalem, the elected Mayor of Jerusalem,who was
expelled by the Israelis,will be comingto this Council, we
hope within a very short time, to presentto this honourable
body first-hand information. He hasmuch to say. He, too,
was arbitrarily expelled by the Israelis.

“

. . * the Christian Shrineshave beenprotected by the
Islamic sovereignof Jerusalemand the Christian inhabitants of Jerusalem have had their traditional rights,
including self-governmentin matters of personalstatus
and ‘in the administration of charitable and religious
foundations.
“In the past, when the Christian Churcheswere often
antagonisticto one another, the Islamic custody of the
city prevented any one of them from monbpolizing the
shrines.Forms of Christianity which were proscribed as
heretical in Christian countrieswere free to live their own
life in the Islamic world. In recent years the courage,
wisdom and courtesy of the successiveGovernors of
Jerusalem,under King Husseinof the HashemiteKingdom of Jordan and father and grandfather have contributed in no small measureto the great improvement
which has come about in the mutual relations of the
ChristianChurchesin the City. This is symbolizedby the
restorationof the Church of the Holy Sepulchre”.
119. I will not mention what happenedto the Crown of
the Virgin Mary immediately after the Israeli occupation. I
leave it to the Mayor of Jerusalem,who is coming with
more information.

115. Mr. Tekoah said that the two resolutions
f 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V)] , adopted in July by the
General Assemblyreferred to the legislation.They did not
call for stagnation,he said. The resolutionsare clear and
speak for themselves. They certainly did not call for
annexation or for continued occupation. They deploredthe
Israeli violation, and fourteen out of fifteen membersof the
Council voted for the resolutions,and I leaveit to them to
see how much credibility should be given to all the
statementsof Mr. Tekoah.
116. A naked act of annexation through military OCCUR
tion cannot be called “unity”. When the forces of naeism
occupied Czechoslovakia and Poland, Hitler announced,
“Now our unity hasbeen accomplished”.This is what the
Council is now hearingfrom Mr. Tekoah.
117. Moreover, Mr. Tekoah spoke about the desecration
of Christian churches which, according to him, has now
been terminated after the unity of Jerusalem.I have
presented to the Council document S/8552, and much of
the material in it is taken from Christian sources.
Mr. Tekoah tried this morning to say that thesechurches
were destroyed by us, and not by the Israelis.I wonder
whether he would say that what was written on a shrine
pictured in this document in Hebrew and in English was
written by us. It states, “Night club, are you lonesome
11

120. CanonEvery continued:
“The custodian is not the sovereign, much as he is
revered, It is the sacredlaw which gives protection, in
certain definite ways, to other monotheistic faiths in any
Islamic state. This has been and may continue to be of
realvalue.”
121. The last paragraph is of special significance since
Mr. Tekoah claimed more than once the absence of
legislationto protect the Holy Places.It is the sacredlaws
developed under Islamic guardianship that preserve the
Holy Places;it is not a matter of legislation,certainly not
legislation by the Israeli Knesset, the legislature of the
aggressor.
122. Mr. Tekoah said that Jordan opposesnot the parade
but the paraders.We opposethe parade and the paraders,
and all invaders.We do not stand aloneon this question;we
have ninety-nine Members of the General Assembly who
voted for the July resolution. ThoseMembersvoted against
the systematic and well-planned Israeli acts of annexation
in Jerusalem.We are here not only to stop the Israeliplans
for changing the status of Jerusalem,but also to reaffirm
the United Nations resolutions and implement them. This
we hope the Council will do when we come to the second
phaseof our deliberations.

123. Mr. Tekoah kept repeating his invitation to me to
visit my own country. But I do not need to go into the
occupied area of my homeland to get information. Those
expelled Arabs who come to our east bank of the Jordan
report to us how they were expelled, banished, mistreated,
tortured. I do not need to go there.

‘L

of the opinion, however, that it would in the
circumstances
be in the interestsof a constructive andfinal
settlementif the matter of formulation were dealt with
after more far-reachingconsiderationof theseproblemsby
the GeneralAssembly”.8 Israelin effect rejectedthe appeal
andmadeno declarationand signednone

124. The most monstrous of the fabrications of
Mr. Tekoah was the allegation that the Arab Governments,
and Jordan in particular, have refused to safeguard free
access to the Holy Places. This is not true. The records of
the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine
show that in response to an appeal by the Commission the
Arab Governments, at that time of Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon
and Syria, pledged themselves to the following declaration
on 15 November 1949. The preamble to the declaration
states:

126. I hope I have made these matters clear. I am very
unwilling to keep coming back here to answerdistortions
and fabrications, but I am compelled to do so to keep the
record straight.

.

.

.

127. I wish to reservemy right to speak on the other
irrelevant issues which have no place in our present
deliberationsat this time. I reserve the right to speakon
them at a time of my own choosing,not of Mr. Tekoah’s.
128. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):I now
call on the representativeof Israel, who wishesto exercise
his right of reply.

“The undersigned representatives of Egypt, the
Hashemite Jordan Kingdom, Lebanon and Syria to the
United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine,
duly authorized by their respective Governments, hereby
make the following declaration on behalf of their
Governments.

129. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): We all know what is Jordan’s
attitude to Israel and to the fundamental questionof peace
and war in the Middle East. There wasreally no needfor
the representativeof Jordan to reiterate it. That attitude
wasmost recently expressedby King Husseinhimself,who
endorsed, on 6 April 1968, the continuation of warfare
againstIsraelby terror, and etiphasized that “its efficiency
will developif it is integratedwithin a generalpolicy andif
its efforts are co-ordinatedwith the Arab Statesinvolved,
andespeciallyJordan”.

“. . .
“ [These Governments] solemnly undertake by the
provisions of the present declaration to guarantee the
protection of, and free access to, the Holy Places,
religious buildings and sites of Palestine, situated in the
territory placed under their authority by the final
settlement of the Palestine problem or pending that
settlement, in the territory at present occupied by them
under armistice agreements.?

130. It took the Jordanian representative six weeks to
fabricate the letter [S/8552/ which he submitted on 19
April I968 in reply to a letter I submitted on 6 March
[S/8439], which he referred to a while ago.He attachedto
that letter an Arab publication issued in Beirut which
included a number of photographs.Someof thosephotographshave nothing to do with the churcheson Mount
Zion. This appliesequally to the photograph depicting a
doorway with the inscription “night club”. I have already
saidearlier this morning that the churchesin questionwere
destroyed by Jordanian fire when Jordanian aggression
in
1948and in 1967turned Mount Zion into a battlefield-the
compoundof the church in question remainingfor nineteen
years a no-man’sland becauseof this Jordanianaggression.

Article 4, the operative article, states:
“The Governments of Egypt, the Hashemite Jordan
Kingdom, Lebanon and Syria undertake to guarantee
freedom of access to the Holy Places, religious buildings
and sites situated in the territory placed under their
authority by the final settlement of the Palestine problem, or, pending that settlement, in the territory at
present occupied by them under armistice agreements;
and, pursuant of this undertaking, will guarantee rights of
entry and of transit to ministers of religion, pilgrims and
visitors, without distinction as to nationality or faith,
subject only to consideration of national security, all the
above in conformity with the status quo prior to 14 May
1948.“7

131. The Jordanianrepresentativehasagainsethimselfup
as judge and spokesmanof the Secretary-General,his
emissaries
and the Christiancommunitiesin Jerusalem.May
I suggestagainthat we allow eachto speakfor himself.Thiq
is what the representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Thalmann,had to say about the situation in Jerusalem
in his report:

This wassignedby the four Arab Governments’.

125. What was the responseof Israel to a similarappeal
made by the very same United Nations Conciliation
Commissionfor Palestineto obtain the very samedeclaration? Hereis the record, which I quote verbatim: Israelwas

“Prime Minister Levi Eshkol, meeting on 7 June with
the spiritual leadersof all communities,declared:
‘Since our forces have been in control in the entire
sty and surroundings,quiet has been restored. YOU
may rest assuredthat no harm of any kind will be

6 see official Records
of the General Assembly, Fourth Session,
Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, vol. I, document A/11 13,
sect. C.
7 Ibid.

8 Ibid., sect.B, para. 4.

12

ould in tl
:tive and fin
re dealt wit
problems b
ed the appe;

allowed to befall the religiousHoly Places.I haveasked
the Minister of ReligiousAffairs to contact the religious
leaders in the Old City in order to ensure orderly
contact between them and our forces, andenablethem
to pursue their religious activities unhindered.” [See
S/8146, para. 138, dated 12 September1967.1

r. I am ver
:r distortion
I to keep th

132. On 27 June the Knessetadopteda speciallaw for the
protection of the Holy Places,and I continue to readfrom
the report by Mr. Thalmann:

3n the othe
Our
preset,
to speak or
dr. Tekoah’s,
nan): I now
s to exercise
it is Jordan’s
:ion of peace
no need for
‘hat attitude
timself, w110
of warfare
ts efficierlcy
Tolicy andif
tes involved,
x weeks to

itted on 19
on GMarch
attachedto
eirut which
hosephotoi on Mount
depictinga
lave already
estionwere
ggression
in
:lefield-the
‘or nineteen
aggression.
himselfup
leneral,his
salem.May
imself.This
ry-General,
1Jerusalem
June with
d:
the entire
ored, You
ld will be

“These statements and statutory measureswere very
favourably received. Various religiousrepresentativesin
fact told the PersonalRepresentative”-of the Secretary
General-“spontaneously that so far the Israelauthorities
had conformed to the principles which had been laid
down and that there was therefore no ground for
complaints. They hoped that whatever difficulties still
existed or were feared-mostly of a practical and physical
nature-would be resolvedin a spirit of co-operation,
“Although the attitude of representativesof other
Christian denominationswasrather one of ‘wait andsee’,
they also describedthe presentsituation assatisfactory.”
(Ibid., paras.141 and 142.1
133. At the beginning of July, the following letter
addressed by His Beatitude Theophilos, Patriarch of the
Church of Ethiopia, to the Israeli Ambassadorin Addis
Ababa, wasreceivedin Jerusalem:
“The Patriarchate of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church
would like to express its appreciation to the Israeli
Government for the proper care with which it handled
the sanctuaries in the Holy Land in general and the
Ethiopian convent in particular. We also extend our
thanks to the Israeli authorities for having granted
unhindered and free movementto our clergy in Jerusalem
during the war and after. Wehope that suchgood careof
the Holy Places will continue to enableour people in
Jerusalem to perform their religious duties without any
difficulty. Pleaseconvey this messageto your Government.”
134. On 14 July a group of Dutch Catholic andProtestant
theologians issuedthe following statementin Amsterdam:
“Catholic and Protestant theologiansconnected with
Het Leerhuis (the Inter-confessional Centre of Bible
Studies) feel themselvescalled to issue the following
statement on Jerusalem,which they hope may offer for
Jewish and Islamic theologians an acceptablepoint of
departure for common thinking on the future of Jerusalem.
“The Jewish people,the PromisedLand and the City of:
Jerusalem are, through Bible andhistory, linked with one
another in a unique way. To separateby thought or deed
the Jewish people from that land or from Jerusalemis
tantamount to challengingJewishidentity.

overwhelmingmajority of the Jewishpeoplethroughout
the world as a vital condition for its existence Recognition of the international character of the Holy Places
cannot imply any denial of the abovementionedbiblical
and historical links binding the Jewish people with
undivided Jerusalem.Neither can suchrecognition imply
distrust with regard to the Jewishpeople, asif it could
not be trusted to have sufficient understandingand
respect for the links connectingChristiansand Moslems
with Jerusalem.”
135. On 6 October, the Catholic Herald of London
publisheda letter from LesFillesde la Charit&de I’Hospice
Saint F&cent de Paul of Jerusalemin which a campaignof
lies againstthe Israelissincetheir victory in the six-day war
is deplored-and I quote from that letter:
“We do not know the sourcefrom which those who are
hawking such rumours aredrawing their inspiration, but
they fill us with profound grief. There is no questionfor
us of ‘taking sides’.Our serviceis at the disposalof all
who standin needof it. Thisis confirmedby the fact that
of the 400 inmatesof thisHospiceapproximately 360 are
Arabs of all ages,from babesin armsto the senile.
“Some are in good health, others suffering from every
conceivablekind of ailment. This, of course,in no way
means that we deny a brotherly hand to the Jewish
population. Within the charity of Christwe love both Jew
and Arab. But we owe it to truth to put on record that
our work here has been made especiallyhappy and its
path smoothed by the goodwill of the Israeli authorities-in peace and in war alike-smoothed, that is, not
only for ourselvesbut (more important) for the Arabs in
our care.
66
...
“The Jews, like the ChristianandMoslemcommunities,
number among themselvesa spiritual Blite whosemoral
quality none can mistakeand which we, at least, cannot
but admire.
“Like us, too, they alsohave their black sheep.But all
in all, after an experienceextending now over a number
of years, we have found amongstthem much to appreciate and indeed to applaud The recent war, moreover,
hasrevealedthem to us-both the soldiersand civiliansasdeservingof our deepestadmiration.
“War is war, and the Jewsprosecutedtheirs with the
sole object of preservingtheir existence, while saving
every singlehumanlife that they possiblycould.”
136. A fortnight ago, on 12 April, the Greek Orthodox
Patriarch of Jerusalem, Benedictos,made the following
declaration:
“It is true, and we would like to stressit again,that the
Holy Placesin general, monasteriesand churcheswere
@.vcnfull respectand protection by the Israelisbefore the
war, during the war and afterwards,and we hope that in
the future they will be respectedaswell and the status
quo which existswill be safeguarded.”

“The autonomousexistence of the Jewishpeoplein its
own country, with Jerusalemasits capital, is felt by the
13

137. Finally, the representative of Jordan, both in his
letter to which he referred and in his statement, has shown
particular solicitude for the Armenian community. He will
understand if I suggest that we rely not on him but on the
leaders of the Armenian community in Jerusalem to tell us
how they fare in united Jerusalem.
138. On 8 April, the Armenian Patriarch of Jerusalem
wrote as follows:
“I have the honour to refer to YourJExcellency’s kind
visit of today to our Patriarchate and to thank you
sincerely for the genuine interest shown by the Israeli
authorities to the Holy Places.
“In this connexion I also present my deep thanks to
Your Excellency for your willingness to render us every
help in order to restore our Monastew of the Holy
Saviour and cemetery, situated on the front line for
twenty years.
“I am confident that the Israeli authorities have always
been animated by a spirit of justice and equity and that
the great consideration and respect they have shown for
the Holy Places will continue with the same spirit and
feeling.”

That work had been officially permitted by an order of 21
February 1960. The Jehovah’s Witnesses were accused of
maintaining contacts with Jews, and were consequently
persecuted.
142. In October 1966, the Jordanian Government took
other steps, discriminating against Christian ecclesiastical
institutions ‘and clergy: for instance the exemption from
customs duty, including that on food-stuffs, formerly
granted to churches was withdrawn. Education in Christian
schools and institutions was narrowly supervised by the
Jordanian authorities, who required that the curricula be
sanctioned by them. Christian schools were bidden to close
on Fridays. Christian civil servants and army officers
suffered, in comparison with their Moslem’ colleagues, in
advancement and often were pensioned off before the
age-limit in order to make way for the promotion of
Moslems. Christian prisoners of war taken by Israel during
the six-day war were beaten up by their Moslem superiors
and comrades, who charged them with disloyalty as citizens
and soldiers.
143. If there can be any value to the Security Council’s
debates and resolutions, it is to the extent that they remain
based strictly on fact and law. It is’ quite clear that the
course of history does witness from time to time modifications in international relations. Surely, however, such
modifications, especially as they occur between Governments rather than between peoples, cannot affect historic
fact, the tenets of law, and political analysis.

139. The representative of Jordan referred to the problem
of discrimination against Christian communities under
Jordanian occupation. May I be allowed to say only this:
On the eve of the six-day war the slogan in Jordan was:
“After Saturday Sunday comes. On Saturday we murder
the Jews; the next day the Christians.” That was plainly
understood to mean what it said. However relieved the
Christian communities may have felt at the liberation of
Jerusalem by the Israel defence forces, weeks passed before
the story about this slogan was repeated, and then only
reluctantly by laymen and clergy to Christian visitors from
overseas. Discrimintition against Christian communities
actually found its way into Jordanian legislafion. The
Parliament of Jordan enacted a law in 1958 prescribing that
all members of the Brotherhood of the Holy Sepulchre
should become Jordan nationals. Since its foundation in the
fifth century, the members of the Brotherhood have always
been Greek; and, if applied, the law would have deprived
the bishops and the Patriarch of the Orthodox faith of their
Greek citizenship.

144. At a meeting of the Security Council on 10 April
1961, the following observations were made on a Jordanian
complaint concerning a military parade in Jerusalem:
“The representative of Jordan has requested the Council to consider-and I quote from his letter-a ‘violation of
the Armistice Agreement and acts of military provocation
which threaten international peace and security’. He
obviously does not imagine that the ceremony planned by
Israel for 20 April might be a direct threat to his
country . . .
“ . . . it is quite evident that the ceremony of 20 April,
as it is planned, cannot in any way harbour a threat of
attack or represent any blameworthy intention.

140. Another ordinance, concerning the use of immovable
property by moral bodies, was adopted in 1965; it curtailed
the development of Christian institutions in Jerusalem by
ar! embargo on their acquisition of further land or property
within the bounds of the municipality and its surroundings,
whether by purchase, testament, gift or otherwise. The
sponsors of that ordinance were apparently Moslems
opposed to the building of a church in the neighbourhood
of Al-Aqsa Mosque. Yet in recent years, wherever possible
the Jordanian Government has built mosques cheek-by-jowl
with churches, or, wherever that tias not possible, sequestered a room in the premises of a church for Moslem
worship and installed a loudspeaker in it.

“ . , . we have no reason to doubt the intentions of
Israel’s authorities or the purely ceremonial character”purely ceremonial character-“of
the anniversary celebrations which are held each year . . .” (See 948th meeting,
paras. 7, 8 and 14.1
That statement was made by the distinguished representative of France, Ambassador BBrard, in 1961.
14.5. There is really no need for me to comment more
fully on the statement made by the representative of
Algeria. I will allow his own President to do that for me. On
15 September last year, President Boumedienne stated:
“The liquidation of Israel is the only solution. Algeria will
never accept a solution that guarantees Israel’s existence.”

141. In October of 1964, the Jordanian Government
decreed a stoppage of the work of the Jehovah’s Witnesses,
14

order of 21
accused ol
onsequently
lment took
cclesiastical
option from
1, formerly
in Christian
sed by the
urricula be
ien ta close
1y officers
Ileagues, in
before the
emotion of
rael during
n superiors
as citizens
r Council’s
ley remtin
lr that the
: modifica.
xer, such
n Govern.
ct historic

10 April

Jordanian
Ill:
the Cow
elationof
3vocation
rity’. He
annedby
it to his

20 April,
threat of

itions of
.racter”r celebrameelillg,

3resentant more
ative of
r me.On
stated:
eria will
stence.”

And then, on 2.5 October, he was quoted as having said:
“Nasser’smain error washis acceptanceof the cease-fire
agreement.Wereject the ceasefire.”

151. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): The referencewe havejust
heard to the Moslemsand Christiansin my country will not
be dignifiedby an answer.Our record is clear.

146. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Algeria statedon
21 July 1967: “Algeria has never put any hope in the
Security Council or in the General Assemblyof the United
Nations.” Now, Article 23 of the United Nations Charter
readsasfollows:
‘l 9. . The General Assembly shallelect ten other Mem-

152. Mr. Tekoah tried the other day to create a kind of
separationbetween the people on the west bank and the
people on the east bank. He kept shouting, championing
the rights of the people on the west bank, sayingthat they
had been deprived of everything and were now getting
everything from Israel.It did not work.

bers of the United Nationsto be non-permanentmembers
of the Security Council, due regardbeing specially paid,
in the first instance, to the contribution of Membersof
the United Nations to the maintenanceof international
peaceand security. . .“,
I wonder what world opinion should be expected to think
of our deliberations here, with Algeria on the Security
Council.
147. Mr. President, I regret to say that the essenceof the
statement we havejust heardfrom the Soviet representative
is a vicious negation of Israel’srights, It remindedme of a
conversation I once had with Mr. Khrushchev,the former
Prime Minister of the USSR. I askedhim whether he had
ever pondered how his anti-Jewish, anti-Israeli attitude
would appear in Jewishhistory. In reply he questionedme
on how large a population Israel had. When he heard my
reply he said, “We are 220 million strong.What interest can
I have in 2.5 million Israelis?” Verily, the country represented by AmbassadorMalik is one of the largestin the
world in territory and population. It is one of the two
nuclear super-Powers.Indeed, it can evenspeakof peacein
the First Committee and arm Arab forces of war and
aggressionfree of charge and come to this Council to
threaten small countries like my own. However a considerable number of Membersof the United Nations are of
Israel’ssize. Thesenationstoo have a right to exist a right
to defend themselves,a right to peacewith their neighbours, a right to hold independenceday parades.
148. With regard to Israel’spresenceandactionsin eastern
Jerusalem,what exactly would the Soviet Governmenthave
Israel do? We know of the methods appliedin Europe in
the wake of hostilities: dismantlingof plants, emptying of
warehousesand massarrests.Wearenot preparedto follow
those methods. We are not preparedto apply the example
of our big brothers of Europe. We would rather build
houses,pave roadsandhold showparades.
149. We are not entirely surprised of course that the
Soviet Union vilifies Israelfor this attitude. After all, in the
Soviet Union we Jewsare branded for whatever we do; we
are all at once nationalists and cosmopolitans.We are
dangerousliberals and religious reactionaries.One would
have expected, however, the representativeof those who
allow their press to speak of men, women and children
murdered by the Hitlerites in gas chambers as nazi
collaborators to remainsilentin their sacrilegeand disgrace.
150. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Russian):1 call on
the representative of Jordan, who wishesto exercisehis
right of reply.

153. This morning he tried to bring in every single
irrelevant issue-but not the relevant one, the parade. He
spokeof everything that had happenedsince 1947. He did
not speakabout the real issue.Again I refuse to indulgein
chargesand counter-chargeswith him, knowing what his
desireis. It did not wbrk this afternoon and he is trying
another-excuse the expression-cheapway of conveying
distorted, unfounded andfalseutterances.
154. I do not have to defend my country against my
people. They are all peopleof Jordan. Discriminationis not
in our tradition, not in our heritage,not part of our values.
Right here in the United Nationsat leastfour out of twelve
or thirteen Ambassadorsare Christians.We do not think in
terms of Christian or Moslem. That is the mentality of
Mr. Tekoah, w’hich breedsdiscrimintition. We do not think
of those things, they do not cometo our mind The three
representativesof Palestinehere in the United Nations are
Christians. There is Mr. Izzat Tannous who is Christian;
Mr. IssaNakhlah is Christian; the Assistant to the Grand
Mufti of Jerusalem,Mr: El-Ghori, is a Christian.
155. Our record is cleanand clear and we areproud of it.
But, as I said, I will not dignify that kind of faIse
misrepresentationwith ananswer.
156. Mr. Tekoah spoke about the methods of Europe. I
wish that he had learned his lesson.Mr. Toynbee said in
volume 8 of his book9 that the tragedy of the whole thing
is that the Israelis did not benefit from their tragic
experience. They are practising on us what they should
have been the last peopleon earth to practise. Mr. Tekoah
tells us that they know the methodsof Europe. Yes, they
know them. But, regrettably and unfortunately, they did
not learn their lesson.I say this with sadness.
Why doeshe
attack every single member around this table? He is
attacking every Gentile. Why? There must be something
wrong. The whofe world cannot be wrong and Israel right.
There must be somethingwrong in them, in their mentality,
in their thinking and in their aggressiveness.
This is a
divide-and-ruletheory. It did not work the other day when
he spoke about the people of the west bank. He is now
attempting to make it work on the east bank, but he is
speakingabout the wrongpeople.Our peoplehave the same
values,Arabism, whether they areChristiansor Moslems.
157. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
The representative of Israel has argued that there js a
contradiction between,on the onehand, the position of my
9 Arnold J. Toynbee,A Study of History, London, Oxford
UniversityPress, 1954.

15

deals with a highly important subject: the status of
Jerusalem, My delegation believes that a brief recess for
consultations would be highly useful, indeed necessary, to
establish whether it may be possible to arrive at a common
Council position on this matter. Accordingly I propose that
this meeting be suspended for approximately thirty minutes
for such consultations.

delegation and myself and, on the other, the statement I
made on behalf of my Government to the Security Council
on 10 April 1961.
158. It is always easy to misrepresent statements by
quoting them out of context. I do not propose to repeat
my statement of 10 April in full; it is readily available and
my colleagues can read it at their leisure. There was no
question of our approving on that occasion of the military
parade organized by Israel in Jerusalem. On the contrary,
we considered it most unfortunate and much to be
deplored. It was merely in a spirit of conciliation that we
did our best to placate whatever ill-feeling such an action
might provoke on the Arab side.

165. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): I am not sure, Mr. President, whether I fully
grasped what you just said about the closure of the debate.
As the Algerian delegation understands it, the item on the
Council’s agenda is “The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8560)“. The representative of Jordan raised two
matters in that letter: the first is the military parade and
the second, which is mentioned quite explicitly in the last
paragraph of the letter, is the situation in Jerusalem. As I
see it, we have finished the examination of the first matter
and it will of course be for the Council to decide if and
when to continue that discussion, as well as when to deal
with the second point raised by the representative of
Jordan, namely, the situation in Jerusalem and effective
measures for remedying it.

159. It is in the same spirit that we today deeply deplore
the Israel Government’s decision to hold another military
parade, which on this occasion is to leave the Israel sector
and pass through the Old City of Jerusalem. We believe that
such an action can only cause feelings to run higher and it is
in the same spirit of conciliation that we have now appealed
to the Israel Government to cancel the parade.
160. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): Speaking as representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and replying briefly to the statement of the
representative of Israel, in which he made some cheap
comments on the position and the policies of the Soviet
Union, I shall restrict myself to mentioning that the Soviet
Union has recognized and continues to recognize the
sovereign rights of all States and peoples, whether large or
small; but we have never recognized and do not now
recognize either aggression or military provocations directed against other States.

166. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I shall
explain. I said that the list of speakers was exhausted and
that therefore the discussion at today’s meeting was
concluded. I then suggested that we proceed to take up the
draft resolution and vote on it.
167. The representative of the United States has proposed
a brief suspension of the meeting for half an hour If there
is no objection from the other members of the Council, the
meeting will be suspended for thirty minutes, after which
the Council will continue its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

$61. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (transzated from
French): My delegation has no intention of drawing out the
Council’s discussions on the urgent matter that is before us
this morning. On the other hand, my delegation obviously
cannot let the remarks of the spokesman for the de facto
authorities in Tel Aviv pass without expressing, if not its
surprise, at least its reaction.

168. As there are no objections,
suspended for thirty minutes.

the meeting will be

The meeting was suspended at 6.10 pm. and resumed at
7.3Qp.m.

162. The best way for members of the Council and
Members of the United Nations to understand the Algerian
position is not from press reports taken out of context, but
by reference to official statements. It is not for my
delegation to evaluate Algeria’s contribution to international peace and security. A vast majority demonstrated its
support for Algeria and its policy by electing it to the
Security Council.

169. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): Follow.
ing consultations, certain changes have been made in the
draft resolution /S/8.563/. Will the Deputy to the UnderSecretary-General kindly read out the full text of the draft
resolution with the changes that have been made as a result
of the consultations?

163. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): There
are no further speakers listed The debate on this question
is now concluded. The Security Council has before it a
draft resolution [S/8563] submitted by the representatives
of India, Pakistan and Senegal,Copies have been distributed
to all delegations. The text of the draft resolution has been
read out by the representative of Pakistan, If there are no
Other
PrOpOdS,
the Council will proceed to consider and
then vote on the draft resolution.

170. Mr. VELLODI
(Deputy to the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Security Council Affairs): The
text as changed now reads as follows:
“The Security Council,
“Having heard the statements of the representatives of
Jordan and Israel,
‘Having considered the Secretary-General’s note (S/
8561), particularly his note to the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations,

164. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): The draft
resolution before US, as all speakers today have indicated,
16

status of
recess for
essary, to
Lcommon
Ipose that
y minutes
zd front
:r I fully
le debate.
m on the
dle East:
Represen: Security
,aisedtwo
trade and
n the last
lem. As 1
.st matter
de if and
n to deal
tative of
effective
): I shall
Isted and
ting was
ke upthe

proposed
If there
mcil, the
er which
item on
will be
rumedat
Follow.
e in the
: Under.
the draft
i a result
:cretarym
rs): The

itives of
late (S/
‘resenta-

“Considering that the holding of a military paradein
Jerusalemwill aggravatetensionsin the areaandwill have
an adverse effect on a peaceful settlement of the
problemsin the area,
“1. CuZls upon Israel to refrain from holding the
military parade in Jerusalemwhich is contemplatedfor
2 May 1968;
“2. Requests the Secretary-Generalto report to the
Security Council on the implementation of this resolution.“.
171. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The
text of the draft resolution asread out by the Deputy to
the Under-Secretary-Generalwill now be put to the vote.
A vote wastaken by showof hands.
The draft resoIu tion wasadopted unanimously.’ ’
172. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The
representativeof Israelhasaskedto speak.I now call on the
representative of Israel.
173. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The Security Council has
adopted a resolution advisingIsrael not to hold a military
parade in Jerusalem.This resolutioncannot be acceptedby
my delegation becauseit concernsa questionwhich, under
the cease-fire,falls within the purview of Israel’sinternal
jurisdiction. Moreover, there is dangerthat the resolution
might prejudice the efforts now beingpursuedin the area
toward a peaceful and acceptedsettlement.
174. I regret very much indeed but I cannot concealthe
fact that it is with somebewildermentthat I havelistened
to today’s deliberations and read the resolution now
adopted. In an adjacenthall the United Nationsis considering the grave problems of world peaceand the non-pro.
liferation of atomic weapons.The Security Council, entrusted under the Charter with the responsibility for
international peace and security, is discussinga forty-five
minute parade. The Middle East is still convulsedin a
twenty-year war of Arab aggression.
Weareexamininghere
the title deeds to parcels of land on which ruined
synagogueswould be restored.
175. Israelisare beingattacked and suffer casualtieson the
border while the Council is deliberatinghow Israelshould
celebrate its national day, I have listenedwith attention to
the advice given to my Government on what partsand what
streets of the areasunder Israeli control the Israeli army
should hold its independenceday march The advice the
Middle East is in need of is of a different nature, the
counselhoped for on a different problem.
176. For twenty yearsIsraelhasbeenreceivingadviceof a
rather particular character.When Egyptian gunsin the Gaza
Strip pointed at the very heart of Israel used to attack
Israeli territory and Israeli citizens we were advisedto stay
away from the demarcation line. When Syrian army

positionsbombardedthe fields of Israelivillagesnear the
border we heard the counselnot to cultivate the fields.
When minesbegan to explode on Israeliroads,killing and
maiming Israeli civilians, when commandoraids against
Israelivillagesmultiplied, we weretold that the footprints
of the attackersdid not alwaysshowclearly on the ground
asleadingto the border. It is not this kind of advice that
the Middle East is looking for. It isnot thiskind ofi counsel
that is required in order to strengthenthe prospectsof
peacein the area.The counselthe Middle Eastrequires,the
advicethe world hopesto hearfrom the Security Council,
is how to terminate the twenty-yearArab war of aggression,
how to put an end to the active belligerencythat the Arab
Statespersistin wagingagainstIsraelcontrary to the United
NationsCharter, in violation of their international obligations. Until such adviceis givenclearly, unequivocally and
effectively, there can be little hope for progresstowards a
peacefulsettlement. Until the Arab Statesarepersuadedto
abandontheir aggressive
designs
in Israel,the peoplesof the
regionwill continue, unfortunately, to find themselvesin a
situationof continuoustensionanddanger.
177. The ceIebrationsin united Jerusalemwill take place.
The Jewishpeople waited for this for 2,000 years.People
everywherewill rejoice, togetherwith us,in thisgreat hour
of biblical prophetic consummation.Behindthe paradersin
Jerusalemwill march twenty centuriesof foreign conquest,
exile, oppression,discrimination,genocideand then revival
and repulsionof aggression.
The twentieth anniversaryof
Israel’srebirth will be celebratedby the Israelipeopleand
by people of goodwill everywhere.Nothing should or can
marit.
178. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Russian): I give
the floor to the representativeof Jordan.
179. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): At the very outset I
shouldlike to pay a tribute to all my colleagues
aroundthis
table for taking prompt andimmediateaction with regard
to the first part of the complaint of Jordan. I am
particularly grateful to the delegationsof India, Pakistan
andSenegalfor their mosthelpfulcontribution.
180. Secondsafter the unanimousadoptionof this,resolution by the Council, it heardMr. Tekoahbeginhisvery first
sentencewith a misrepresentation
of fact. He saidthat the
Council “advised” Israel. The Council did not adviseIsrael.
The Councilcalled upon Israel.Hisvery first sentencewasa
misrepresentation
of fact. Hissecondsentencewasan act of
arrogance.He said that Israel will not accept what was
unanimouslydecided. The third sentencewas an act of
defiance,challengingthis greatbody, the body responsible
for peaceandsecurity.
181. The statementwe havejust heardcallsfor action. We
know the motives. Weknow what they aresayingand what
they are goingto do. He saidopenlyto the membersof this
esteemedbody that the paradewill be held and that the
celebrationwill take place.
182. I am glad that the Counciltook action on only the
first part uf my complaint. The situation in Jerusalemis
still under consideration.I take it that, ,togetherwith that

10 Seeresolution250 (1968).
17

situation in Jerusalem, the Council will have to consider
sanctions and the invoking of Chapter VII of the Charter.
This baby of the Un%ed Nafions, which was created by the
United Nations but which accepted only what it wanted
from the United Nations and rejected what did not meet its
designs, should be made to understand that this is an
Organization of law and that arrogance has no place in the
Security Council. I hope, Mr. President, that you in your
wisdom will convene an urgent meeting to continue
consideration of the situation in Jerusalem.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

183. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The
resolution of the Security Council, which was adopted
unanimously, contains a request addressed to the Secretary-General to report to the Security Council on the
implementation of the resolution. It appears from consultations that all members of the Council agree that the next
meeting for consideration of this item should be held at’
10.30 a.m. on 1 May.

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

l%e meeting rose at 7.45 p. m.

in other currencies)

35655-September

1972-2,100
