S/2003/1074

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2003
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Afghanistan,
31 October to 7 November 2003
I. Executive summary
1.
The Security Council mission to Afghanistan took place at a critical juncture in
the Bonn process. It coincided with the release of the draft constitution, which
provided the first opportunity to solicit the opinions of Afghans on the constitutional
process. The mission was greatly welcomed and appreciated by all Afghan
interlocutors. Its members felt that, despite ethnic divisions and factional fighting,
there did not appear to be any separatist tendencies in Afghanistan. The eagerness
expressed by the Afghan interlocutors to improve their living conditions greatly
impressed the mission. At the same time, increasing frustration about the lack of a
peace dividend and tangible benefits was voiced.
2.
The Afghan Government, with the support of the international community, has
made significant progress in implementing the Agreement on Provisional
Arrangements in Afghanistan pending the Re-establishment of Permanent
Government Institutions (Bonn Agreement; see S/2001/1154) and recovering from
the devastation caused by over two decades of war. The mission noted that strides
had been made in many areas, including the successful launch of a new national
currency, the ongoing reconstruction of roads, the reopening of schools, progress in
the reform of the security sector, the start of a national disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration campaign, the preparations for the Constitutional Loya Jirga and
the release of a draft constitution.
3.
Notwithstanding those gains, major challenges lie ahead and much remains to
be done if the peace process is to become irreversible and security in Afghanistan
realized. Insecurity caused by terrorist activities, factional fights and drug-related
crime remains the major concern of the Afghans today. The south and south-east
were highlighted by all interlocutors in this regard, where insecurity, including
attacks against non-governmental organizations (NGOs), was contributing to a
slowing of reconstruction. The threats faced by the region limited access of
government and development agencies. This, in turn, increases the risk that the
population could become disenchanted and be left out of the peace process. While
the Afghan government representatives were rather optimistic regarding the
expansion of central authority in all provinces, representatives of NGOs expressed
their concerns about the challenges faced in tackling insecurity, violations of human
rights, impunity, corruption and the increasing trend in the production and

03-60622 (E)

121103

*
0
3
6
0
6
2
2
*

S/2003/1074

trafficking of drugs. According to them, the existing gap between the expectations
of the Afghan people and the funds provided by the international community could
jeopardize the political process.
4.
In too many areas, individuals and communities suffer from abuses of their
basic rights by local commanders and factional leaders. The mission heard vehement
complaints by women’s organizations and civil society groups regarding
intimidation, harassment and exclusion from social, economic and political
activities. Judicial institutions remain weak, and the narcotic economy is largely
unchecked. Insecurity from factional armies and extremist activities continue to
destabilize many areas.
5.
Such insecurity also poses a direct challenge to the full implementation of the
Bonn Agreement, as it constricts the political space necessary for national political
processes and blocks access to many areas, threatening to disenfranchise parts of the
population, notably in majority Pashtun areas.
6.
Although some progress had been made in reconstruction and economic
stabilization, the pace remained slow, and gains were increasingly under threat from
factional forces, terrorism and the rapid growth of drug trafficking, which
increasingly threatened to subsume the legal economy. The mission was informed
that farmers had gains between 4 and 20 times higher with illicit crops than with
traditional crops. If Afghanistan is to achieve a basic level of self-sufficiency in the
medium term, a greater infusion of donor assistance would be required in the near
term. Not addressing the consequences of drug trafficking, instability and the
terrorist networks would potentially cost far more in the medium to longer term.
7.
Successfully addressing the above-mentioned challenges will ultimately
depend upon the further expansion of the authority of the central Government to
ensure its control of all armed forces and weapons as well as national revenues, and
the establishment of representative and effective national institutions responsible for
ensuring justice and security.
8.
The recent expansion of the mandate of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) was unanimously welcomed by the Afghans. However, they
considered the envisioned deployment of a German provincial reconstruction team
to Kunduz insufficient and called for the deployment of ISAF contingents
throughout Afghanistan. They emphasized that strong support of international forces
was necessary to provide an enabling environment for the Bonn process so as to
build up the national army and police and to extend central government authority to
the provinces. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Lakhdar
Brahimi, shared this view. The mission welcomes the enhanced coordination
between the Government, ISAF and the coalition forces.
9.
The achievement of peace and security in Afghanistan will also depend upon
the continued and coordinated political and financial support of Afghanistan by the
international community.

II. Recommendations
10. The mission reminds all parties that have made a commitment to
participate in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process that,
in accordance with a presidential decree, the new national army, national police

2

S/2003/1074

and border police are to be responsible for security and law and order in
Afghanistan. All other armed units are to be dissolved. As a first step towards
dissolution, the mission recommends, in accordance with annex I to the Bonn
Agreement, that all factional forces be withdrawn from Kabul as a matter of
urgency.
11. Given the importance of building up Afghan capacity in the security
sector, the mission draws the attention of the international community to the
need for enhanced assistance activities in this area, in particular regarding the
accelerated training and further deployment of the national police and Afghan
national army, and to urgently commit further funds to the Law and Order
Trust Fund.
12. The mission urges the Afghan Transitional Administration to take all
possible measures to strengthen national unity and reconciliation and to ensure
broad and universal participation in the peace process, in particular with
regard to the role of women. As a concrete measure, the mission recommends
that the Administration follow through with the reform of the Ministry of
Defence that was recently launched. Such a reform process should be extended
to other key institutions.
13. The mission recognized the difficulty of organizing general elections:
insecurity and the risks of disenfranchising a large segment of the population
from the political process. It stressed the importance of tackling these issues so
that the elections could be held within the time frame provided in the Bonn
Agreement. In this regard, the mission noted the transitional provisions of the
draft constitution, in particular the definition of a transitional period contained
in it, which would include presidential elections followed by parliamentary
elections as soon as possible.
14. In order to ensure the necessary financial support and political
momentum for peace and stability in Afghanistan, the mission noted with
interest the wish of the Afghan president to convene a follow-up conference to
the Bonn process early next year, following the conclusion of the Constitutional
Loya Jirga. The mission invites the Secretary-General to study the possibilities
for such a conference.
15. The mission calls upon all the neighbours of Afghanistan to fully
implement the Kabul Declaration on Good-neighbourly Relations of 22
December 2002 (S/2002/1416, annex) and to redouble their efforts, in particular
within the framework of the tripartite commission, to help preserve peace and
security in Afghanistan, especially in the southern and south-eastern areas.
16. In order to strengthen the central Government and the basic institutions
of the State, the mission recommends that the Afghan Transitional
Administration initiate a process of national reconciliation directed to all
Afghans willing to help rebuild the country irrespective of past events.

III. Mission statement
17. By his letter dated 1 October 2003 (S/2003/930), the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General that the members of the Council had
decided to send a mission to Afghanistan. The mission was conducted from 31

3

S/2003/1074

October to 7 November 2003. The terms of reference, composition and programme
of the mission are annexed to the present report (see annexes I and II).
18. The mission left New York on 31 October and visited Afghanistan from 2 to 6
November. Based in the capital, Kabul, the mission travelled to Herat (3 November)
and Mazar-i-Sharif (5 November). Although a visit to Kandahar was planned, the
prevailing security situation necessitated its cancellation. En route to Kabul, in
Islamabad, the mission received a briefing from Fariq Osman Hyder, Additional
Foreign Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Pakistan.
19. In Afghanistan, the mission held extensive discussions on the implementation
of the Bonn Agreement and the implications of Security Council resolution 1510
(2003) with the Afghan Transitional Administration, regional leaders, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), United Nations agencies,
ISAF, the coalition forces, the diplomatic community, NGOs and civil society.
20. The primary message of the mission to the Afghan people was that
Afghanistan remained high on the agenda of the Security Council and that the
international community continued to support the peace process in Afghanistan. To
the Afghan Transitional Administration, the mission underscored the Council’s
support of the Bonn process and expressed its strong interest in the constitutional
and electoral processes. To the local and provincial authorities, the mission sent a
clear message that it was imperative that they participate in the Bonn process and
that they cooperate with the central Government.

IV. Key issues
General security
21. Throughout the visit, security was at the centre of the mission’s discussions.
The mission clearly saw how the lack of security (“the rule of the gun”) affected the
entire Afghan peace process. According to Afghan interlocutors, the three main
sources of insecurity are terrorism, factional fighting and drug production and
trafficking.

Terrorism
22. In the provinces of the south, south-east and east, insecurity is greatly
exacerbated by terrorist attacks from suspected members of the Taliban and AlQaida, and supporters of Gulbudin Hekmatyar. These elements pose a significant
threat to the newly established Afghan National Army and national police forces, to
Afghans supportive of the central Government and, increasingly, to the assistance
community. These threats have significantly slowed reconstruction by limiting the
access of government, international humanitarian and development agencies. This,
in turn, increases the risk that the predominately Pashtun population — already
frustrated by its relatively low level of representation in the Government — will
become marginalized. In this regard, the mission welcomes plans by the coalition
forces to deploy pilot provincial reconstruction teams in the south and south-east.
23. Long-term stability for Afghanistan cannot be achieved without the
cooperation of the neighbouring States. Many of the Afghan interlocutors

4

S/2003/1074

consistently spoke of instability caused by members of the Taliban and Al-Qaida
believed to be crossing the border into Afghanistan. However, in briefings, the
Additional Foreign Secretary and the Ambassador of Pakistan to Afghanistan
assured the mission that Pakistan was doing its utmost to control its border with
Afghanistan and emphasized the need for further international assistance in that
regard. The establishment of the tripartite commission between Afghanistan,
Pakistan and the United States of America is welcome, and the mission encourages
the commission to increase dialogue among its participants.

Factional fighting
24. In too many areas of the country, the arbitrary control exercised by local
commanders and factional armies has resulted in heavy casualties. Last month, the
heaviest factional fighting since the start of the Bonn peace process took place in
Mazar-i-Sharif. In meetings with provincial officials and factional leaders in Herat
and Mazar-i-Sharif, the mission emphasized the importance of cooperation between
the provinces and the central Government. It also emphasized the need for the
respect of human rights and the existence of a civil society. In particular, in the
meeting with Ustad Atta Mohammed and General Abdul Rashid Dostum, the
mission, in strong terms, underlined the need to implement the reforms outlined for
the north. The reforms include: (a) the restructuring of the seventh and eighth corps
to combine them into a unified national force; (b) the demilitarization of
Mazar-i-Sharif; (c) the collection of heavy weapons; and (d) the appointment of
professionals to key positions and the defactionalization of the local administration.
For their part, they expressed concern that the constitution would not address their
specific needs, in particular regarding the lack of democratic mechanisms for the
election of provincial and local authorities. They reiterated to the mission their
commitment to fulfil the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme,
which had to be universal and inclusive. They also expressed their concerns on
issues related to “power-sharing”, appointments to governmental posts and
impartiality of central authorities to all factions.

Narcotic drugs
25. Many interlocutors, including President Hamid Karzai and Foreign Minister
Abdullah, listed drug production and trafficking as a major source of instability.
Drug production and trafficking feed terrorism, criminality and corruption.
Mr. Brahimi underscored that the magnitude of the problem could lead to
Afghanistan becoming a narco-state. As described by Finance Minister Ashraf
Ghani, the production of opium is draining resources from Afghanistan because it
results in larger defence, health and economic costs. He urged the international
community to provide prosecutable evidence, which would contribute to the
isolation of the perpetrators. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland is leading international assistance to the Afghan Transitional Administration
in the narcotic drugs sector through institution-building, law enforcement, demand
reduction and comprehensive measures to promote alternative livelihoods.
Representatives of NGOs said that the lack of resources for economic development
and the low prices of alternative crops had contributed to the increase in the
cultivation of poppies. Senior Transitional Administration officials and NGO

5

S/2003/1074

representatives emphasized the need for a comprehensive programme of action to
combat drug production and trafficking. Furthermore, they highlighted the need for
increased cooperation from neighbouring States in that regard. At the same time, it
was clear that there was no single solution that would quickly resolve the issue.
Progress in counter-narcotics was not possible without parallel progress in security,
reconstruction and extension of the authority of the central Government. Since drugs
originating from Afghanistan had a significant impact on end-user markets, there
was a need to strengthen drug control efforts beyond Afghanistan, including along
the borders. The mission commends the initial efforts made by the Afghan
Government in counter-narcotics, and calls for a sustained, coordinated and
comprehensive effort to combat drug production and trafficking.

International security assistance
26. The mission reiterates that ultimately it is Afghan security institutions that
must assume responsibility for national security. However, until they can be
developed there will be a continued need for international forces to provide security.
In this regard, all interlocutors warmly welcomed Security Council resolution 1510
(2003) and sought clarity on its implications for security beyond Kabul in the
immediate to near future.
27. The mission was impressed by the positive contribution of ISAF to security in
Kabul and the role of the provincial reconstruction teams in Mazar-i-Sharif. It looks
forward to further contributions of the Force to the Bonn process, in particular in
support of the Constitutional Loya Jirga and the electoral process.
28. Representatives of the coalition forces, recognizing that effective counterterrorism efforts required a comprehensive long-term strategy, outlined their current
thinking. The approach would integrate the efforts of the international community
and provide a platform for the extension of government structures in areas that were
the most insecure (the south and south-east). The coalition intends to deploy a
provincial reconstruction team in Kandahar to provide the population with greater
confidence in their security, which in turn would improve conditions for
reconstruction, the establishment of the Government’s administrative structures and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. Once the outcome of the pilot phase
was assessed and the model refined, the possibility of deploying additional coalition
provincial reconstruction teams and creating a “regional development zone” in the
south and south-east would be given consideration.

Security sector reform
29. The mission was briefed on initiatives to accelerate security sector reform.
Efforts towards the development of the national police (target strength of some
20,000 by June 2004) and military forces (target strength of 70,000 by 2008)
received a significant boost this month with the provision of additional assistance
from the United States. These initiatives are of particular importance in creating an
environment in which the Constitutional Loya Jirga and electoral processes can be
conducted successfully (Minister of the Interior Ali Jalali said it was “a race against
time”). Their deployment also serves to build public confidence in the law and order
structures of the State. Mr. Jalali highlighted the importance of providing regular

6

S/2003/1074

funding to the Law and Order Trust Fund, in particular for the salaries of police
officers.
30. With the appointment of 22 new senior-level officials, the first step in
reforming the Ministry of Defence has been implemented. The Afghan interlocutors
and their international partners underscored that while much more was required to
transform the Ministry into a truly representative body, this progress allowed the
pilot phase of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration exercise to
commence in Kunduz. The mission invites the Afghan Transitional Administration
to build on those initial measures to complete the reform process and extend it to
other key institutions, starting with the Ministry of the Interior and intelligence
services, to ensure that they are both broadly representative and professional.

Bonn process
31. The mission was encouraged by the progress made towards achieving peace in
Afghanistan and the concurrent efforts towards the development of a State that is
sustainable and accountable to the population. To date, the benchmarks of the Bonn
peace process have been attained, broadly on schedule. But progress has been
neither uniform nor without serious setbacks. Continued security problems, the
clearly limited writ of the Government and the absence of the rule of law remain
serious obstacles to the successful conclusion of the Bonn process. The failure of
armed factions to abide by the specific commitment made in the Bonn Agreement
(S/2001/1154, annex I, para. 4), namely to withdraw from Kabul, seriously impinges
on the Government’s authority — at its very core — and should be remedied without
further delay.
32. Afghanistan has now entered the most critical juncture in the peace process —
the draft constitution was released on 3 November and preparations for the
Constitutional Loya Jirga and the start of the electoral registration exercise are under
way. These processes by their nature, even in the best of conditions, bring to the
forefront issues that divide society. In Afghanistan, the conditions necessary for a
credible national political process are not yet in place: national reconciliation
requires greater focus; political parties need time to develop; national institutions
must undergo reform; and the power of factional leaders must be diminished.
Furthermore, some local commanders continue to ignore the demands of the central
Government vis-à-vis appointments of provincial officials and the remittance of
customs revenue.
33. The mission, following discussions with the head of the UNAMA Electoral
Unit, is of the view that, notwithstanding the substantial efforts made by UNAMA
and the Afghan electoral authorities, the ability to undertake registration is made
precarious not only by the lack of security, which currently prevents access in
particular to significant Pashtun areas, but also by the dearth of voluntary funding
on which the project is dependent. The mission learned that for the completion of
the registration process, a total of $62 million was required.
34. The draft constitution, which was released during the mission’s visit, provides
for a transitional arrangement. This provision, if accepted by the Constitutional
Loya Jirga, allows a gap (of up to 12 months) between the convening of the
presidential and parliamentary elections. Nevertheless, President Karzai expressed
concern that such a delay might be construed as an illegitimate attempt to hold onto

7

S/2003/1074

power and fuel frustration over the perceived lack of balanced representation in the
central Government and its limited authority. Such sentiments could alienate parts of
the population, notably in majority Pashtun areas. To avoid the consolidation of the
power base of factional leaders, it is important for credible elections to take place as
soon as possible after the presidential elections. Mr. Brahimi shared his view with
the mission that the Bonn Agreement should be implemented in spirit, but not at any
cost.

Reconstruction
35. The mission was encouraged to learn of the progress made in the areas of
reconstruction and governance. Significant steps have been taken, including the
establishment of a national development framework, the introduction of a new
national currency and the ongoing reconstruction of major roads. The Minister of
Finance shared his vision for the rapid construction of a road network that would
allow Afghanistan to regain its traditional role as a land bridge between South and
Central Asia. Such a network would also facilitate the expansion of the central
Government’s authority into the provinces. Key ministers of the Afghan Transitional
Administration underscored the importance of implementing major infrastructural
projects, such as a water system, including irrigation and reservoirs, and a gas
pipeline network.
36. Furthermore, in a convincing presentation, Finance Minister Ghani outlined his
vision for the economic sustainability of Afghanistan. He expressed his hope that in
the next five years reforms and structures put in place would yield $500 per capita
income and $1.5 billion in domestic revenues. Attaining this goal would require
double-digit growth and sustained international assistance. He urged donors to focus
their assistance in no more than three sectors.
37. The mission was also very encouraged by initiatives of the Minister of Finance
to combat corruption and to implement measures of good governance. He
underscored that the return of the highly qualified Afghan diaspora would be
desirable. However, a constraining factor was the relatively low pay scales. The
work of the Minister of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, in particular the
efficient refurbishment of his Ministry and the large number of its national
programmes, which promotes local empowerment, was also noted with appreciation
by the mission.

Human rights and gender issues
38. The mission met with representatives of civil society and of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission in Kabul, Herat and Mazar-i-Sharif. Many
of the representatives described vividly the general situation in their areas, which
was characterized by the pervasive abuse of a broad range of basic human rights. To
regional leaders, the mission emphasized the importance of a vibrant civil society
and respect for human rights for the stability of Afghanistan.
39. NGO and civil society representatives called for an end to impunity and the
establishment of a mechanism for transitional justice and the deployment of human
rights monitors. They stressed that it was unacceptable that perpetrators of grave
human rights violations in the past continued to hold high public office. However,

8

S/2003/1074

senior officials of the Afghan Transitional Administration and other interlocutors
suggested that at present Afghanistan was too weak to face the challenges of the past
and that the focus should rather be on the establishment of good-governance
practices.
40. The mission had an opportunity to exchange views with the Minister for
Women’s Affairs, Habiba Sohrabi, and received briefings from civil society
representatives on gender issues. The rights of women, particularly their active
participation in social, political and economic spheres, continued to be seriously
hampered by culture, customs and the lack of security. The mission was shocked to
learn about the frequent death threats against women’s rights activists and that the
rate of suicide among women was very high — in the past six months alone there
have been more than 40 cases, often as women were reacting in desperation against
forced marriages.
41. Civil society representatives underlined the need for women’s needs to receive
serious and immediate attention. In particular, they were concerned about the
present draft of the constitution, which in their view did not provide sufficiently
explicit guarantees for women’s rights, and they called upon the international
community to pay close attention to the matter.
42. Finally, the members of the mission highly commend the tireless efforts and
leadership of Mr. Brahimi. They are impressed by the dedication of UNAMA staff,
who serve in an extremely challenging and insecure environment. They also express
appreciation to the Afghan Transitional Administration and UNAMA for their
hospitality during their visit.

9

S/2003/1074

Annex I
Terms of reference and composition of the Security Council
mission to Afghanistan
Terms of reference
1.
The members of the Security Council have decided to send a mission to
Afghanistan. The visit will take place from 31 October to 7 November 2003. The
mission will visit Kabul, Herat, Kandahar and Mazar-i-Sharif.
2.

The mission has the following objectives:
• To underscore the international community’s unwavering commitment to the
peace and reconstruction process in Afghanistan and to promote further
international and regional support to this end.
• To review the progress achieved so far and to encourage the Afghan
Transitional Administration to further strengthen the implementation of the
Bonn Agreement, inter alia, with respect to security sector reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and the election process.
• To observe the operations of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), including its role in assisting the Afghan Transitional
Administration in preparing for the elections and in implementing the
constitution and in coordinating all United Nations activities.
• To observe the operations of the International Security Assistance Force in
Afghanistan, to discuss ways to improve the security situation and to expand
the authority of the Afghan Transitional Administration throughout the
country, and, in this context, to obtain a fuller understanding of the role of the
provincial reconstruction teams.
• To review the humanitarian and human rights situation, in particular with
regard to women, children, refugees and internally displaced persons, and to
assess the status of rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts.
• To review the implementation of the Kabul Declaration on Good-neighbourly
Relations of 22 December 2002.
• To convey a strong message to regional and factional leaders about the need to
reject all violence, condemn extremist, terrorist and illegal drug activities,
ensure public order and safety, promote inter-ethnic reconciliation and support
the implementation of the Bonn Agreement and fully cooperate with the
Afghan Transitional Administration in line with the agreement of 22 May 2003
and UNAMA to these ends.

Composition
Germany (Ambassador Gunter Pleuger, head of mission)
Angola (Counsellor Candido Pereira dos Santos Van-Dunem)
Bulgaria (Ambassador Stefan Tafrov)
Cameroon (Minister Counsellor Mathieu Blaise Banoum)

10

S/2003/1074

Chile (Counsellor Armin Andereya)
China (Minister Counsellor Jingye Cheng)
France (Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sablière)
Guinea (Minister Counsellor Boubacar Diallo)
Mexico (Ambassador Adolfo Aguilar Zinser)
Pakistan (Ambassador Masood Khalid)
Russian Federation (Ambassador Gennadi Gatilov)
Spain (Ambassador Inocencio Arias)
Syrian Arab Republic (Counsellor Bassam Sabagh)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (Ambassador Emyr
Jones Parry)
United States of America (Ambassador John D. Negroponte)

11

S/2003/1074

Annex II
Programme of the Security Council mission to Afghanistan
(31 October-7 November 2003)
Sunday, 2 November
0800

Departure Dubai

1100

Arrival Islamabad

1200

Departure from Islamabad

1510

Arrival Kabul

1520

Press Encounter
(at airport)

1545-1620

Dr. Abdullah Abdullah, Minister of Foreign Affairs, accompanied
by SRSG and Karl Fischer, Senior Advisor/External Relations
Ministry of Foreign Affairs

1630-1930

H.E. President Karzai, Vice Presidents Marshall Mohammad
Qassim Fahim, Hydayet Amin Arsala, Mohammad Karim Khalili,
and Nematullah Sharani, accompanied by SRSG and interpreter
Presidential Palace

2000-2130

Light Dinner and Briefing with Lieutenant-General Götz
Gliemeroth, Commander ISAF
ISAF HQ

2130

Departure from ISAF HQ to Accommodation

Monday, 3 November

12

0615

Departure from Gandamak Lodge to Turkish Embassy

0645

Departure from Turkish Embassy to Airport

0745

Depart Kabul for Herat, accompanied by Karl Fischer, Senior
Advisor/External Relations

0900

Arrival in Herat

0945-1045

Deputy Governor of Herat
(will meet delegation at airport and accompany to Governor’s
Residence)

1100-1145

Meetings with members of the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission (AIHRC) and civil society representatives
UNAMA Western Regional Office

1200-1245

Lunch Meeting with UN Agency Heads and NGO representatives
UNAMA Western Regional Office or UNICA Guesthouse

1245-1345

Advisory Shura
UNAMA Western Regional Office

1345-1400

General Baz Ahmadi, 4th Army Corps Commander

S/2003/1074

1415-1430

Press Encounter
(at airport)

1545

Departure for Kabul

1700

Arrival Kabul

1815-1915

Meeting with SRSG
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

1930

Dinner at the German Embassy for Security Council Members

2130

Return to Turkish Embassy

Tuesday, 4 November
0800

Departure from Gandamak to UNAMA

0815

Departure from Turkish Embassy to UNAMA

0830-0930

Dr. Ashraf Ghani, Minister of Finance, accompanied by CoS
Margareta Wahlstrom
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

0930-1015

Ambassador of Pakistan to Afghanistan
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

1030-1115

Major-General David Barno [p], Office of Military Cooperation —
Afghanistan (OMC-A), and David Sedney, US Chargé d’Affaires,
accompanied by SRSG
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

1115-1215

Ali Ahmed Jalali, Minister of Interior, accompanied by
DSRSG Arnault
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

1215-1300

Lunch
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

1315-1415

General Rahim Wardak, Deputy Defence Minister and General
Bismillah Khan, Chief of Staff, Ministry of Defence, accompanied
by DSRSG Arnault and interpreter
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

1445-1530

Ambassador of Iran to Afghanistan
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

1530-1730

Security Sector Briefing, with Italy, Germany, Japan, United
Kingdom, United States, France, UNAMA Military Advisory Unit,
presentation by Afghanistan New Beginnings Programme
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

Wednesday, 5 November
0615

Departure from Gandamak Lodge to Turkish Embassy

0630

Departure from Turkish Embassy to Airport

13

S/2003/1074

0730

Depart Kabul for Mazar-i-Sharif, accompanied by Karl Fischer,
Senior Advisor/External Relations

0840

Arrival in Mazar

0900-0930

Engineer Habibullah, Interim Governor of Balkh Province
UNAMA North Regional Office

0930-1015

UNAMA, UN agencies, and NGOs
UNAMA North Regional Office

1015-1045

Major Guy Bennett, Chief of Staff, UK Provincial
Reconstruction Team
UNAMA North Regional Office

1045-1130

Usted Atta Mohammad, Jamiat-i-Islami and General Abdulrashid
Dostum, Junbesh-i-Milli
UNAMA North Regional Office

1130-1200

Sandwich Lunch
UNAMA North Regional Office

1200-1330

Multiparty Security Commission of the North
UNAMA North Regional Office

1330-1430

Civil Society Representatives, organized by the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission
UNAMA North Regional Office

1430-1500

Press Encounter
UNAMA North Regional Office

1500

Departure to Airport

1530

Departure for Kabul

1700

Arrival in Kabul

1930

Dinner hosted by the SRSG and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Foreign Affairs

2130

Departure from Ministry of Foreign Affairs to Accommodation

Thursday, 6 November

14

0730

Departure from Gandamak Lodge to Turkish Embassy

0740

Departure from Turkish Embassy

0800-0900

Mine Detection Dog Training, UN Mine Action Centre for
Afghanistan
Mine Dog Training Centre

1015-1100

Dr. Hanif Atmar, Minister of Rural Rehabilitation and
Development, accompanied by CoS Margareta Wahlstrom
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

1100-1145

Dr. Sima Samar, Chairperson, and the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission, accompanied by DSRSG Arnault
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

S/2003/1074

1145-1345

Roundtable Discussion with Local and International Civil Society
Representatives — organized in conjunction with the Agency
Coordinating Body for Afghanistan Relief (ACBAR)
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

1345-1415

Sandwich lunch with Heads of UN Agencies
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

1415-1515

Wrap up with SRSG, Heads of UN Agencies, Reginald Austin
(Chief, UNAMA Electoral Component)
UNAMA, Building 6 Conference Room

1515-1545

Press Conference
UNAMA Building 6, Press Briefing Room

1600

Departure from UNAMA for Kabul International Airport

1700

Departure for Islamabad

1830

Arrival Islamabad

1900

Departure for Dubai

2200

Arrival Dubai

Friday, 7 November
0930

Depart Dubai

1310

Arrive Munich

1800

Arrive New York

15
