A /77/PV.45

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

45th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 6 December 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Rai (Nepal),
Vice-President, took the Chair.

minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/537)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/362)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/77/72,
A/77/318, A/77/361)
Draft resolutions (A/77/L.30, A/77/L.32,
A/77/L.35)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/93)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.34)
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
(d) Strengthening of international cooperation and
coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and

Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Our
world is currently going through a rapid and unbroken
succession of major humanitarian crises. The past
year has been particularly difficult, as evidenced
by the numerous reports of the Secretary-General
published this year. The international community is
facing a myriad of challenges whose intersection has
aggravated humanitarian needs and slowed progress
towards achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Humanitarian actors struggle every day
to respond to crises linked not only to political and
armed conflicts but also to extreme climatic events
and their impact, such as droughts, floods, landslides,
earthquakes and tsunamis, as well as the multiple risks
and severe consequences that result from them, ranging
from food insecurity to people’s forced displacement.
Along with that, the coronavirus disease pandemic
(COVID-19) and its direct and indirect effects continue
to take a heavy toll on the most vulnerable, especially
women and children, who are disproportionately
affected. The United Nations, in coordination with
Member States, is therefore called on to redouble its
efforts and to continue to strengthen the coordination
of emergency humanitarian aid in order to respond
effectively to the needs of the growing numbers affected
by these humanitarian crises.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-72704 (E)
*2272704*

A/77/PV.45

If we really want to succeed in reducing the risk
of natural disasters, conflicts and humanitarian crises,
we must invest more in prevention, particularly through
an anticipatory approach and the implementation of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. Earlywarning systems need to be comprehensive, because
fast and flexible funding for preparedness and rapid
response, combined with climate predictions, makes it
possible to save more lives. What we also need now
are more green partnerships and pilot actions aimed at
adapting agriculture to climate change.
The alarming state of food insecurity and
concurrent risks of famine are more than ever in need
of a comprehensive and coordinated response through
humanitarian action in synergy with development
and peacebuilding efforts. It is therefore our duty
to work together, within a diverse and varied system
of humanitarian partners, including Member States,
the United Nations, its funds and programmes,
international financial institutions, international and
regional humanitarian organization and civil society, in
order to bridge the funding gap and ultimately alleviate
the suffering of the most vulnerable populations.
In that respect, Morocco commends the efforts and
leadership of Secretary-General António Guterres, as
well as Mr. Martin Griffiths, Head of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and the
other relevant agencies of the United Nations for their
admirable humanitarian work. We also want to pay
tribute to humanitarian workers at the national and
international levels for the selflessness they show when
operating in the most dangerous regions of the world.
These humanitarian actors must be able to fulfil their
noble mandate in complete safety and without political
interference. In that regard, the Kingdom of Morocco
calls for further mobilization of the international
community in order to guarantee the safety of
medical and humanitarian personnel and to prevent
disinformation, the dissemination of false information
and instances of hate speech.
Humanitarian action is a fundamental and
structural pillar of the Morocco’s foreign policy
under the enlightened vision of His Majesty King
Mohammed VI. In that regard, we have always been
committed to supporting the humanitarian action of the
United Nations, especially through financial assistance
to the Central Emergency Response Fund and other
timely contributions to country-based pool funds, in
accordance with national circumstances and priorities.
2/23

06/12/2022

In 2022, Morocco provided $1.5 million in financial
assistance in support of many of our brother countries,
including Yemen, Tonga and Pakistan, with the aim of
mitigating the impact of the humanitarian crises they
had to face this year. In addition, pursuant to royal
directives, we have set up a humanitarian operation
for the benefit of some 20 brother countries in Africa,
as well as for the African Union Commission in Addis
Ababa, with donations including 228 tons of products
for fighting the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore,
on His Majesty’s instructions, our armed forces have
deployed 19 field hospitals and provided large amounts
of medical services for local populations and refugees
in 14 countries on four continents. Similarly, we have
strengthened our efforts to mitigate humanitarian crises
through our effective contributions to peacekeeping
operations. Cognizant of the importance of the
peace, humanitarian and development nexus, we have
been working to support South-South and triangular
cooperation that is centred on the promotion of
sustainable initiatives and partnerships and that benefits
human development and investment in productive
sectors that generate growth and employment.
In order to meet the unprecedented humanitarian
challenges our world is facing, we must ensure full
respect for international humanitarian law and its
implementation must be strengthened. In that respect,
the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence must be scrupulously
respected in all circumstances.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco supports
the three humanitarian resolutions that will be adopted
today (A/77/L.30, A/77/L.32, A/77/L.35) and would like
to thank their co-facilitators — Sweden, the European
Union and Bangladesh, on behalf of the Group of 77
and China — for their efforts to reach compromise on
the texts.
Ms. Nishihara (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile thanks the Secretary-General for his report on
assistance to the Palestinian people (A/77/93) for the
period from 1 April 2021 to 31 March 2022, providing
a description of the efforts made by the United Nations
and its agencies, in cooperation with the Government
of Palestine, donors and civil society, to support the
Palestinian people and their institutions. Chile notes
with great concern the increase in violence during
the reporting period, especially the escalation of the
conflict between Israel and Palestinian armed groups
in the Gaza Strip in May 2021, in which more than 200
22-72704

06/12/2022

Palestinians, nine Israeli citizens and three residents
of Israel were killed. Any human death should be
condemned wherever it takes place and regardless of the
circumstances. We deplore the fatalities and hope that
the perpetrators will be held to account for these losses.
In addition, the significant material losses in
this conflict must come to an end. Chile regrets that
despite the efforts of the United Nations system, the
humanitarian, economic and development needs of
the Palestinian people increase every year, reflecting
the gravity of the health and economic crisis facing
Palestinians in the occupied territory. We therefore
reiterate how urgent it is to provide assistance on the
ground and enable mechanisms that can alleviate
the financial precarity of such agencies as the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to respond to the crisis.
Chile reiterates its rejection of the disproportionate
use of force in this conflict, which has caused numerous
deaths and thousands of injuries. Any indiscriminate use
of violence against civilian populations is unjustifiable.
It is a violation of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law and is unacceptable
to the international community. We urgently call on
the parties to abide by their international obligations
regarding the protection of the civilian population. We
reiterate that any violence against civilians, especially
women and children, by any of the parties to the conflict
must stop. By the same token, in the quest for a lasting,
just and sustainable solution, we call for peaceful
coexistence among the two peoples, which would be
conducive to dialogue between Palestine and Israel. My
country will continue to support efforts to achieve a
solution based on the concept of two independent States
within secure and internationally recognized borders.
The Government of Chile reaffirms its position on the
question of Palestine, which is based on respect for
international law, in accordance with the United Nations
resolutions that promote the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people to a free, sovereign and independent
State, in the spirit of achieving a just and lasting peace.
In conclusion, Chile expresses its solidarity with
the Palestinian people, whose largest diaspora lives in
our country. We highlight the valuable contributions
made by immigrants of Palestinian descent to our
nation and its development.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): It is my privilege
to deliver a joint statement on behalf of India and
Sweden on the agenda item entitled “Strengthening

A/77/PV.45

of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster
relief assistance of the United Nations, including
special economic assistance”. Our joint statement is a
reflection of our shared commitment to strengthening
the United Nations system in order to respond to the
complex humanitarian challenges of our time.
We would first like to pay tribute to the tens of
thousands of United Nations humanitarian and medical
personnel around the world who have been at the front
lines of our joint response to humanitarian emergencies,
often at immense personal risk and sacrifice. We believe
that the primary responsibility for providing protection
and assistance in a humanitarian crisis lies with the
countries concerned and their national Governments.
However, when international humanitarian assistance
is provided, it must be given impartially, in accordance
with the guiding principles outlined in resolution 46/182
and other relevant resolutions. India and Sweden remain
committed to preserving the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence in responding
to all humanitarian situations. We also believe that
respect for the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including sovereignty, political independence
and the territorial integrity of Member States, should
remain the basis for all humanitarian assistance.
The magnitude and scale of some of the
unprecedented natural disasters that the world has
witnessed in the past couple of years, together with
a number of other complex emergencies, have not
only exerted pressure on the humanitarian response
system but also disrupted progress towards the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals. The world is still
experiencing the after-effects of the pandemic, which
have resulted in economic instability, disrupted global
markets and added to poverty. Development gains in
employment, food security, education and health care
have been seriously affected and in some cases even
reversed. Those most severely affected are often the
most vulnerable segments of populations. India and
Sweden greatly value the coordinating capacities of the
United Nations system, through the Emergency Relief
Coordinator and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, and we encourage all actors to
continue enhancing their support to the Office.
The latest Global Humanitarian Overview report,
released just a few days ago, illustrates in detail the
humanitarian challenges the world is facing now. As
the Secretary-General notes, 2022 has been a year

22-727043/23

A/77/PV.45

06/12/2022

of extremes. The conflicts and tensions across the
world have triggered unprecedented challenges to
global food and energy security. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, natural disasters such
as floods, and climate change continue to cause and
exacerbate humanitarian emergencies. The Global
Humanitarian Overview 2023 calls for $51.5 billion
to bring life-saving support to 230 million of the most
vulnerable people. That is a formidable challenge for
the entire international community and one that we
cannot afford to downplay.

donors, with 10 donors currently providing 90 per
cent of humanitarian funding. That is not sustainable.
We call on Member States to consider increasing
their contribution to the United Nations humanitarian
assistance system, including the Global Humanitarian
Response Plan for COVID-19, country-based pooled
funds and the Central Emergency Response Fund, to
which India and Sweden are long-standing donors.
We would also like to emphasize to our humanitarian
partners the value of non-earmarked flexible funding
and predictable support.

While the outlook provided by the report may be
bleak, there are some encouraging indicators on delivery
by the United Nations and the entire humanitarian
system. Data collection has improved, flexible
instruments such as the Central Emergency Relief Fund
and country-based pool funds have made it possible to
quickly redirect resources to address the most acute
needs. The private sector is increasingly stepping in as a
strong and creative partner for traditional humanitarian
actors. Increased global Internet access, coupled
with new innovative technologies, offers potential
for improving humanitarian action. For example,
artificial intelligence has been used for mapping
pandemic outbreaks, drones have delivered medical
supplies and testing samples and three-dimensional
printers have helped in the production of face shields,
personal-protective-equipment kits and ventilators.
Collaboration between humanitarian, development
and peacebuilding efforts has increased, something
we also saw during the pandemic. The localization of
humanitarian work has improved. Building on that will
help meet the needs of those in need of humanitarian
assistance in future.

We believe that our approach to humanitarian
response must put the people affected at the very centre.
That will ensure respect for human dignity, as well as
the flexibility necessary to make choices about the
goods and services that the populations affected need
the most. The need for greater complementarity between
humanitarian action and development cooperation is
well recognized. Action for development by national
Governments and the international community should
focus on reducing risk and vulnerability, which will
contribute to building resilience and capacity. We
encourage further work to enhance coherence between
humanitarian, development and peacebuilding efforts,
with full respect for their respective mandates.

Violence against humanitarian workers in
situations of armed conflict remains a matter of serious
concern. We extend our condolences to the families of
humanitarian workers reported to have been killed over
the last year. We strongly condemn all attacks and threats
against humanitarian personnel. Member States must
take every possible measure to ensure the protection
of humanitarian personnel and actors in accordance
with international law. All humanitarian organizations
must also strictly adhere to a policy of zero tolerance
for sexual exploitation and abuse and ensure that the
victims are provided with adequate protection.
The persistent shortfalls in the financing of
humanitarian appeals remain a challenge. Today the
funding of humanitarian systems relies on too few
4/23

Guided by its ancient philosophy of viewing the
world as one family, India has been at the forefront
of supporting fellow developing countries by
providing assistance and relief efforts in humanitarian
emergencies, including natural disasters. Those efforts
have ranged from the immediate supply of relief
materials to the emergency evacuation of large numbers
of people of various nationalities from affected zones.
Moving forward, we need to look beyond immediate
relief and rehabilitation. India’s call for promoting
infrastructure’s resilience to disaster through the
Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure has
received global attention, with many new countries
adopting the Coalition’s charter. The Coalition’s
membership has expanded and now includes 30 countries
and seven multilateral organizations. Several countries
have supported its mandate by committing technical
assistance and financial resources. The Coalition’s
strategic initiative for small island developing States
(SIDS), the Infrastructure for Resilient Island States
initiative, was also launched last year. It is envisaged
that it will be truly owned by SIDS with a view to
achieving sustainable development through a systemic
approach to promoting resilient, sustainable and
inclusive infrastructure.
22-72704

06/12/2022

Humanitarian assistance is a strong priority for the
new Swedish Government. Sweden will remain one of
the top humanitarian donors. Sweden has contributed a
record amount, more than $900 million, in humanitarian
aid in 2022. Sweden will remain a strong voice for
principled humanitarian assistance and a leader in
developing new, innovative and efficient solutions to the
challenges facing the world in the humanitarian field.
As part of its European Union (EU) presidency, next
March in Brussels Sweden will co-host the European
Humanitarian Forum together with the European
Commission. We look forward to discussing with
international partners the main strategic challenges
facing the humanitarian system today.
India and Sweden remain particularly concerned
about the deterioration of global food security. India
and Sweden fully support the Black Sea Grain Initiative
and welcomed the announcement on 17 November of
its extension by 120 days, which means that Ukraine’s
grain, foodstuffs and fertilizer can continue to be
exported from its Black Sea ports. To help support the
delivery of grain from Ukraine to people facing acute
hunger, Sweden has contributed some $50 million to
enable wheat to be delivered from Ukraine to Yemen,
Somalia and the Sudan for humanitarian purposes.
To help low-income countries fight rising prices and
shortages of foodstuffs, India has exported more than
1.8 million tons of wheat to countries in need, including
Afghanistan, Myanmar, the Sudan and Yemen.
The humanitarian system makes a difference in the
lives of the most vulnerable people every day. It provides
assistance to the people who are suffering the most
and saves lives in some of the worst places across the
globe. But we must ensure that 2023 is not the year that
breaks the system. This is a shared responsibility. The
creativity and magnitude of our response must match the
unique nature of the challenge. We, India and Sweden,
reiterate our commitment to working with all Member
States to ensure a united and effective response to the
world’s humanitarian challenges. Our debate today is
an opportunity to send a strong and united message of
support to those in need of humanitarian assistance and
to humanitarian actors worldwide. India joins Sweden
in calling on delegations to adopt the humanitarian
draft resolution (A/77/L.32) by consensus.
Mr. Alajmi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation is pleased to participate in this debate
on strengthening the coordination of humanitarian

A/77/PV.45

and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance.
The State of Kuwait, its leadership and people, is
firmly convinced of the importance of giving ultimate
priority to humanitarian action, which is an approach
whose mechanisms and endowments are based on
the enormous historical and societal generational
experiences of our parents and grandparents in
providing assistance. The teachings of our Muslim
religion also urge us to extend a friendly hand to those
who most need it. The Holy Qur’an says that
“those who spend their wealth (in Allah’s cause) by
night, by day, secretly, and openly, their rewards
are with their God. There is no fear on them, nor
shall they grieve” (The Holy Qur’an, II:274).
The increasing disputes and disasters facing
the world, natural or human-made, have serious
humanitarian and economic repercussions. They also
exacerbate food insecurity and increase the numbers of
displaced persons and refugees. All of that has increased
the burden on the United Nations and relevant partners
in the work of addressing humanitarian and development
challenges and coordinating humanitarian efforts.
As a result, and considering the relevant resolutions
and reports of the General Assembly on providing
humanitarian assistance, the State of Kuwait reiterates
the importance of strengthening and coordinating the
rapid humanitarian assistance and relief provided by
the United Nations in the event of disasters and crises
to afflicted areas in order to save lives.
We have noted the reports of the Secretary-General
under agenda item 69. We share his concern in his report
(A/77/362) about the millions who have been compelled
to flee their homes and lose their livelihoods while also
dealing with starvation and disease. That has been made
even worse by the spread of pandemics, foremost among
them the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and its disastrous consequences. More than 1.8 million
people have lost their lives, while poverty has increased
along with conflicts, acts of violence and persecution,
resulting in serious effects and grave violations of
international law and international humanitarian law in
many parts of the world.
The Secretary-General also highlighted the
suffering of the Palestinian people in their occupied
territory in his report (A/77/93). It is an explicit
confirmation of the many systematic violations
committed by the occupation authorities, including the

22-727045/23

A/77/PV.45

expansion of settlements, home demolitions, forced
evictions, the fencing-off of areas and the imposition of
limitations on people’s free movement. The report also
underscores that the protracted military occupation
has had a strong impact on the humanitarian, social
and political life of Palestinians and their ability to
exercise their most fundamental rights. In addition, the
occupation authorities continue to perpetrate acts of
violence against unarmed Palestinian civilians and to
maintain their unjust blockade against the Gaza Strip.
In conclusion, we commend the vital and effective
role performed by various bodies and organs of the
United Nations, as well as their partners, in supporting
and coordinating humanitarian assistance and relief
around the world. We also highly value the increasingly
important work of United Nations personnel and all
humanitarian actors. They make tireless efforts in
carrying out their humanitarian activities. We express
to them our thanks and appreciation.
Mr. Abuzied Shamseldin Ahmed Mohamed
(Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My country’s delegation has
reviewed the reports of the Secretary-General under
agenda item 69 (a) (A/77/72, A/77/318 and A/77/361),
which reflect the dangerous humanitarian situation
throughout the world resulting from natural disasters
due to climate change, including destructive floods,
severe droughts, hurricanes and others, not to mention
protracted and emergent conflicts. Those disasters
and conflicts have wreaked mass destruction on the
infrastructure of some countries and caused massive
displacement and migration of people. They have also
led to food insecurity in certain regions, most of the
victims being the elderly, women or children.
In view of that, it is imperative that we prioritize
the search for ways and means to deal with the
repercussions in the short and long terms. Moreover,
there is a need for more efforts to raise funds to provide
urgent support to those affected by floods, droughts,
pandemics and diseases — not just to save their
lives, but to rehabilitate infrastructure and create the
conditions conducive to restoring their activities and
guaranteeing their resilience in the future.
My country’s delegation values the role of the
United Nations, especially the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and
humanitarian organizations that provide humanitarian
aid to those afflicted. At the same time, we call for
enhanced partnerships with regional and international
organizations and donors. We also call for coordination
6/23

06/12/2022

with local communities to offer the appropriate level of
services and to create a balance among the priorities in a
manner that will meet the humanitarian needs of everyone.
It is important to pay due attention to rehabilitating the
infrastructure that has been destroyed by floods and
conflicts, including schools, homes, health-care centres
and roads. That is always important, because it contributes
to the recovery of those who have been displaced and to
assistance for children whose schools have been destroyed.
In addition, it enables those affected, in particular those
living in agricultural societies, to restore their normal
lives and their ways of living by meeting their needs.
The delegation of the Sudan underscores the
importance of connecting humanitarian work with
peacebuilding, as some reports have mentioned.
Experience has proved that humanitarian aid in cases of
emergencies and disasters must expand to include the
creation of projects to gain livelihoods, as well as proactive
pilot projects to guarantee the stability of populations and
families. Such projects should help to avoid any migration,
displacement or friction and should alleviate severe
humanitarian suffering. Those projects should also prevent
societies from depending on humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian aid should arrive at the right time and
should seek to rehabilitate and protect the humanitarian
workers while respecting the basic principles of
humanitarian action, namely, transparency, impartiality,
neutrality, independence and non-discrimination.
Coordination and cooperation between Governments, the
United Nations and humanitarian organizations remain
imperative in any humanitarian operation. The Sudan has
faced several crises as well as humanitarian and natural
disasters, the most recent of which were the heavy rains
and floods that affected most of the states of the country
during the rainy season this year. That has led to severe and
widespread damage to infrastructure and public facilities,
causing the displacement of thousands of families
and disrupting education in schools. The Government
made immediate efforts to deal with the situation in
the short term. However, the crisis was more profound
than expected, large gaps remain, and international and
United Nations support is therefore needed to assist those
afflicted. It is crucial that such support not be politicized.
Mr. Fremy (France) (spoke in French): The delegation
of France aligns itself with the statement made by the
European Union (see A/77/PV.44) and would like to make
the following remarks in its national capacity.
22-72704

06/12/2022

We have listened with concern to the statements
on the increase in humanitarian needs, which have
reached an unprecedented level. The United Nations
warns that more than 339 million people will need
humanitarian assistance in 2023. In that respect, France
is fully mobilized.
First, I would like to recall that we are all bound
by international humanitarian law and the preservation
of the humanitarian space. Humanitarian workers,
including local staff, are increasingly the victims
of attacks. The international community has both a
moral duty and an obligation to those who put their
lives at risk to help people on the ground. Perpetrators
and accomplices to attacks on humanitarian workers
must be prosecuted and punished. France calls for
the guaranteeing of rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access wherever people need to receive
assistance. My country is fully mobilized to respond to
the humanitarian crises in Ukraine, Africa and the Near
and Middle East. The humanitarian emergency is due,
in particular, to climate change, which causes natural
disasters, as in Pakistan, or unprecedented droughts, as
in the Horn of Africa.
Conflicts also continue to make civilian populations
their first victims. In the Russian aggression against
Ukraine, Russia is deliberately targeting civilians and
using winter as a weapon of war. Faced with global
food insecurity that is exacerbated by the Russian
aggression in Ukraine, France’s approach is based on
three initiatives in particular. The first is the European
Union solidarity corridors. The second is the Food and
Agriculture Resilience Mission, which was launched
in March to support the countries most affected by
the global food crisis. The third is the Save Crops
Operation, which was launched on 23 September by
the President of France, along with his partners, to
facilitate access to fertilizers for vulnerable countries,
in particular African countries.
Today’s humanitarian challenges are immense.
Humanitarian response funding must be increased
and diversified. We must continuously optimize the
effectiveness of aid, placing the voices and needs
of affected populations, especially the voices of
women and girls, at the centre of responses. We must
anticipate better in order to respond better, and we
must increase the presence of women in management
positions in humanitarian organizations. It is important
to strengthen cooperation between humanitarian,
development and peace actors.

A/77/PV.45

In March 2022 France, along with the European
Commission, organized the first session of the
European Humanitarian Forum, thus demonstrating
its commitment to responding to these challenges. It
is essential to support the work of the humanitarian
community through the draft resolutions (A/77/L.30,
A/77/L.32, A/77/L.34 and A/77/L.35) that we will
adopt today. To do so, we must all mobilize and
join in collective efforts in the spirit of effective
multilateralism. We therefore call on States to join
the appeal for humanitarian action launched jointly by
France and Germany in 2019.
Mrs. Mudrenko (Ukraine): The delegation of
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
delegation of the European Union (see A/77/PV.44) and
would like to add several points in its national capacity.
In recent years, we have witnessed rapid growth
in humanitarian needs across the globe. This year,
however, the number of people in need has increased
enormously. One of the main reasons for that is Russia’s
full-scale aggression against Ukraine, which has
further exacerbated global food insecurity. Russia’s
war on Ukraine provoked the largest humanitarian
crisis in Europe since the Second World War. It
uprooted some 14.5 million Ukrainians — or one
third of the population. Today about 4.7 million of our
citizens have been displaced within Ukraine, and more
than 7.7 million have been seeking safety abroad. Since
24 February, Russia has attacked Ukraine with more
than 16,000 missiles, rockets, bombs and drones, 97 per
cent of which were targeted at civilian infrastructure
and residential areas. Faced with military defeats,
losses of personnel and vigorous resistance, the
Kremlin regime began systematic mass targeted attacks
on critical civilian infrastructure across Ukraine,
aimed at creating conditions that are unsuitable for the
population’s life. That constitutes not only a war crime
but an act of genocide.
Today millions of Ukrainians are in desperate
need of humanitarian assistance. Winter is here, and
this winter will be the hardest to live through. Among
the serious problems for the security of the civilian
population is the heavy contamination of large areas
of Ukraine with mines and explosive remnants of war.
Ukrainian authorities face the extremely difficult
task of cleaning up these territories, which could last
for years, if not decades. Ukraine needs international
support in that area.

22-727047/23

A/77/PV.45

We commend the courageous work of the United
Nations humanitarian team to ease the suffering of
Ukrainians on the ground. We are grateful to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the International Organization for Migration
and other United Nations agencies for their active
efforts in addressing this harsh humanitarian crisis.
We are also profoundly thankful to all our partners
and donors around the world for the assistance and
help provided to Ukraine, in particular to the European
Union, United States, Germany, Great Britain, Japan,
Canada, Norway and many others. We urge the global
humanitarian community to continue to ramp up its
assistance and protection services in Ukraine. It is
also crucial to continue to expand these efforts to the
liberated areas, in which the situation is the direst.
Despite the horrors of the war, Ukraine is one of
the guarantors of global food security, and we remain
committed to our obligations. We are ready to continue
shipping agricultural products to ensure global food
security and price stability on the international market.
As at 2 December, over 12.4 million tons of grain and
other foodstuffs have been exported via the Black Sea
Grain Initiative. That was made possible owing to the
strong participation of the United Nations, Türkiye
and other partners. In order to increase our exports
by several million tons per month, Ukraine proposes
to expand the grain export initiative to other ports,
in particular the ports of Mykolayiv and Olvia in the
Mykolayiv region. Ukraine has also launched the Grain
from Ukraine initiative to support the most vulnerable.
For that purpose, Ukraine will send 60 ships to Ethiopia,
the Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia, the Congo, Kenya,
Yemen and others. About $190 million have already
been raised for this initiative. Any country can join
and contribute to ensuring that Ukrainian grain will be
supplied to those in need.
On 21 July, the delegation of Belarus, Russia’s
proxy, made a deliberate attempt to prevent the debate on
sub-item (d) of agenda item 69, entitled “Strengthening
of international cooperation and coordination of efforts
to study, mitigate and minimize the consequences of
the Chernobyl disaster,” as well as the issuance of the
relevant report of the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly on this important issue (see A/76/PV.96).
We are grateful to United Nations Member States
for their strong stance. By rejecting draft decision
A/76/L.71, the General Assembly demonstrated that it
8/23

06/12/2022

has the right to know the truth and to get a credible
update on the current situation and its implications for
the international efforts to mitigate and minimize the
consequences of the Chornobyl disaster.
For a few decades, the Chornobyl issue has been a
symbol of unity of purpose for the world. By attacking
and seizing the Chornobyl nuclear power plant and
the exclusion zone in February, the Russian federation
opened another tragic page in the history of Chornobyl
and exposed the world to a new nuclear catastrophe.
During the attack on the Chornobyl nuclear power
plant, Russia’s military captured representatives of the
Ukrainian National Guard, while civilian personnel
were, in fact, held hostage. As a result of the temporary
occupation of the Chornobyl nuclear power plant, almost
every office space in the buildings on the territory
of the power plant was broken into and completely
pillaged. The hostilities in the territory of the exclusion
zone, as well as the digging of trenches by the Russian
military in close proximity to the area of the temporary
localization of radioactive waste known as the “Red
Forest”, caused an intense increase of radioactive dust
and aerosols. In addition, all construction projects have
been suspended, and their funding has been terminated.
Owing to Russia’s destructive actions at the
Chornobyl nuclear power plant, with the complicity of
Belarus, both of these countries have lost the right to
be co-penholders on sub-item (d) of agenda item 69,
entitled “Strengthening of international cooperation
and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster.”
The delegation of Ukraine will proceed, in close
consultation with United Nations Member States, with
this issue accordingly within the General Assembly.
We cannot help but mention the ongoing situation
in and around the temporarily occupied Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, the largest station in Europe.
As of today, Russia continues to regularly shell the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and holds its
personnel hostage. As a result of the latest missile attacks
by Russia against Ukrainian energy infrastructure, the
temporarily occupied Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant went into full blackout mode, with the start-up of
all diesel generators. Thus, for the first time in the 40year history of the Ukrainian nuclear power industry,
all nuclear power plant power units were shut down.
Also, for the first time ever, owing to a decrease in
frequency in the power system of Ukraine stemming
from Russia’s attacks against our energy infrastructure,
22-72704

06/12/2022

emergency protection was activated at the Rivne, South
Ukraine and Khmelnytskyi nuclear power plants. As a
result, all power units were automatically disconnected.
This shows once again that Russia’s missile terror poses
an unprecedented threat to Ukraine’s nuclear facilities
and may lead to a nuclear accident with potentially
grave consequences not only for Ukraine but for the
European continent and beyond.
Ukraine welcomes the establishment of the
presence of the International Atomic Energy Agency
at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and its most
recent extension. That is an important step, but as we
have stated on a number of occasions, the only way
to guarantee the nuclear safety and security of the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant remains a complete
demilitarization and de-occupation of the plant. Without
the immediate withdrawal of Russian troops from the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant and its vicinity,
including the city of Enerhodar, the grave risks to the
nuclear safety of Ukraine and beyond will remain.
Mrs. Monica (Bangladesh): The global humanitarian
overview for 2023 presents a very grim picture. A
record number of 339 million people are projected to
be in need of humanitarian assistance, which is almost
24 per cent higher than in 2022. Acute food insecurity
and imminent famine loom large, as 45 million people
in 37 countries face the real risk of starvation. More
than 1 per cent of the global population is displaced,
with the majority being hosted in developing and least
developed countries. Many of those countries face
compound humanitarian emergencies due to climate
change, conflicts, rising food and fuel prices, economic
downturns and debt crises.
The overview also reveals disturbing global trends
of extremes — extreme levels of violent conflict,
extreme poverty and hunger, extreme weather patterns
and frequent natural disasters. These are not only
escalating global humanitarian needs, but also having a
negative impact on the capacity of public institutions at
both the national and global levels to prevent, prepare
and respond to humanitarian emergencies.
Against that backdrop, we welcome today’s
general debate under agenda item 69 (a). We thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive reports
(A/77/72, A/77/318, A/77/361) and appreciate his useful
recommendations. We believe those recommendations
are going to help strengthen international efforts to
respond to the growing humanitarian needs around the
world more effectively and sustainably. We also take

A/77/PV.45

this opportunity to express our deepest appreciation and
pay tribute to all humanitarian personnel, volunteers
and local responders for their courage, dedication
and commitment to serving humankind in the face of
challenges and, often, threats.
As the Assembly is aware, Bangladesh is hosting
1.2 million forcibly displaced Rohingyas who fled
atrocities in Myanmar. Within our limited capacity,
we are providing necessary humanitarian support to
them. We have also arranged education based on the
curriculum of Myanmar in the camps for the Rohingya
children and a skill development programme for
the Rohingya women and youth. We appreciate the
assistance provided by the international community
and the humanitarian operations run by the relevant
United Nations agencies. However, we are concerned
that the growing humanitarian needs at the global
level are having negative impacts on the humanitarian
assistance programme for the Rohingyas.
Given the protracted nature of the crisis, we urge
our partners to scale up efforts for international burden
and responsibility sharing. At the same time, we also
stress the need for increased international attention
to the deteriorating situation in Myanmar in order to
create the conditions for the safe and sustainable return
of the displaced Rohingyas to their homeland. The
prolongation of the crisis will further compound the
already complex political and humanitarian situation
in the country and for all its neighbours hosting the
persecuted minorities, including my own country,
Bangladesh.
Bangladesh is a highly climate-vulnerable and
disaster-prone country. Climate change in particular is
affecting our food, energy, water, health and economic
security and is also directly and indirectly forcing
people to leave their homes and causing internal and
cross-border displacements. We see growing needs
for the collection and sharing of data and evidence on
displacements caused by multiple and intersecting sets
of factors with a view to a coordinated international
response to this challenge.
We attach high importance to the work of the United
Nations humanitarian and emergency relief assistance
entities and support international efforts to build
resilient societies in order to respond to humanitarian
challenges. Indeed, resolution 46/182 remains the
cornerstone of all such efforts. Allow me to underscore
a few points in this regard.

22-727049/23

A/77/PV.45

First, we recognize the importance of transition
from emergency response to preparedness and
resilience-building as fundamental to humanitarian
situations. In preparing for that transition, the
international community’s response mechanism should
be tailored in accordance with the national priorities
and the situation on the ground. And this should be
backed by sustainable, flexible and multi-year financing
support and the necessary expertise and technologies.
It is also critical to have good coordination between
national Governments and other relevant actors,
including United Nations agencies and local responders,
in addressing humanitarian situations on the ground.
Secondly, the international community must
undertake development activities with a focus on
building resilience and ultimately reducing dependency
on humanitarian aid. It is imperative to ensure better
cooperation between humanitarian and development
actors, including the international financial institutions,
to enable a smooth transition from relief dependency to
sustainable development. There must be a balance in
funding between humanitarian and development work
without their respective priorities being compromised.
Thirdly, we acknowledge the centrality of women
as first responders in humanitarian crises. Therefore,
it is very important to further strengthen genderresponsive policy development for disaster-risk
reduction and mitigation as well as in the planning and
implementation of all humanitarian response plans. In
Bangladesh, our National Action Plan on Women, Peace
and Security has integrated disaster risk reduction and
climate adaptation as the priority context.
Fourthly, rising food insecurity and the risk of
famine in many parts of the world, due to armed
conflicts, extreme weather events, including floods
and drought, as well as food, energy and economic
crises need to be addressed urgently through concerted
international efforts. We urge the development and
international partners to extend their support to the
countries that are shouldering a disproportionate
humanitarian burden and are also vulnerable to
shocks. We commend in that regard the initiatives of
the Secretary-General, including the establishment of
the Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy
and Finance, and appreciate the efforts of the Group in
addressing and mitigating rising food insecurity.
Finally, we remain concerned at the denial of
humanitarian access in many conflict situations and at
the indiscriminate armed attacks against humanitarian
10/23

06/12/2022

personnel and convoys, medical and peacekeeping
personnel and civilian infrastructure essential to
humanitarian operations. We would like to stress the
importance of ensuring accountability and justice in
the event of any reported violence.
The four draft resolutions (A/77/L.30, A/77/L.32,
A/77/L.34 and A/77/L.35) that are going to be
considered today after this debate are going to be
important instruments to better equip the humanitarian
arms of the United Nations. Our delegation thanks the
delegations of Sweden and the European Union for
their extensive work on the draft resolutions contained
in documents A/77/L.30 and A/77/L.35, which we are
pleased to sponsor. We are also grateful to the Chair
of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China for entrusting our
delegation with the coordination and facilitation of the
draft resolution on natural disasters, which is contained
in document A/77/L.32. We also express our sincere
appreciation to all members of the G-77 and China,
as well as other delegations, for their constructive
engagement and support during the negotiations. In that
regard I would also like to thank the Secretariat, the
secretariat of the G-77 and China, as well as the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for their
continued support during the negotiations stage. We
remain committed to the effective implementation of
these four important draft resolutions, which we very
much hope will be adopted by consensus today.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): Our multilateral order was
conceived and built in the aftermath of the Second World
War, as we became conscious that a crisis somewhere
could turn into conflict everywhere. We discovered
we were interconnected in the worst way possible and
decided to address it in the best way possible. One of the
most important manifestations of this consciousness is
humanitarian assistance to help those most vulnerable
when they are most in need.
You rightly described our world today, Mr. President,
as one in a permanent state of humanitarian emergency.
The Secretary-General also analysed these complex,
long-lasting, overlapping, nature-made or human-made
emergencies and crises. Palestine epitomizes them. It is
the most protracted refugee crisis, the most protracted
protection crisis, the most protracted justice crisis
in the history of the United Nations. The Palestinian
experience has been one of man-made, occupation-made
insecurity, from physical insecurity to food insecurity.
22-72704

06/12/2022

Our people suffered dispossession, displacement and
denial of rights 75 years ago and continue to suffer
from dispossession, displacement and denial of rights
75 years later.
We owe our survival and our ability to cope and to
carry on first and foremost to our people’s extraordinary
resilience and determination, but also to all those who
stood by our side all these years. From this podium,
allow me to express our deep gratitude to peoples
and Governments around the world for standing in
solidarity with Palestine. Allow me also to express our
deep appreciation to the United Nations for its critical
humanitarian role in Palestine, especially the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East, a lifeline for Palestine refugees. And of
course, I cannot help but also mention the host countries
of Palestine refugees. Allow us to thank the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, the
United Nations Development Programme, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
UN-Women, UNESCO, the World Health Organization,
the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations
Office for Project Services, the International Labour
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, the World Food Programme, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UN
Habitat. We also express our deep appreciation to the
States and organizations that have provided support to the
Palestinian people, and we recognize the humanitarian
actors, Palestinian and international, who endure great
risk and sacrifice to deliver aid to those who need it.
In particular, I would like to mention here the
six Palestinian human rights and humanitarian
non-governmental organizations that Israel has
outrageously labelled as terrorist organizations, with
their staff arrested and their offices ransacked in a failed
attempt to silence them and deter them from pursuing
their sacred mission. I want to salute Mohammad ElHalabi, who has been languishing in an Israeli prison
since 2016. United Nations human rights experts said of
his detention that
“convicting a humanitarian aid worker in serious
violation of the right to a fair trial and on baseless
charges of ‘terrorism’ is further evidence of Israel’s
egregious misuse of counter-terrorism measures to
suppress voices of human rights defenders”.
I want to salute Salah Hammouri, a son of Jerusalem
and a lawyer and advocate for prisoners’ rights who was
himself arbitrarily detained. Israel asked him to choose

A/77/PV.45

between prison and leaving the country, and he chose
prison in his homeland rather than freedom away from it.
Now Israel has revoked his right to reside in his own city,
Jerusalem, and wants to deport him from his homeland.
United Nations human rights experts consider that may
constitute a war crime and stress that
“such unilateral arbitrary measures taken by
Israel and Israeli authorities in retaliation against
Mr. Hammouri as a human rights defender
violate every principle and the very spirit of
international law”.
Stand with the six. Free Mohammad El-Halabi. Justice
for Salah.
There is no effective humanitarian response
without a political response that is grounded in the
law and upholds the law on the ground. I will give
one example out of thousands. In Masafer Yatta,
where 1,200 Palestinians are under threat of forcible
displacement and hundreds have already been forcibly
displaced, the international community helped build a
school to counter attempts to uproot the community.
The diplomatic corps visited the school in a sign of
solidarity and commitment. The very next day Israeli
bulldozers and occupation forces were deployed while
schoolchildren were attending class and the school was
destroyed in front of their eyes. Accountability is what
ensures that in this race bulldozers do not prevail over
humanity and legality.
When humankind is faced with a disease, it
searches for a cure. Here we know the cure. Now it
is just a matter of will to address climate change,
which is a clear and present danger, because there is
no possible humanitarian response if we do not. As
millions of our fellow humans suffer today and many
more will suffer tomorrow, we have a responsibility to
act, collectively and decisively. It is a matter of will to
uphold international law, our first line of defence. It is
a matter of will to end colonialism, foreign occupation
and apartheid, which are anachronistic and shameful
realities. It is a matter of will to resolve lingering crises,
to end famine and poverty, to address dire health and
education needs. It is a matter of will to build resilient
communities, resilient countries and a resilient planet.
There is a human and an economic cost to political
inaction that no humanitarian response can address.
The human cost of Israeli occupation is felt in every
Palestinian family, every home. It translates into
pain and loss, separation and subjugation. But let me

22-7270411/23

A/77/PV.45

speak of the economic cost of the occupation. The
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) estimates that the lost potential gross
domestic product in the West Bank alone in the last
two decades due to Israeli restrictions amounts to
$58 billion. That does not include the cost of the damage
to and destruction of Palestinian assets under Israeli
military operations and other measures. It does not
include the loss due to Israel’s full control of 60 per cent
of the West Bank, which is off limits for Palestinians,
including the Jordan Valley, our water reservoir and our
food basket. UNCTAD also estimates the cumulative
economic cost of the prolonged blockade of the Gaza
Strip and of military operations there at $16.7 billion.
The cost of the occupation since its onset can therefore
be estimated at several hundred billion dollars, more
than all of the humanitarian assistance provided to the
Palestinian people since 1948 several times over. In
parallel, the contribution of illegal settlements to the
economy of Israel is estimated at $30 billion a year. If
we want to end occupation, we must make sure that we
stop bearing its costs while Israel reaps its benefits.
Palestine can become aid-independent virtually
overnight once its political independence is effectively
guaranteed. We have human capital we are proud of.
We have natural resources. We have an entrepreneurial
spirit. That potential must be unleashed. That
only happens with freedom, sovereignty and selfdetermination, and must be our primary objective.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Sovereign Order of Malta.
Mr. Mc Guire (Sovereign Order of Malta): The
Sovereign Order of Malta thanks the President for
calling this meeting to discuss key comprehensive
reports published by the Secretary-General (A/77/72,
A/77/93, A/77/318 and A/77/361). Transparency
remains our most effective tool at the United Nations,
and the transparency shown in the reports enables us
to better understand and therefore better respond to
the natural disasters and humanitarian crises we will
continue to face.
According
to
the
World
Meteorological
Organization, the past eight years are on track to be
the eight warmest on record, fuelled by ever-rising
greenhouse-gas concentrations and accumulated heat.
Extreme heatwaves, droughts and devastating flooding
have affected millions and cost billions. In an annual
report published by the global reinsurance company
Swiss Re, it is believed that in 2021 the global economic
12/23

06/12/2022

losses from natural disasters such as floods, hurricanes
and wildfires exceeded $260 billion. This is a price that
is too often borne by the least affluent of our brothers
and sisters, and which, in its turn, consigns them and
future generations to deeper levels of poverty and
privation. But sometimes, even in moments of crisis,
opportunities are created. We must use this opportunity
to reflect on and reconsider our expenditure priorities.
We must step up to the plate when it comes to following
through on the funding promises made to our most atrisk nations following the twenty-seventh Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change and dealing with the economic and
social dimensions of the North-South divide. Some
here may disagree, but I ask, if not now, then when?
Across the world, Governments, sovereign
entities like ours and non-governmental organizations
are accelerating humanitarian and disaster relief
in concert with the United Nations, helping those
living amid armed conflict and natural disasters by
providing medical assistance and care for refugees
and by distributing medicines and basic equipment for
survival. By focusing on disaster risk reduction, we
implement measures to ensure that communities are
prepared when disasters strike. At the Order of Malta,
through our prevention programmes, we particularly
reach out to people who are the least able to flee from
war and conflict — the elderly and the disabled.
After an epochal level of rain and flooding
in recent months, and when 33 million people in
Pakistan continued to be affected by the monsoon,
our international aid agency, Malteser International,
assisted in rescue operations and the evacuation of
families in the severely affected province of Sindh. In
training sessions, our volunteers were trained to warn
the population of disasters at an early stage and then to
accompany people to higher ground during flooding.
We were one of many aid agencies that quickly came to
the aid of that beleaguered nation.
Furthermore, considering the Secretary-General’s
report entitled “Persistent legacy of the Chernobyl
disaster” (A/77/537), we join his call to ensure that no
one is left behind and unable to find help in the face
of such disasters. In recent years, we have donated
Order of Malta ambulances to affected areas and have
provided financial aid and rehabilitation services to
first- and second-generation victims of the meltdown.
Our response to that disaster has continued since 1986,
and we have not lost sight of the fact that 36 years after
22-72704

06/12/2022

the explosion, we are still making monumental efforts
to alleviate its social and environmental effects. Yet
in recent months we have all witnessed the potentially
very similar near-destruction of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power station. Humankind seemingly remains
unenlightened by its very own history.
We commend the focused discussion that the
United Nations has had on Palestine in recent weeks. As
is highlighted in the report (A/77/93), the social sector
there was hit hard by the coronavirus disease, and the
recent security escalations have significantly weakened
the safety net for the most vulnerable in their society.
In response, we are expanding our resources to protect
its most at-risk citizens, namely women, children and
refugees, and we are trying to provide them with hope
through employment and medical assistance.
We know there are no easy solutions to the
world’s problems, but the urgency of reconciling our
own political differences and seeking common action
in the face of those clear and present dangers, which
transcend political and cultural domains, must not be
lost on any of us. After all, the United Nations is our
last best hope, not only for coordinating humanitarian
and disaster relief but for energizing in all of us the will
and the power to break through our differences and put
the needs of the sick, the poor and the marginalized at
the centre of our efforts. It is they who demand justice
in regions that too often put national self-interest,
power and control before a concern for the victims of
our own disregard for the common good. Drawing on
our Christian heritage and tradition, we seek hope in
the words of the beatitudes — “Blessed are they who
hunger and thirst after justice, for they shall have their
fill”. If all of us expand our collective collaboration
with United Nations aid agencies and related bodies, we
can be on the right side of history and continue to earn
the respect of those who, tragically, are on the wrong
side of the economic divide.

A/77/PV.45

Throughout the year in this Hall we have heard
resounding statements that climate change is having
far-reaching consequences, affecting every aspect of
our lives and making humanitarian assistance more
unpredictable and complex. Yet nearly every day we
hear stories of the suffering caused by the effects of
climate change in communities across the world. The
climate crisis is not just an important issue for the
humanitarian community. It is the main issue because
the threats posed by climate change are growing
everywhere. They cause increasing humanitarian
needs and greater losses of life and livelihoods. They
reverse hard-won development gains and so demand an
unprecedented global response.
As the world’s largest and oldest humanitarian
network addressing disasters and climate-related
emergencies, we have been tackling the adverse effects
of climate change for a long time. We first talked about
it from this very rostrum in 2008 (see A/63/PV.29),
long before the climate crisis hit the headlines. It is
sad that after so many years I am standing here today
with the same message. The climate crisis is a threat to
humankind, and the humanitarian impact from climate
change will continue to escalate everywhere if we do
not act now. Over the past decade, 83 per cent of all
disasters were caused by climate-related events. We
estimate that 200 million people every year could need
international humanitarian aid by 2050 because of a
cruel combination of climate-related disasters and their
socioeconomic impact. If we let the number of people
in need increase, the cost of failing to act will be an
extra $29 billion for the humanitarian system, which is
already struggling to meet overlapping crises with half
its current financial needs.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies.

Climate change is today’s defining humanitarian,
development and human rights challenge, and its
impact could cancel the development and human rights
progress of recent decades and put further pressure on
a humanitarian system that is already stretched due to
overlapping crises. It is therefore important to further
study and understand climate risks for people and the
humanitarian effects of climate change, which are
becoming more frequent and intense with each new year.

Ms. Ghukasyan (International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the General
Assembly on behalf of the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) and its
192 National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.

Based on the work and operational experience of our
Red Cross and Red Crescent network, I want to urge all
Member States and partners to focus on two priorities.
The first is that locally led climate adaptation should be
scaled up. As the humanitarian impact of climate change
keeps growing, so too should the financing for local

22-7270413/23

A/77/PV.45

action for climate adaptation, ensuring that it reaches
the world’s most impoverished communities, which are
often the most affected and most at risk. No country
is immune to the climate crisis, and all Governments
need to invest in climate adaptation and disaster risk
reduction. However, some countries and communities
are more vulnerable than others. They have greater
exposure to extreme climate and weather events, higher
susceptibility to disasters and a lower capacity to adapt.
According to our latest analysis, climate adaptation
funding averages less than $1 per person in countries
where vulnerability is highest.
We welcome the new language in this year’s draft
resolution entitled “Strengthening of the coordination
of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations” (A/77/L.30), recognizing the importance of
enhancing access to international climate finance to
support mitigation and adaptation efforts in developing
countries, especially those that are particularly
vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change. But
urgent action is needed now, because climate finance
is not yet targeted to the people who need it most. We
therefore call on all Member States, United Nations
agencies and other partners to prioritize the most
vulnerable and commit to the accountable funding
allocation of climate finance for adaptation. That is best
done by developing and sharing robust frameworks that
target the countries most vulnerable to climate change
and account for funds spent on the basis of people’s
risks and needs.
Secondly, the amount of climate finance to local
actors should be increased and made easier to access.
Our new data shows that climate funding is not
reaching the local communities at the sharp end of
climate change, despite the political promises of that.
Currently, only about 10 per cent of adaptation funding
is granted at the local level, and with less than 2 per
cent of total climate funding. The top 30 countries that
receive most adaptation funding are not among the top
30 most vulnerable countries. Additionally, multilateral
humanitarian finance remains particularly difficult for
local organizations and groups to access. International
investment, attention and authority still flow mainly to
international organizations rather than the local actors
on the front lines of the fight against climate change.
The barriers to climate finance are still too high
for local communities, especially in what are already
fragile contexts. Determined political commitment is
needed to lower those barriers, and the IFRC stands
14/23

06/12/2022

ready to work with all Member States and other partners
on financially responsible and operationally effective
ways to do this. A key part of the solution will be
ensuring that climate, development and humanitarian
funds work together for a common purpose. We very
much welcome the agreement reached at the twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
to establish a new funding arrangement on loss and
damage. However, that must be complemented by
new and additional financing that reaches the people
and communities most at risk. That financing must be
predictable, adequate and flexible enough to address
risk and disaster as they happen.
We in the IFRC and our National Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies are steadfast in our dedication
to responding to the climate crisis by scaling up local
action and lowering the barriers to climate financing
for the people who need it most. We look forward
to continuing to work with the communities and
Governments affected to build their preparedness
and resilience in the face of today’s rising risks and
increasing impact.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the observer of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
Ms. Courtois (International Committee of the
Red Cross): We are again meeting this year at a time
of significant humanitarian challenges compounded
by armed conflicts, climate change and a global food
and energy crisis. Thousands of our colleagues are
mobilizing in places like Ukraine, Afghanistan, Syria,
Yemen, Israel and the occupied territories, the Sahel
region, Myanmar, Ethiopia, Iraq, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Haiti to uphold the
principles of humanity. In that context, the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) calls on all parties
to facilitate the work of medical and humanitarian
personnel, respect their safety and security and preserve
humanitarian space.
This year we would like to draw the attention of the
Assembly to three important issues that continue to shape
the operational landscape of impartial humanitarian
organizations. The first is urban warfare, including
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. The
urbanization of warfare is a reality for populations
and humanitarian agencies. Last month, more than
80 States adopted a milestone political declaration
to improve the protection of civilians from the use of
22-72704

06/12/2022

explosive weapons in populated areas, one of the major
causes of civilian harm in today’s armed conflicts. That
collective achievement has the potential to change the
fate of hundreds of thousands of people. It is a major
step towards strengthening the protection of civilians
and essential services and respect for international
humanitarian law. For the first time in an instrument of
this kind, States have acknowledged the gravity of the
problem and committed to taking concrete actions to
address it, including by restricting or refraining from
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. It sends
a powerful signal that belligerents cannot continue
fighting in populated areas the way they have until now.
That change in mindset and perspective is crucial.
Yet we are only at the beginning of a long process.
We urge Member States to work together to broaden
support for the Declaration and implement it effectively,
turning ambitious commitments into concrete
measures to alleviate human suffering during armed
conflicts and their aftermath. The ICRC will continue
to work closely with other parts of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement to prevent and respond to the
devastating and cumulative effects of urban warfare on
essential services such as water, sanitation, electricity
and health care. We also call on all Member States to
operationalize Security Council resolution 2573 (2021),
on the protection of essential services, and to comply
fully with international humanitarian law.
The second issue is digital threats. In recent years,
several cyber operations have affected States’ critical
civilian infrastructure, such as nuclear plants, electricity
grids and water systems, as well as humanitarian
organizations. The disruption or destruction of outerspace systems serving critical infrastructure could also
have broad consequences for the civilian population,
including humanitarian organizations. In addition,
the growing involvement of civilians and civilian
companies in military cyber operations and other digital
activities during armed conflict exposes them to harm
and risks undermining the principle of distinction, a
central tenet of international humanitarian law. In that
respect, the ICRC urges States to consider the risk of
adverse humanitarian consequences when making any
decision at a national or multilateral level regarding
cyber operations during armed conflict.
Essential questions on the protection of civilian
life require further discussion and clear positions
from States, taking into consideration the specific
characteristics of the information and communications

A/77/PV.45

technology and space environments. In that context, we
call on States to interpret and apply existing rules of
international humanitarian law in good faith to ensure
sufficient protection for civilians, civilian infrastructure
and civilian data. States should also take measures to
ensure that humanitarian organizations are protected
online just as they are offline, and that civilians are
protected against harmful information such as hate
speech. In October, the ICRC also announced that in
close collaboration with the Movement’s partners, it
would seek States’ and other stakeholders’ views on
whether and how to develop a digital emblem, meaning
a digital signal to identify medical facilities and the
ICRC and the Federation, and to provide an additional
layer of protection against cyber operations.
The third issue concerns obligations under
international humanitarian law related to prisoners
of war and missing persons in international armed
conflicts. In international armed conflicts, international
humanitarian law requires captured soldiers and
interned civilians to be treated humanely and allowed
to communicate with their families and the ICRC
granted regular access to them to verify the conditions
of their detention and restore contacts between those
persons and their families. In such conflicts, States
must account for protected persons, in particular by
sharing relevant information on prisoners of war,
wounded, sick and dead military personnel and other
protected persons in their hands via their national
information bureaus with the Central Tracing Agency
of the ICRC, intended for onward transmission to their
countries and families. States must also ensure that the
dead are treated with dignity and properly identified.
Measures such as these are critically important in
preventing people from going missing and fulfilling
the right of families to know the fate and whereabouts
of their relatives. In the light of resurgent international
armed conflicts, we call on all States to redouble their
political efforts and leadership to respect and ensure
respect for these fundamental provisions through their
concrete and timely implementation.
Now is the time to redouble diplomatic efforts to
put our shared humanitarian values at the centre of
international cooperation. Multilateralism matters.
International humanitarian law and humanitarian
principles matter. It is through renewed collective action
that we will preserve our common humanity and make a
difference in the lives of millions of people affected by
armed conflicts and other humanitarian emergencies.

22-7270415/23

A/77/PV.45

06/12/2022

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item. We shall now proceed
to consider draft resolutions A/77/L.30, A/77/L.32,
A/77/L.34 and A/77/L.35. Delegations wishing to make
statements in explanation of position before adoption
on any or all these draft resolutions are invited to do so
now in one intervention.

Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Portugal, the Republic
of Moldova, Romania, the Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America.

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.30, entitled “Strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations”.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.32?

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms.
Sharma
(Department
for
General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of draft
resolution A/77/L.30, and in addition to the delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan,
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Australia, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
El Salvador, the Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau,
India, Indonesia, Jordan, Libya, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Namibia, Palau, Qatar, San
Marino, Türkiye, Tuvalu, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.30?

The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.32,
entitled “International cooperation on humanitarian
assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development”. For the Assembly’s information, the
draft resolution has closed for e-sponsorship.
floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/77/L.32,
and in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of the
draft resolution: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
16/23

The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.34,
entitled “Assistance to the Palestinian people”. For the
Assembly’s information, the draft resolution has closed
for e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/77/L.34,
and in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of the
draft resolution: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Djibouti, Georgia, GuineaBissau, Iraq, Japan, Malaysia, Monaco, Mozambique,
North Macedonia, the Republic of Korea, Senegal,
Serbia and Switzerland.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.34?

Draft resolution A/77/L.30 was adopted
(resolution 77/28).

I give the
the Secretariat.

Draft resolution A/77/L.32 was adopted
(resolution 77/29).

Draft resolution A/77/L.34 was adopted
(resolution 77/30).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.35, entitled
“Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and
protection of United Nations personnel”. For the
Assembly’s information, the draft resolution has closed
for e-sponsorship.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/77/L.35, and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Andorra,
22-72704

06/12/2022

Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Chile, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, the
Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Palau, Panama, Peru, the Republic of Korea, Serbia,
the State of Palestine, Timor-Leste, Türkiye, Uruguay
and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.35?
Draft resolution A/77/L.35 was adopted
(resolution 77/31).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by representatives from their seats.
Mr. Al-Motaery (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I am honoured to deliver this statement
on behalf of the delegations of the Kingdom of Bahrain,
the Sultanate of Oman, the State of Kuwait, the State
of Qatar and my own country, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia. Our States express their thanks and appreciation
to the delegation of Sweden for the efforts exerted
in facilitating draft resolution A/77/L.30, entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”.
Our States’ delegations joined consensus on the
draft resolution because they believe in the importance
of the issues that it addresses. However, with regard to
the topics on reproductive and sexual health needs and
services, especially as contained in paragraphs 62 and
63 of the draft resolution, our countries consider that
those topics must be considered in line with our national
legislation and the religious and cultural values of our
society. We ask that this statement be recorded in the
official record of the meeting.
Ms. Karmazinskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We traditionally join the consensus on
resolutions concerning humanitarian personnel, but
I would like to touch on the International Criminal
Court. This judicial body is deteriorating. It is far
from the high ideals of justice enshrined in the Rome
Statute. In the 20 years of its existence, there have
been scandalous falsifications and unprecedented use
of incorrect and politicized approaches. We therefore
dissociate ourselves from operative paragraph 8 and
the relevant preambular paragraphs in resolution 77/31
concerning this, and we do not believe that we can accept

A/77/PV.45

the provisions related to the International Criminal
Court. We would like this to be reflected in the record
of the meeting.
Mr. Sahraoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): I
deliver this statement in explanation of my delegation’s
positions on the resolutions adopted today under agenda
item 69.
Humanitarian work occupies an extremely
important place in the agenda of the United Nations
and its agencies owing to its profound impact on the
lives of persons needing humanitarian assistance
and the recurrence of natural disasters and armed
conflicts, which make the burden even heavier for relief
organizations. We call on the international community
to demonstrate greater solidarity in order to provide
humanitarian aid to people in vulnerable situations.
My country’s delegation joined the consensus
on — and welcomes the adoption of — resolutions 77/28,
77/29 and 77/31. We would like to express our sincere
thanks to the facilitators for the efforts they have made,
which enabled us to reach consensus on those draft
resolutions. They will undoubtedly contribute to the
enhancement of humanitarian work in a manner that
will meet the needs of persons while giving due respect
to the principles and rules of humanitarian work.
However, we would like to clarify our position on some
of their contents.
First, with regard to references to sexual and
reproductive health care, we would like to stress that
this concept only refers to health-care services that
are in line with the national legislation and religious
and cultural values of our society. At the international
level, such services must be in line with the agreedupon Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development and the
policies agreed upon internationally and adopted by the
General Assembly.
Secondly, with regard to the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, we would like
to stress that the Compact is not a legally binding
document. While we agree with its objectives, which
aim to deal with the structural reasons for migration,
such as development, the negative impact of climate
change and the degradation of the environment, we
also confirm the sovereign right of countries to adopt
legislation, as they see fit, to manage the migration
dossier. We ask that this statement be recorded in the
official record of the meeting.

22-7270417/23

A/77/PV.45

Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): I take the floor to explain the
position of my delegation in relation to resolution 77/29,
entitled “International cooperation on humanitarian
assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development” and its paragraph 17. As my delegation
explained during the consultations on the draft, there is
prickly evidence on and no direct causal link between
climate change and displacement. Assumptions linking
these two phenomena as a single or main cause actually
hinders the focus on the root causes of displacement
and other human mobility. Indeed, the agreed language
from various General Assembly resolutions, including
in relation to internally displaced people, migration and
disaster risk reduction, refers to the adverse effects of
climate change as one of the risk multipliers or push
factors in certain instances and among other drivers.
That also reflects the position of my delegation.
Mrs. Fangco (Philippines): The Philippines was
pleased to join the consensus on resolution 77/31,
entitled “Safety and security of humanitarian personnel
and protection of United Nations personnel”. We express
profound appreciation to all humanitarian personnel and
those who take part in humanitarian and peacekeeping
operations. We strongly condemn all acts of violence,
attacks and threats against all humanitarian workers,
their transport, equipment and medical facilities.
The Philippines, however, disassociates itself from
all paragraphs mentioning the International Criminal
Court (ICC), including preambular paragraph 33 and
paragraph 8 in the resolution.

06/12/2022

displacement. Nevertheless, we would like to take the
opportunity to put on record our position concerning
preambular paragraph 13 of resolution 77/29, which
contains references to the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration. We would like to recall
that Hungary did not endorse the Global Compact and
does not participate in its implementation. Therefore,
we cannot accept any reference to the Compact in
international documents. Therefore, Hungary would
like to disassociate itself from preambular paragraph
13 of the resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after adoption.
I now give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of the Holy See.
Ms. Maniezzi (Holy See): The Holy See welcomes
the consensus-based adoption of resolutions 77/28,
77/29 and 77/31.

We request that this statement be made part of the
record of this meeting.

Regarding resolution 77/28 on “Strengthening of
the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations”, the Holy See thanks the
Permanent Mission of Sweden for presenting the text
and for facilitating the informal consultations. The
Holy See welcomes the positive additions included
this year, in particular the recognition of the initiatives
and efforts by the Secretary-General and the United
Nations system to address and mitigate rising food
insecurity. The Holy See also welcomes that this year’s
text includes language about the critical importance
of enhancing the capacities of the United Nations
humanitarian system and humanitarian organizations
to reach people in need. Another crucial element is the
acknowledgement that increased efforts are needed
to address the root causes of internal displacement,
achieve durable solutions and prevent, protect and
improve assistance to internally displaced persons.
The Holy See recommends that, in future years, all
announcements regarding this process go through
official United Nations communication channels. This
is to ensure transparency and inclusivity, so that all
delegations are promptly informed about every step of
the negotiation process and therefore can participate in
the informal consultations.

Mr. Ivanyi (Hungary): Hungary is deeply
concerned about the increase in the impact of natural
disasters, resulting in losses of life worldwide, food
insecurity, water- and sanitation-related challenges,
shelter and infrastructure losses, as well as

Regarding resolution 77/29, on “International
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development”, the Holy
See thanks the Group of 77 and China for presenting
the text and expresses its appreciation to the Permanent

Notwithstanding our withdrawal from the Rome
Statue, the Philippines reaffirms its commitment to
protecting humanitarian and United Nations personnel
and to applying the full force of the law against persons
who attack them. The Rome Statute is anchored on
the principle of complementarity, not substitution. It
recognizes that States have the first responsibility and
right to prosecute international crimes and that the ICC
may only exercise jurisdiction where national legal
systems fail or are unable to do so. Since we are able and
willing, and our courts are fully functioning, we do not
accept the ICC as a substitute for our national courts.

18/23

22-72704

06/12/2022

Mission of Bangladesh for facilitating the informal
consultations on the resolution. The Holy See welcomes
the calls in this year’s text to prevent famine and prevent
and address food insecurity and malnutrition, their
underlying causes related to disasters and the adverse
effects of climate change. The Holy See is also pleased
to see that the text includes language about the need to
identify and apply lessons learned and best practices
for major sudden-onset and slow-onset natural disasters
to improve humanitarian system-wide responses and
outcomes for people in need.
Finally, the Holy See, in conformity with its nature and
particular mission, is obliged to express two reservations
on the following concepts used in resolutions 77/28 and
77/29. First, the Holy See understands the terms “sexual
and reproductive health” and “sexual and reproductive
health-care services” as applying to a holistic concept of
health. It does not consider abortion, access to abortion
or access to abortifacients as a dimension of these terms.
Secondly, with regard to “gender” and its derivates,
the Holy See understands the term to be grounded in
biological sexual identity and difference, male or female.
The Acting President: The exercise of the right of
reply has been requested. May I remind members that
statements made in exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to five
minutes for the second intervention and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Aliaa Ali (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We cannot cover all the facets of the humanitarian
suffering of the Syrian people without indicating the
systematic and continued looting of Syria’s wealth,
including its oil, wheat and agricultural harvests, being
perpetrated by the United States occupying forces. It is
interesting to hear the claims being made by the United
States delegate, according to which the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic is hindering the delivery of
humanitarian aid. The Syrian Government is sparing no
effort to guarantee protection for humanitarian convoys
crossing the lines and has lost some of its best men in its
effort to protect these convoys.
I would like to indicate here what was mentioned
by the Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of
unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human
rights. These unhumanitarian, illegal and unethical
measures deepen the suffering of the Syrian people and
lead to an extreme shortage of medications, specialized
medical equipment and limited access to food, water,
electricity and fuel.

A/77/PV.45

(spoke in English)
Only when the United States withdraws its forces
from Syria, stops supporting separatist militias
and lifts its unilateral coercive measures, which
contribute to the suffering of Syrians, can it talk about
humanitarian assistance.
Ms. Karmazinskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would like to use this right of reply in
order to repudiate the open speculation that has taken
place, in particular by Ukraine, regarding events at the
Chornobyl nuclear power plant. We strongly reject the
misinformation of Ukraine and their Western backers
who are accusing us of endangering the security of
Ukrainian nuclear facilities. Not a single real fact was
presented in this regard, only baseless speculation.
In April and June, the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) missions to Chornobyl showed that
radiation levels at the plant were within the normal
range. Russian forces took control of the plant in such
a way as to pose no threat to its security. Russian
forces kept the plant safe between 24 February and
31 March. There was no interference with the work of
its operators — it continued to be run by its Ukrainian
personnel. No workers were pressured in any way. All
of the necessary conditions were fulfilled for them to
perform their duties as usual.
Complications that arose related solely to the
actions of Ukraine, which created artificial obstacles for
personnel rotation. In particular, the Kyiv regime blew
up a bridge that was used to ensure the safe passage of
workers from the city of Slavutych to the power plant.
Formations controlled by the Kyiv regime orchestrated
provocations aimed at creating an emergency situation
at the power plant. For example, on 9 March, Ukraine
deliberately damaged an electricity line that provided
supply to the cooling system of the storage facility for
spent nuclear fuel located on the territory of the plant.
The consequences of this diversion were swiftly dealt
with. Backup diesel generators were used, and later,
in agreement with Minsk, the electricity supply was
replenished from the Belarusian power grid. Having
completed the assigned tasks, Russian divisions returned
the station to full Ukrainian control. At the time, the
management of the power plant made no complaints
about the manner in which the Russian military acted,
which is confirmed in the relevant document.
The main threat to the security of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant is the ongoing shelling by Ukrainian
armed forces who, since mid-July, have carried out

22-7270419/23

A/77/PV.45

attacks on the station and created real threats to its
security, including the risk of a technical accident with
radioactive substances. The most recent example of
this was the shelling of the Zaporizhzhya plant by the
Armed Forces of Ukraine on 19 and 20 November. We
provided the relevant information in official Security
Council and General Assembly documents. However,
the United States of America and its allies continue to
ignore what happened and are in no hurry to reason
with the Zelenskyy regime, which is playing games
with the lives of people in the country and across all of
the European continent.
Russia did everything that it could to do to
effectively and safely carry out the IAEA mission on
1 September to the station, despite the provocations
from the Kyiv regime. After the visit to the plant, the
Director General of the IAEA proposed an initiative
to create an operational and physical nuclear safety
protection zone around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant. The aim was to prevent any threat to the station
as a result of the ongoing attacks by the Ukrainian
armed forces. We support this initiative in principle,
but we must agree on the parameters of the zone so that
it does not risk lead to a lower level of protection or
an increased threat of terrorist acts. The State that are
now again allowing themselves anti-Russian tirades are
turning a blind eye to the provocative actions of the
Kyiv regime towards the Chornobyl and Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plants. That threatens the security of
the entire European continent. Such permissiveness by
Western countries creates a false idea for Kyiv that such
actions will remain unpunished and will also encourage
new, even more dangerous actions. Those countries
will therefore share responsibility for those actions and
consequences with the Kyiv regime.
Ms. Shmat (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of Belarus would like to use its right of
reply relating to this agenda item. We are sure that
the international cooperation on Chornobyl must
be continued exclusively in a spirit of coordination
and partnership. That should not be a platform
for politicization, manipulation or aggravating
confrontation. The consequences of the accident at the
power plant have caused us shared pain, and overcoming
it is our common goal. The people of Belarus are
grateful for assistance for the sustainable development
of the territories that have suffered as a result of the
accident at Chornobyl — this assistance complements
the national efforts of all States concerned.
20/23

06/12/2022

Belarus remains committed to international
cooperation on Chornobyl based on dialogue and
partnership. We are grateful to the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency for the
active participation of the Agency in providing, as
requested, support in ensuring nuclear and radiation
safety at Ukraine’s nuclear facilities. We are pleased
that the situation at the Chornobyl nuclear power plant
is returning to normal.
For its part, Belarus has done everything it can to
organize ongoing and reliable electric supply to the
station’s facilities, which had been cut off in March.
In March and April, Belarus provided 12.5 million
kilowatts of electricity to the station, which made it
possible to prevent an environmental disaster in the
region. Belarus has always been willing to support
and engage in cooperation. Along with Russia and
Ukraine, Belarus itself suffered the consequences of
the Chornobyl disaster. We understand better than
anyone the possible consequences of those types of
events. We continue to hope that nuclear security and
guarantees thereof will remain an absolute priority for
all stakeholders.
On the resolution, Belarus made its position clear
in July when we considered the decision of the General
Assembly on the rollover of sub-item (d) of agenda
item 69, entitled “Strengthening of international
cooperation and coordination of to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster”,
to the next session.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 69 and its sub- items (a) to (d).
Agenda item 14
Culture of peace
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take action on the draft resolution contained in
document A/77/L.10.
Before we proceed to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to inform members that the
Assembly will hold a debate on this item at a later date
to be announced.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Turkmenistan to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.10.
Mr. Eyeberdiyev (Turkmenistan): It is my honour,
on behalf of the delegation of Turkmenistan, to
22-72704

06/12/2022

introduce the draft resolution entitled “International
Year of Dialogue as a Guarantee of Peace, 2023”,
contained in document A/77/L.10.
At the outset, let me express our sincere gratitude
to all delegations for their productive engagement
and the constructive inputs they brought to the
negotiations, which resulted in the substantive text of
this draft resolution.
We note with appreciation the broad interregional
support for the document submitted. Thus, in addition
to the initial co-sponsors, more than 60 countries have
joined the list.
Throughout the negotiation process on the text, we
made every effort to maintain a constructive atmosphere
and reach broad consensus.
The Charter of the United Nations calls upon all
Members to maintain international peace, develop
friendly relations, carry out international cooperation
and resolve their disputes by peaceful means through
negotiation and dialogue. In developing those
principles and goals, the President of Turkmenistan,
in December 2021 in Ashgabat, put forward the global
initiative “Dialogue is a Guarantee of Peace” during the
Forum of Peace and Trust. That idea directly correlates
with the initiative of the Secretary-General to form
an ambitious New Agenda for Peace, which includes
reducing global strategic risks, investing in conflict
prevention and peacemaking, and supporting regional
preventive measures.
The philosophy of “dialogue is a guarantee
of peace” is aimed at pooling the efforts of the
international community in strengthening the tradition
of the peaceful and trusting coexistence of nations,
restoring the values, views and traditions relating to
preserving and promoting peace, and establishing an
extensive culture of peace in international relations.
The draft resolution entitled “International Year of
Dialogue as a Guarantee of Peace, 2023” is a product
of comprehensive consultations that takes into account
the constructive opinions and proposals of all member
countries. The document reflects the main principles
of the Charter of the United Nations: to settle disputes
by peaceful means and to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. This document reaffirms
that inclusive dialogue in its various manifestations
plays an important role in strengthening relations and
cooperation among Member States.

A/77/PV.45

The text of the draft resolution emphasizes the special
role of women and youth as well as the contribution of
children and older persons to the promotion of a culture
of peace and in particular the importance of women’s
active participation in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in the promotion of a culture of peace,
including in post-conflict situations.
We believe that broad and sustainable dialogue will
contribute to mobilizing the efforts of the international
community to strengthen peace and trust among peoples,
based on mutual understanding and cooperation, with a
view to building solidarity and harmony.
In that regard, our objective is to call upon the
international community to promote the ideals of
peace and trust and to demonstrate its commitment to
dialogue in every possible way.
The operative part of the draft resolution declares
2023 the International Year of Dialogue as a Guarantee
of Peace and calls on the community of nations to resolve
conflicts through inclusive dialogue and negotiation in
order to ensure the strengthening of peace as a value
that promotes sustainable development, security and
human rights.
It is a great honour to inform the Assembly that
in a few days, on 11 December, Turkmenistan will
host an international conference entitled “Dialogue is
a Guarantee of Peace”. We strongly believe that the
convening of that forum in neutral Turkmenistan in
today’s geopolitical conditions is a timely and necessary
step towards sustainable peace to put multilateral
dialogue on a peaceful, diplomatic course. That is part
of a long process, and now we are continuing the global
campaign to promote a culture of peace based on the
results of the International Year of Peace and Trust, in
2021, initiated by Turkmenistan.
The States Members of the United Nations and
international, regional and subregional organizations
are invited to participate in that important conference. It
will also be broadcast in real time on Internet platforms.
We are convinced that Turkmenistan’s initiative to
launch in 2023 the Global Campaign for Dialogue as a
Guarantee of Peace will make a significant contribution
to the development of equal, mutually respectful and
trusting ties between nations.
We thank the delegations that co-sponsored the
draft resolution that we are considering today and look
forward to reaching consensus on it.

22-7270421/23

A/77/PV.45

06/12/2022

The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/77/L.10.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “International Year of Dialogue as a
Guarantee of Peace, 2023”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to the delegations listed in
document A/77/L.10, the following countries have also
become co-sponsors: Afghanistan, Angola, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad,
Chile, China, Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, the Gambia,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya,
Maldives, Mali, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, the Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Türkiye,
the United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam and Yemen.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.10?
Draft resolution A/77/L.10 was adopted
(resolution 77/32).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote or position after the voting, I would
like to remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Hamilton (United States): The United States
firmly supports efforts to promote dialogue and
cooperation as a means of promoting peace. We thank
Turkmenistan for having submitted resolution 77/32 on
an important topic.
We would like to take this opportunity to clarify
our position on the following issues.
First, the United States has not seen evidence
that the policy of neutrality plays an important role in
the development of peaceful and mutually beneficial
22/23

relations among countries and contributes to the
strengthening of international peace and security.
Collective self-defence is an inherent right reflected in
the Charter of the United Nations. Defensive security
alliances promote international peace and security
by deterring aggression and violence. They protect
territorial integrity and provide conditions for political
independence, principles enshrined in the Charter.
Alliances and alignments based on democratic values
and transparency can also be effective at preventing
aggression and strengthening peace and security. We are
open to conversations about the links between neutrality
and the goals of the resolution. We believe that this
resolution would have been stronger and more effective
if it referred to tangible goals supported by data.
Secondly, and similarly, the United States supports
the idea of friendship to all and malice towards none, as
referenced in preambular paragraph 14, but the language
in that paragraph does not explicitly link and clarify how
that will contribute to strengthening international peace.
Finally, resolution 1980/67, paragraph 11, of the
Economic and Social Council states:
“A final decision on a proposal for an
international year should be taken by the General
Assembly, not earlier than one full year after the
introduction of the proposal, thus allowing the views
of all Member States to be taken into account and
allowing the competent organs to make a thorough
assessment of the proposal in the light of its practical
desirability and the probability of real results”.
Any decision on international years or dates should
be announced a full year ahead of time, meaning that
the first possible year to observe this International Year
would be 2024, not 2023. Member States should have
had more time to reflect on the commitments that this
type of announcement entails.
Nevertheless, we reiterate our appreciation for the
efforts of Turkmenistan in submitting this resolution
in support of dialogue in establishing and maintaining
peace. The United States remains committed to
working with Member States to promote tolerance
and understanding.
Ms. Sherys-Rivet (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom would like to thank Turkmenistan
for bringing forward resolution 77/32 and for its
helpfulness in coordinating important discussions
throughout negotiations. As we look ahead to 2023 as
22-72704

06/12/2022

the International Year of Dialogue as a Guarantee of
Peace, we must recall what the Charter of the United
Nations says about the principles of territorial integrity,
sovereignty and peaceful settlements of disputes. Actions
must follow words. We cannot truly have a year of peace,
and we cannot implement this resolution unless and until
Russia stops its illegal war in Ukraine.
Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): The delegation of Ukraine
has joined the consensus on resolution 77/32, entitled
“International Year of Dialogue as a Guarantee of
Peace”. We commend the efforts of Turkmenistan in
promoting that important topic.
We have always considered dialogue to be an
important element of peace efforts. Since the beginning
of the Russian aggression against my country, in
2014, Ukraine has been committed to a peaceful
settlement through dialogue and negotiation. Instead
of reciprocating Ukraine’s peaceful aspirations, Russia
started a military build-up along our borders at the end
of the previous year and remained deaf to our attempts
to get back on a diplomatic track.
On the eve of the invasion, President Zelenskyy
publicly addressed the Russian leader, calling for
dialogue and talks on the escalation. There was no
response to that call, just as there been none to any
of our previous attempts. Several hours later, Russian
rockets and bombs hit peaceful Ukrainian cities and
villages. The invasion had begun.
Now, more than nine months later, Russian troops
are still invading Ukraine, although they have had to
flee from several regions. Russian missiles and shells
continue to target Ukrainians, our homes, schools,
hospitals, industrial facilities and critical infrastructure.
Just yesterday, more than 70 missiles were launched
from Russian aircraft and ships to destroy critical

A/77/PV.45

infrastructure throughout Ukraine. All Ukrainian
regions have suffered from emergency power outages,
and millions of people were left without electricity, heat
or water, in freezing temperatures. That was Moscow’s
deliberate goal.
We are therefore baffled to find the aggressive
State of Russia and its accomplice, Belarus, on the
list of sponsors of resolution 77/32, a list that contains
many Member States that we respect as responsible and
peace-loving nations. A rotten apple that could spoil
the whole barrel, Russia discredits all the decent things,
institutions and initiatives it touches, speaks about or
joins, or it tries to manipulate or misuse them for its
aggressive purposes.
In that regard, Ukraine, while supporting the
initiative of declaring 2023 the International Year of
Dialogue as a Guarantee of Peace, harbours no illusions
that it will have an effect on Russia’s aggressive stance
or make Moscow withdraw its troops from the sovereign
territory of Ukraine or stop killing Ukrainians.
At the same time, there is no doubt that Moscow
will be forced to halt its aggression and to quit Ukraine
and that it will be brought to justice for the crimes that
its troops have committed and continue to commit.
The initiative that we have just supported should serve
a reminder that sustainable peace is possible only if
we remain resolute in defending the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and in responding to
violations thereof until they are stopped.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after the voting.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 14.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

22-7270423/23
