Reeolad_. adopted on the re)NIIU of the Special Polltieal Committee

(f) To cease all c~peration with South Africa in
nuclear and other modem technological research, particularly research with military applications;
10. Condemns the policy of "bantustans" imposed
by the South African regime and cans upon an Governments and organizations not to accord any form of
recognition to any institution or authority created

thereby;
11. Requests the Secretary-Genera) and the speciaJi7.ed agencies to take steps, as appropriate, to deny aU
facilities tot and ~peration with, companies and
organizations which assist the South African regime
or South African companies with loans, technical assistance or other means;
12. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid to keep under review the conaboration of States
and economic and other interests with South Africa,
as wen as an aspects of the implementation of the
United Nations resolutions on apartheid in South Africa, with a view to facilitating and promoting the universal application of economic and other sanctions
ag~nst South Afric~;
13. Commends all those Governments and organizations which have provided humanitarian, educational,
political and other assistance to the oppressed people
of South Africa and their liberation movements in
their struggle for freedom and equality, and appeals
to all Governments and organizations to provide
greater assistance in that legitimate struggle.
2320th plenary meeting
16 December 1974
3330 (XXIX). Working Group on the Financing
of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near

East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2656 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2728 (XXV) of 15 December 1970, 2791
(XXVI) of 6 December 1971, 2964 (XXVII) of
13 December 1972 and 3090 (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973,
Having considered the report of the Working Group
on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East,lll
Taking into account the annual report of the Com-

missioner-Genera) of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
covering the period from 1 July 1973 to 30 June
1974, 111
Gravely concerned at the alarming financial situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, imminently
endangering the essential minimum services being provided to the Palestine refugees,
Emphasizing the urgent need for extraordinary efforts in order to maintain, at least at their present
minimum level, the activities of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East,
Ill Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Senion, Annexes, agenda item 38, document A/9815.
111 Ibid., Twenty-ninth Seuion, Supp/eme:il No. !J {.A.196 I J)

39

1. Commends the Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for its work;
2. Notes with appreciation the report of the Working Group;
3. Requests the Working Group to continue its efforts, in co-operation with the Secretary-General and
the Commissioner-Genera), for the financing of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for a further period of one
year;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary services and assistance to the Working Group
for the conduct of its work.
2322nd plenary meeting
17 December 1974
3331 (XXIX). United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3089 B (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973 and all previous resolutions referred to
therein, including resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948,
Taking note of the annual report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the _Near East, covering the period from 1 July 1973 to 30 June 1974,17
l. Notes with deep regret that repatriation or compensation of the refugees as provided for in paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (Ill)
has not been effected, that no substantial progress has
been made in the programme endorsed by the Assembly in paragraph 2 of resolution 513 (VI) of 26 January 1952 for the reintegration of refugees either by
repatriation or resettlement and that, therefore, the
situation of the refugees continues to be a matter of
serious concern;
2. Expresses its than'cs to the Commissioner-General and to the staff of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
for their continued faithful efforts to provide essential
services for the Palestine refugees, and to the specialized agencies and private organizations for their valuable work in assisting the refugees;
3. Notes with regret that the United Nations Con-.
ciliation Commission for Palestine has been unable to
find a means of achieving progress in the implementation of paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution
194 (III) and requests the Commission to exert continued efforts towards the implementation of that paragraph and to report as appropriate, but no later than
1 October 1975;
4. Directs attention to the unprecedented seriousness of the financial position of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, as outlined in the Commissioner-General's report;
5. Notes with concern that, despite the commendable and successful efforts of the Commissioner-General to collect additional contributions which met the
11 /bid.
