42

General Assembly -

Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, as appropriate :
(a) To give high priority to the opening of information centres or arranging for adequate information facilities in the less-developed areas, particularly in the
newly independent countries and Trust and Non-SelfGoverning Territories, by effecting economies in other
directions ;
( b) To intensify his efforts to achieve a more effective regional representation at the policy-making level
of the Office of Public Information ;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its sixteenth
session on the progress made in implementing the
present resolution.
954th plenary merting,
18 December 1960.

1559 (XV). Geographical distribution of the staff
of the Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the geographical distribution of the staff of
the Secretariat,28
Recalling Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of
the United Nations,
Reaffirming the third paragraph of the preamble to
General Assembly resolution 153 (II) of 15 November
1947, namely:
"Whereas, in view of its international character and
in order to avoid undue predominance of national
practices, the policies and administrative methods of
the Secretariat should reflect, and profit to the highest
degree from, assets of the various cultures and the
technical competence of all Member nations",
Taking into account the various views expressed by
delegations during the discussion of this question.
Recognizing that the present method of determining
the desirable range of posts for each Member State on
the basis of the scale of assessments to the United
Nations budget needs review,
Noting the steady increase in the proportion of the
fixed-term staff of the Secretariat,
1. Requests the Committee of Experts appointed by
General Assembly resolution 1446 (XIV) of 5 December 1959 to study the categories of posts subject to
geographical distribution and the criteria for determining the range of posts for each Member State with a
view to securing a wide geographical distribution of the
staff of the Secretariat, taking into account, inter alia,
the relative importance of various posts, and to report
to the Assembly at its sixteenth session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his
efforts to implement the General Assembly resolutions
on the question of the geographical distribution of the
staff of the Secretariat ;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its sixteenth session on the
implementation of the above-mentioned provisions.
954 plenary meeting,
18 December 196fJ.
23 Jbid., agenda item 60, documents A/C.5/833 and Addl
and A/C.5/834.

Fifteenth Session

1560 (XV). Annual report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the annual report of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board ;24
2. Approves, with effect from 1 May 1960, the draft
agreement between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development on the transfer of pension rights of
participants in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund and of participants in the Staff Retirement Plan
of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development ;211
3. Approves, with effect from 1 May 1960, the draft
agreement between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the International Monetary Fund on the
transfer of pension rights of participants in the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and of participants
in the Staff Retirement Plan of the International
Monetary Fund. 26
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.
1561 (XV). United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the expert group 27
appointed by the Secretary-General to undertake a
comprehensive review of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1310 (XIII) of 10 December 1958, the report
of the United Nations Toint Staff Pension Board 28 and
the proposals made by the Secretary-General, as a result
of those reports, in conjunction with the executive he:1ds
of the other member organizations and in co-operation
with the Board, 29
Agrees that the expert group has accomplished a
difficult task with skill and thoroughness, and places on
record its warm appreciation of the services of the
group;

I
PENSIONABLE REMUNERATION OF THE STAFF

1. Decides that, for the purposes of contributions
payable to the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund,
the pensionable remuneration of the staff with effect
from 1 April 1961 shall be established as follows:
(a) Base pensionable remuneration:
(i) For staff who are subject to the Staff Assessment
Plan under staff regulation 3.3, the base pensionable remuneration shall be the annual rate of the
United Nations gross salary, expressed in United
States dollars or such other currency as may be
agreed between the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board and the organization, applicable
to the grade and step (including any language
allowance) of the official, less one half of the
24 Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/4469 and
Corr.I).
25 Ib;d., Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 62, document A/C.5/846, annex A.
26 Ibid., annex B.
2 7 Ibid., agenda item 63, document A/4427.
28 Ibid., document A/4467.
29 Ibid., document A/4468.

43

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

amount of staff assessment deductible from such
gross salary under the Staff Assessment Plan;
(ii) For staff who have been exempted from staff
assessment under the provisions of paragraph (a)
of staff regulation 3.3, base pensionable remuneration shall be the annual rate of salary, expressed in United States dollars or such other
currency as may be agreed between the Board
and the organization, applicable to the grade and
step ( including any language allowance) of the
official;
( b) Adjustments to the base pensionable remuneration :
(i) There shall be added to the base pensionable
remuneration, calculated as above, the net amount
of any non-resident's allowance which may be
payable, expressed in United States dollars or
such other currency as may be agreed between
the Boatd and the organization ;
(ii) In the case of staff in the Professional category
or above, who are subject to the post adjustment
system under annex I of the Staff Regulations,
the base pensionable remuneration shall be
adjusted in multiples of 5 per cent whenever the
weighted average of the post adjustment classifications of the headquarters and regional offices
of.the member organizations varies by 5 per cent
measured from 1 January 1956; such adjustment
shall be effective from the 1 January following
the date on which each 5 per cent variation in
the weighted average was accomplished.
2. Decides that, for the purposes of benefits payable
to. participants leaving the Fund after 31 March 1961,
final average remuneration shall·, subject to the option
granted under article X.4 of the Regulations of the
Fund set out in section II of the present resolution,
be calculated as though the pensionable remuneration
of such participants had been established in accordance
with paragraphs 1 (a) and 1 ( b) above from the date
of entry into the Fund; in the case of staff subject to
paragraph 1 ( b) (ii) above, the base pensionable remuneration shall be deemed to have been increased by 5
per cent with effect from 1 January 1959;
3. Recommends that, in the interest of maintaining
the common system of salaries, allowances and conditions
of service, the other member organizations in the Fund
take appropriate action to ensure that the pensionable
remuneration of their staffs be increased to the same
extent as that of United Nations staff;

II
AMENDMENTS TO THE REGULATIONS OF THE FUND

Resolves that the Regulations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund shall be amended as follows
with effect from 1 April 1961:
ARTICLE

I

(Definitions)
Add the following new paragraphs:
"8. 'Survivor' means a widow, or a disabled widower,
or a child, or a secondary dependant, who survives the
participant or former participant and is entitled to a benefit
under the present Regulations.
"9. 'Secondary dependant' means a mother, or a father,
or an unmarried brother, or an unmarried sister, who was
recognized as a dependant under the staff rules of a member

organization and in respect of whom a dependency allowance
was being paid to a participant at the time his service ceased.
"10. 'Basic benefit' means the retirement or disability
benefit to which a participant is entitled when he leaves the
service, or, if he dies in the service, the disability or retirement benefit to which he would have been entitled had he
qualified for such benefit at the date of death."
ARTICLE

II

( Participation)
Paragraph 1, after sub-paragraph (d), should read:
" ( e) If, having formerly been a participant in virtue of
this article and
"(i) His participation having been interrupte<l for a period
not exceeding three years, or
" (ii) His prior contributory service having been restored
in accordance with article XII,
he re-enters employment under a fixed-term contract for
at least one year, or has completed one year's employment,
provided that he is under sixty years of age at the time of
entry or re-entry into the Fund and that his participation 1s
not excluded by his contract of employment."
ARTICLE

IV

( Retirement benefits)
Replace the present text by the following :
"l. (a) A participant who reaches the age of sixty shall,
upon retirement, be entitled: during the remainder of his life
to an annual retirement benefit, payable monthly, equal to
one fifty-fifth of his final average remuneration multiplie<l
by the number of years of his c-ontributorv service not
exceeding thirty years ;
·
"(b) This retirement benefit shall be not less than whichever is the smaller of:
"(i) 120 dollars multiplied by the number of years of his
contributory service not exceeding ten ; or
"(ii) One-thirtieth of his final average remuneration multiplied by the number of years of his contributory
service not exceeding ten ;
" ( c) A participant who reaches the age of fifty-five shall
be entitled, at any time before he reaches the age of sixty,
to retire with an immediate retirement benefit equal in
actuarial value to the benefit he would have received under
sub-paragraph (a) above had he been sixty at the date his
service ceased; sub-paragraph ( /,) above shall not apply in
this case.
"2. A participant, other than a participa,Jt whose retirement
benefit under paragraph 1 (a) above is increased as a result
of the application of paragraph 1 (b), may, with the consent
of the Joint Staff Pension Board, prior to the date on
which the first payment of his retirement benefit becomes due,
elect to receive a lump sum not greater than one-third of
the actuarial equivalent of the retirement benefit payable to
him, and his retirement benefit shall be reduced in the
proportion that such lump sum bears to the actuarial equivalent of his retirement benefit prior to reduction.
"3. A participant, other than a participant whose retirement benefit under paragraph I (a) above is increased as a
result of the application of paragraph I (b), who is entitled
under this article to a benefit which is less than 300 dollars
per annum may, prior to the date on which the first payment
of his retirement benefit becomes due and with the consent
of the Joint Staff Pension Board, receive the whole benefit
payable to him in the form of a lump sum which is the
actuarial equivalent of his benefit. A participant who is
married at the date of retirement may also receive the
actuarial equivalent of the prospective benefit which would
be payable on his death under article VII.Z(a).
"4. A participant whose retirement benefit would be
increased as a result of the application of paragraph 1 ( b)
above may, at the date of retirement, elect to waive the

General Assembly -

44

additional amount which he would thereby receive; if he so
elects, he shall be entitled to a retirement benefit calculated
under paragraph l(a); and shall then be entitled to receive
a lump sum under the conditions of paragraph 2 or 3 above."
ARTICLE

IV bis

(Minimum return of accumulated contributions)
Add the following new article:
"A participant who becomes entitled to a retirement benefit
under article IV shall be entitled to elect, at the date his
service ceases, to receive a reduced benefit with a guarantee
that the total benefits paid on his account under these
Regulations shall not be less than the amount payable under
article VII ter.l as at the date of retirement. Where the
participant, at the date of retirement, has a wife, the amount
of the reduction shall be one-half of 1 per cent of his own
and his survivors' benefits ; in other cases, the amount of the
reduction shall be 1½ per cent of his own and his survivors'
benefits."
ARTICLE

V

(Disability benefits)
Replace the present text by the following :
"Subject to the provisions of article XVI, a participant
who, before reaching the age of sixty, has, in the opinion
of the Joint Staff Pension Board, become unable to perform
duties appropriate to his grade owing to serious physical
or mental impairment shall be entitled, subject to article IX,
while such di~ability continues, to a disability benefit payable
in the same manner as a retirement benefit and equal to
one fifty-fifth of his final average remuneration multiplied
by the number of years of his contributory service not
exceeding thirty years; this disability benefit shall be not
less than the smaller of :
"(a) One-third of the final average remuneration; or
"(IJ.) The retirement benefit to which he would have been
entitled if he had remained in service until he had reached
the age of sixty and his final average remuneration had
remained unchanged."
ARTICLE VI

(Commencement, discontinuance and reduction of disability
benefits)
Replace the present text by the following:
"l. The Joint Staff Pension Board shall determine, in
accordance with article V and the procedure laid down in
the administrative rules made under these Regulations, when
a participant qualified for a disability benefit. The participant
shall not, however, be entitled to a disability benefit so long
as he is entitled to receive any larger payments under the
staff regulations applying to him other than payments under
a scheme of compensation for disability attributable to the
performance of official duties on behalf of a member organization.
"2. Until the recipient of a disability benefit reaches the
age of sixty, the Joint Staff Pension Board may require
evidence of the continuance of disability and review his
eligibility to a disability benefit in the light of such evidence.
Where the Board decides that the recipient is no longer
eligible for a disability benefit, it shall, after giving such
notice as it considers proper in each case, discontinue the
disability benefit. Where the disability benefit is discontinued
and the recipient is not re-employed by a member organization,
the recipient shall be entitled to a withdrawal settlement as
though he had withdrawn under the provisions of article X
at the date disability payments began, except that the amount
of the withdrawal settlement which would have been awarded
under article X shall be reduced by the amount of the
disability payments made to him.
"3. The Joint Staff Pension Board may make rules
regarding the extent to and the circumstances in which a
disability benefit may be reduced when the recipient,

Fifteenth Session

although remaining disabled in accordance with the provisions
of article V, is nevertheless in paid employment."
ARTICLE VII

(Widow's (or disabled widower's) benefit)
Replace the present text of paragraphs 1 and 2 by the
following:
"1. Subject to the provisions of article XVI, if a married
male participant dies, his widow shall be entitled, subject to
article IX, to a widow's benefit amounting to half of the
basic benefit; this benefit shall cease on the widow's remarriage.
"2. (a) If a married man who is a recipient of a retirement benefit as provided under article IV dies, his widow,
provided she was his wife at the time of the cessation of
his service with the member organization, shall be entitled
to a widow's benefit half as large as the benefit which was
being paid to the deceased at the time of his death; however,
if the deceased at the time of his retirement had received a
lump sum as provided in article IV, in lieu of part or the
whole of the retirement benefit to which he was entitled, the
widow's benefit shall be half of the total retirement benefit
to which the staff member was entitled at the cessation of
his service, except that in the case where a married man
received the actuarial equivalent of a prospective widow's
benefit, no widow's benefit shall be payable; this benefit shall
cease on the widow's remarriage;
" ( b) If a married man who is a recipient of a disability
benefit dies, his widow, provided she was his wife at the
time he qualified for the disability benefit, shall be entitled
to a widow's benefit half as large as the benefit being paid
to the deceased at the time of his death; this benefit shall
cease on the widow's remarriage."
Delete the present text of paragraph 3.
Replace the present text of paragraphs 4 to 7 by the
following:
"3. Upon ceasing to be entitled to a widow's benefit by
reason of remarriage, the widow shall be entitled to a lumpsum payment equal to twice the annual amount of her widow's
benefit.
"4. Wherever the amount of the widow's benefit determined
under paragraph 1 or 2 above would be less than 750 dollars
per annum, it shall be increased to the smaller of:
" (a) 750 dollars per annum; or
"(b) Twice the original amount determined.
"S. A widow whose annual benefit under the present article
is less than 200 dollars may, prior to the first payment of
such benefit and with the consent of the Joint Staff Pension
Board, receive in lieu thereof a lump sum which is the
actuarial equivalent of such benefit.
"6. Should a married woman participant, or a married
woman in receipt of a retirement or disability benefit, die
and her widower be found by the Joint Staff Pension Board
on the basis of a medical examination to be totally and
permanently incapable either physically or mentally of
providing for his own support, at the time of her death, he
shall be entitled, subject to the same conditions as would
apply to a widow, to the same benefits as set forth in the
present article, as would the widow of a male participant."
ARTICLE

VII bis

(Secondary depe1'1dant's benefit)
Add the following new article :
"l. Upon the death of a participant who does not leave
a widow, or a disabled widower, or a child, entitled to a
benefit, but who leaves a secondary dependant, the secondary
dependant shall be entitled to a benefit under the conditions
in paragraph 3 below.
"2. Upon the death of a recipient of a retirement or
disability benefit who, at the time his service ceased, had
neither a spouse nor a child eligible for benefit, but who at

45

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

that time had a secondary dependant, the secondary dependant
shall, if he can prove to the satisfaction of the Joint Staff
Pension Board that the former pensioner had continued to
contribute materially to his support between the date of
separation from service and the date of death, be entitled
to a benefit under the conditions in paragraph 3 below.
"3. The amount of a secondary dependant's benefit under
paragraph 1 or 2 above shall be:
"(a) In the case of a mother or father, the amodnt of
a widow's or disabled widower's benefit, respectively, under
article VII ;
"(b) In the case of a brother Dr sister, the a111011nt of a
child's benefit under article VIII.2(a);
the benefit under sub-paragraph (a) above shall be payable
under the same conditions as the benefit to a widow, except
that in the event of the remarriage of the dependent parent
the Board shall have discretion to continue the benefit if
it deems fit. The benefit under sub-paragraph ( /J) above
shall be payable under the same conditions as a child's benefit
under article VIII. I.
"4. Not more than one secondary dependant of a participant shall be eligible for a benefit."
A1nICI.E

VII tcr

(Other death payments)

Add the following new article:
"l. Upon th~ death of a participant who docs not leave
a survivor entitled to a benefit, there shall be paid to his
designated recipient a sum equal to:
"(a) His own contrihutions to the Pension Fund, with
compound interest at the rate designated in article XXIX;
plus
" ( b) Such amount as may have been transferred on his
account to the Pension Fund from the Provident Fund of a
member organization at the time of his entry into the Fund,
without interest; plus
" ( c) If he has validated a period of prior non-pensionable
service under article III, such amount, not exceeding 5 per
cent of his pensionable remuneration for that period, as h•i
mav have received from the Provident Fund of a member
organization in excess of his own contributions thereto and
have refunded to that member organization ;

If a designated recipient does not survive a participant or
if a participant has not made, or has revoked, a designation,
such sum shall be paid to the participant's estate.
"2. If, in the event of the death of a participant who leaves
a survivor entitled to a benefit under these Regulations, or
of a former participant who is in receipt of a disability
benefit, the total benefits paid to him and to all his survivors
amount to less than the amount which would have becn
payable under paragraph I ahove, there shall be paid to
his designated recipient the difference between the sum total
of the benefits paid and the amount in paragraph l. If a
designated recipient has died before the last benefit payment
is made under articles V, VII, VII bis or VIII, or if a
participant has not made, or has revoked, a designation, such
sum shall be payable to the estate of the former participant.
"3. If the total benefits paid to a former participant who
has elected to ,eceive a reduced retirement benefit under
article IV bis, and to all his survivors, amount to less than
the sum which would have been payable under paragraph
1 above had he died on the date his service ceased and
quaiified for a benefit under that paragraph, there shall be
paid to his designated recipient the difference between the
sum total of the benefits paid and the amount in paragraph l.
If a designated recipient has died before the last benefit
payment is made under articles IV, VII, VII bis or VIII,
or if the former participant has not made or has revoked
a designation, such sum shall be payable to the estate of the
former participant."

ARTICLE

VIII

(Child's benefits)

Heplace the present text by the following:
"I. Subject to paragraph 4 below, each unmarried child
of a participant who dies or on whose account a bemf1t
becomes payable under articles IV, V or VJ I shaH be entitled
to a child's benefit. The child's benefit shall he payable
monthly up to and including the month in which tlw child
shall attain the age of eighteen, or, if the child is in full
time attcmlaucc at a school or university or similar educational
institution, the age of twenty-one. If the child is total! y
disabied by reason of physical or mental incapacity, there
shall be no age limit so lung as the disaoility continues.
"2. The annual bcnefit on account d each child shall be
determined as follows:
"(a) If there is a surviving parent ( except in the case
where a surviving parent is a widow who is not receiving
a henefit or a widower who has not become cntitlccl to a
benefit and who, in the opinion of the Board, is unable to
support the former participant's children), the am, 1unt of
each child's benefit shall be equal to one-third of the basic
benefit, subject to a minimmn of 300 dollars and a maximum
of WO <ldlars per child, and subject further to an over-all
maximum as in paragraph 3 below;
" ( /,) If there is no parent surviving, or if the surviving
parent is a widow who is not receiving a hcnelit or a widower
who had not bccnine entitled to a lwndit under these Regulations and who, in the opinion of the Board, is unable to
support the former participant's children, the total children's
benefits shall be calculated as under sub-paragraph (a) above,
with the addition of the following amount :
"'(i) Where tlll're is only one eligible child. hy whichcn-r
is the greater of 300 dollars or 25 pl'r crnt of the
basic benefit:
" (ii) If there arc two or more eligible children, hv whichever is the greater of 600 dollars Qr 50 pe1: crnt of
the basic benefit ;
The total children's benefits payable under sub-paragraph (ii)
above shall be divided equally among all the eligible children
to determirw the amount of any one child's benefit. As and
when a child ceases to be eligible, the total benefit payable
to the remainder should be recalculated in accordance with
this sub-paragraph.
"3. The total children's benefits payable under paragraph
2 (a) above shall not exceed 1,800 dollars a year. Further,
the sum of children's benefits, plus any retirement benefit
payable umler article IV.l, or disability benefit or widow's
bendit, shall not exceed the final average remuneration of
the former participant plus the children's allowances which
were paid by a member organization at the cessation of his
employment.
"4. Entitlement to a child's benefit is limited to dependent
children existing at the time of eligibility for retirement or
disability benefit or at the time of the death of the participant,
provided that, if the benefit on account of the participant
is payable under article IV.I (c), the entitlement to a child's
benefit shall not arise until the date on which the participant
reaches or would have reached the age of sixty. The Joint
Staff Pension Board shall define 'dependent child', having
regard to the provisions of the staff rules of the member
organization.
"5. In no circumstances shall more than one child's
henefit be payable in respect of any one child."
ARTICLE

VIII bis

(Commencement of cntitleme11t to suruiz1or's benefit)
Add the following new article:
"I. Entitlement to a survivor's benefit under articles VII. I,
VII bis.I and VIII of these Regulations shall begin on the
day following the death of the participant, except as otherwise
provided in these Regulations.

46

General Assembly -

"2. Entitlement to a survivor's benefit under articles VII.2
and VII bis.2 shall begin on the first day of the month
following the death of the primary beneficiary.
"3. The Joint Staff Pension Board may, however, decide
for any particular ea tegory of cases that an earlier date of
commencement should apply if deemed more appropriate."
ARTICLE

IX

(Eligibility for disability and death b,enefits)
Replace the present text by the following :
"1. The Joint Staff Pension Board shall require every
entrant or re-entrant, before admission to coverage by the
benefits provided under articles V, VII.1 and VII bis.l, to
undergo a medical examination to be prescribed in the
administrative rules made under these Regulations, unless the
Board decides to accept the findings of a medical examination
previously undergone by the entrant.
"2. On the basis of the medical examinations referred to
in paragraph 1 above, the Joint Staff Pension Board shall
decide whether the participant concerned shall be covered
by the provisions of articles V, VII.1, and VII bis.1 immediately, or shall not be covered by those provisions until
he has completed five years of contributory service or, in the
case of a re-entrant, until he has completed five years of
contributory service subsequent to his re-entrance. However,
no participant shall be excluded from the benefits provided
under articles V, VII.I and VII bis.I, if the disability or
death is the direct result of accident or damage to health
arising from service in an unhealthy area, nor shall his
survivor be excluded from the provisions of articles VII.I,
or VII bis.I, if he has attained the age of sixty."
ARTICLE.

X

(Withdrawal settlements)
Replace the present text by the following :
"1. If a participant ceases to be in the employment of a
member organization for reasons other than death, or dismissal for serious misconduct, as defined in the staff regulations, and is not eligible for a disability or retirement benefit,
he shall be entitled to a withdrawal settlement in accordance
with paragraph 2 or 3 below.
"2. If the participant has less than five years of contributory service, he shall be paid a sum equal to :
"(a) His own contributions to the Pension Fund, with
compound interest at the rate <lesignated in article XXIX;
plus
"(b) Such amount as may have been transferred on his
account to the Pension Fund from the Provident Fund of
a member organization at the time of his entry into the
Pension Fund, without interest; plus
"(c) If he has validated a period of prior non-pensionable
service under article III, such amount, not exceeding 5 per
cent of his pensionable remuneration for that period, as he
may have received from the Provident Fund of a member
organization in excess of his own contributions thereto and
have refunded to that member organization.
"3. If the participant has five or more years of contributory service he shall be entitled to elect, at the date his
service ceases, to receive one of the following:
"(a) Subject to article XII.I a life annuity, deferred to
age sixty, equal to one fifty-fifth of his final average remuneration multiplied by the number of years of his contributory service not exceeding thirty years, with survivor benefits
in accordance with paragraph 6 below;
"(b) Subject to article XII.2:
"(i) An amount in cash equal to the amounts in paragraphs
2 (a), 2 (b) and 2 (c) above; plus
"(ii) A life annuity, deferred to age sixty, equal in value
to the difference between the amount he receives in
cash and the actuarial equivalent, at the date his employment ceased, of the retirement benefit payable at
the age of sixty calculated on the basis of his con-

Fifteenth SeHion
tributory service and final average remuneration ;
where the amount of this annuity at age sixty is less
than 300 dollars a year, he shall be entitled to receive,
at the date his service ceases, in lieu of the annuity, a
cash sum of equal actuarial value;
" ( c) A final cash settlement, which shall extinguish all his
entitlements under these Regulations, consisting of:
"(i) A sum in cash equal to the amounts in paragraph 2
above; plus
"(ii) For each completed year of service in excess of five,
10 per cent of the amount in paragraph 2(a) above,
subject to a maximum of the amount in paragraph Z(a).
"4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 3(c)
above, a participant in the Pension Fund on 31 March 1961
who subsequently becomes eligible for a final cash settlement
under paragraph 3(c) above shall be entitled to receive, in
lieu of and if greater than the amount in paragraph 3(c), the
following:
"(a) If he withdraws on or before 31 December 1966:
"(i) The amount of the lump-sum withdrawal benefit which
he would have received had the regulations, actuarial
bases and other provisions in force at 31 March 1961
been still in force at the date his service ceased ;
together with
"(ii) The amount by which his own contribution to the
Pension Fund after 1 April 1961 exceeds the amount
he would have contributed under the regulations,
actuarial bases and other provisions in force at
31 March 1961, with compound interest on this excess
at the rate designated under article XXIX ;
"(b) If he withdraws on or after 1 January 1967:
"(i) The amount of the lump sum which he would have
received under sub-paragraph (a) above had he withdrawn on 31 December 1966; plus
"(ii) The amount of his own contribution to the Pension
Fund from 1 January 1967 until the date his service
ceases, with compound interest at the rate designated
under article XXIX, which amount shall be increased
by 10 per cent for each of his completed years of
contributory service in excess of five, whether before
or after 1 January 1967, subject to a maximum increase
of 100 per cent.
"S. Where, under this article, a deferred annuity to a
participant is payable at the age of sixty, he may elect to
receive the annuity from an earlier age, provided that this
age shall not be less than fifty-five. In such event, the value
of the annuity shall be subject to an appropriate actuarial
reduction to be determined by the Joint Staff Pension Board.
"6. On the death of a former participant who elected
to receive a deferred annuity under paragraph 3 (a) above:
"(a) If he leaves a widow who was his wife at the time
his service ceased, a widow's benefit shall be payable as
from the date of his death, of an amount calculated as
follows:
"(i) If death occurred after the commencement of the
annuity, the widow's benefit shall be one-half of the
amount of that annuity;
"(ii) If death occurred before the commencement of the
annuity, the widow's benefit shall be one-half of the
annuity which, had it been payable to the former
participant from the date of his death, would have had
the same actuarial value as the annuity he would have
received at the age of sixty ;
"(b) If he leaves no widow, but leaves a dependent mother
or father who, at the time his service ceased, was recognized
as a secondary dependant, a secondary dependan1's benefit
shall be payable, of an amount calculated as in sub-paragraph
(a) (i) or (a) (ii) above, as may be appropriate;
"(c) A survivor's benefit payable under sub-paragraph (a)
or (b) above shall be subject to the same conditions as if
the benefit had been payable under article VII or VII bis;
"(d) If he dies before the commencement of the annuity
and leaves no survivor entitled to a benefit under sub-

47

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

paragraph (a) or (b) above, there shall be paid to his designated recipient an amount equal to the sums in paragraph 2
above as at the date his service ceased. If a designated
recipient does not survive the former participant, or if no
designation has been made, or if the designation has been
revoked, such sum shall be paid to the former participant's
estate."
ARTICLE

XII

(Re-employment)

Replace the present text by the following :
"If a person who has ceased to be a participant again
becomes a participant by virtue of a new appointment, the
following provisions shall apply, subject to article IX :
"1. If the participant, when he previously left the service,
had elected to receive a deferred annuity under article X.3 (a) :
"(a) If payment of the annuity had not commenced, his
contributory service credit prior to separation shall be restored and his benefits when he again ceases to be a participant shall be calculated on the basis of his total period
of contributory service;
"(b) If payment of the annuity had commenced, such
payment shall cease and if the participant repays all payments
of his benefit received with compound interest at the rate
designated in article XXIX, his contributory service credit
prior to separation shall be restored; if the participant does
not so repay the payments of his benefit received, then the
lump sum which is the actuarial equivalent of the discontinued benefit at the date upon which payments were discontinued shall be credited as an additional contribution in
accordance with the provisions of article XVIII 2 and 3.
"2. If the participant, when he previously left the service,
had elected to receive a cash refund together with a deferred
annuity under article X.3(b):
"(a) If he has not, at the time he again becomes a participant, begun to receive the annuity payable under article
X.3(b) (ii), he may pay into the Pension Fund, in a manner
acceptable to the Joint Staff Pension Board, a sum or sums
equivalent to the amount he received under article X.3 ( b) (i),
with compound interest at the rate designated in article

XXIX:
"(i) If he does so, his contributory service credit prior to
separation shall be restored and his benefits, when he
again ceases to be a participant, shall be calculated on
the basis of his total period of contributory service;
"(ii) If he does not do so, the annuity arising from the
earlier period of service shall not begin until he again
ceases to be a participant, and his entitlement to
further benefits shall be determined solely by reference
to his contributory service after re-employment, provided however that the total benefits paid or payable
to him in respect of two or more periods of employment shall not exceed the benefits he would have
received had all his employment been continuous ;
"(b) If he has, at the time he again becomes a participant,
begun to draw the annuity payable under article X.3(b) (ii),
payment of that annuity shall cease, and the provisions of
paragraph 1 (b) above shall be applied.
"3. If the participant received a final cash settlement
under article X.3(c) or X.4, or if he commuted a deferred
annuity under article X.3(a), or X.3(b), his entitlement to
further benefits shall be determined solely by reference to
his contributory service after re-employment, provided however that the total benefits paid or payable to him Jn respect
of two or more periods of employment shall not exceed the
benefits he would have received had all his employment been
continuous.
"4. If the participant was in receipt of a disability benefit
under article V, payment of that benefit shall cease, and ;
"(a) He shall re-enter the Pension Fund as a participant
with credit for the contributory service which he had accumulated when his disability benefit began ;
"(b) In making any withdrawal settlement to which he

may become entitled within five years after his re-entry into
the Pension Fund, the Joint Staff Pension Board may take
into account the amount of the disability benefit payments
made to him, and the amount of any retirement benefit which
may become payable to him within one year after his re-entry into the Fund may be reduced by the Board to an
amount not exceeding the sum of the disability benefit of
which he had been in receipt and the retirement benefit earned
during his period of contributory service since reappointment."
ARTICLE

XVT

(Contributions on account of participa11ts)

Replace the present text of paragraph 5 by the following:
"5. (a) A participant on leave without pay who is not
covered by the full benefits provided under the present
Regulations, who reaches the age of sixty and retires, shall
be entitled to a retirement benefit as provided under article
IV;
"(b) Any such participant who before reaching the age
of sixty becomes disabled, or withdraws from the Pension
Fund, or dies, shall be deemed to have withdrawn from the
Fund on the date his appointment terminated, his contributorv
service being reckoned to his last day of actual service;
"(c) If a participant on leave without pay, granted for
the performance of military service, becomes disabled or dirs
before reaching the age of sixty, the benefit payable under
sub-paragraph ( b) above shall not be less than the individual
actuarial reserve of such participant calcu'iated at the time
disability or death occurred."
ARTICLE

XXV

( Investment of assrts of the Fu,ui)

Replace the present text by the following :
"Subject to the complete separation to be maintained
between the assets of the Pension Fund and the assets of
the United Nations as provided in article XIV, the investment of the assets of the Fund shall be decided upon hy
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, after consultation with an Investments Committee and after having heard
any observations or suggestions by the Joint Staff Pension
Board concerning the investments policy. The Investments
Committee shall consist of six members appointed by the
Secretary-General after consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, subirct
to subsequent confirmation by the General Assembh "
ARTICLE

XXIX

( Adoption of basic tablrs)

Replace the present text by the following:
"I. The Joint Staff Pension Board, upon the advice of a
committee of three independent actuaries to be appointed
hy the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the recommendation of the Board, shall adopt from time to time
service, mortality and other tables and shall decide upon the
rate of interest which is to be used in each actuarial valuation of the Pension Fund.
"2. At least once in each three years, the Joint Staff
Pension Board shall have an actuarial investigation made intn
the service, mortality and compensation experience of the
participants and beneficiaries of the Pension Fund, and,
taking into account the results of such investigation, the
Board shall adopt such service, mortality and other tables
as it shall deem appropriate.
"3. Without prejudice to the power of the Joint Staff
Pension Board to establish a rate of interest for actuarial
valuations purposes under paragraph I above, the rate of
interest which shall be used in all actuarial calculations
required in connexion with these Regulations shall be 2½
per cent per annum through 31 December 1957, 3 per cent
per annum for the period I January 1958 to 31 March 1961
and 3¼ per cent per annum thereafter unless and until
changed by the Board."

48

General Assembly ARTICLE

XXXIV

(Documentary euidencc)
Replace the present text by the following:
"l. Every participant and every beneficiary under these
regulations shall furnish such documentary evidence as may
be required under the administrative rules.
"2. If the Joint Staff Pension Board finds that any
material fact so required has been omitted or misrepresented,
the Board shall be cmpowcrc,l to take such omission or
misrepresentation into account in deciding 011 the individual's
entitlement to benefits or participation in the Pension Fund
or in modifying any such decision, provided that the
individual's entitlement to benefits and participation in the
Fund in such case shall be no less favourable than it would
have been had the material facts been disclosed or accurately
represented."

Ill
ADJUSTMENTS IN BENEFITS AFTER AWARD

Decides that:
1. The supplement of 5 per cent to pensions and
life annuities authorized, pending the outcome of the
comprehensive review, by paragraph 5 of General
Assembly resolution 1310 (XIII) shall cease to be paid
after 31 March 1961, provided that if in any case the
increases resulting from paragraph 2 below in the
benefits of a participant or his widow, taken together
with the benefits payable to his children, shall amount
to less than the amount of the 5 per cent supplement,
the differenctt shall continue to be paid;
2. With effect from 1 April 1961, all pensions and
life annuities in payment or payable under the provisions
of articles IV, V, VII, VIII and X.1 (d) of the
Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund as in force on 31 March 1961, shall, with the
exception stated in paragraph 3 below, be adjusted to
the amount which would have been payable had they
been awarded under the provisions of articles IV, V,
VII, VIII, and X.3 (a) or X.3 (b), as approved in
section II of the present resolution, and had their final
average remuneration been calculated on a base salary
at the mid-point between their actual net base salary and
the corresponding United Nations gross salary; in the
case of staff subject to the post adjustment system who
retired between 1 January 1959 and 31 March 1961,
the base pensionable remuneration shall be deemed to
have been further increased by 5 per cent with effect
from 1 January 1959;
3. No adjustment shall be made in the amount of
lump-sum payments paid or payable under the Regulations in force on 31 March 1961, nor shall the new
provisions of article IV .1 ( b) applied retroactively to
any retirement benefit of which the recipient commuted
a part to a lump sum ;
4. Where part of any retirement benefit has been
commuted to a lump sum, the amount of any remaining
part which is paid or payable as an annuity shall be
increased pro rata to the increase which would have
been granted under paragraph 2 above in the full retirement benefit, other than as a result of article IV .1 ( b),
had no part of it been commuted;
5 The present resolution shall create no entitlement
to a pension or annuity to which no entitlement existed
at the date a former participant left the service;
6. The United Natic,ns Joint Staff Pension Board
is reouested to studv, at its next session, methods by
which any foture adjmtmerits in benefits, after their

Fifteenth Session

award, might be made; pending the outcome of such
study, the Board is invited to establish, fron~ the e~cess
yield on its investments, a Reserve for Pension Ad Justments, and to credit annually to such Reserve a.n amount
sufficient to cover the actuarial value of an increase of
1 per cent in benefits and annuities in payment and in
deferred annuities payable under article X of the Regulations.
954th plenary mectinr,.
18 December l<JMJ.
1562 (XV). Amendments to the Pension Scheme
Regulations for members of the International Court of Justice
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the SecrctaryGeneral30 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,3 1
1. Adopts the text annexed to the present resolution
as revised Pension Scheme Regulations for members of
the Internatfonal Court of Justice;
2. Decides that the revised Regulations shall come
into force on 1 January 1961 and shall supersede the
Regulations contained in the annex to General Assembly
resolution 86 (I) of 11 December 1946, as amemkd by
resolution 1408 (XIV) of l Decemher 1959.
954th plenary me,'linq,
18 December 1Q60.
ANNEX

PE'.'JSION SCHEME REGULATIONS FOR MEMBERS
OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
ARTICLE

I

Retirement pension

I. A member of the International Court of Justice who has
ceased to hold office and who has reached the age of sixtyfive shall be entitled during the remainder of his life, subject
to paragraph 4 below, to a retirement pension, payable monthly,
provided that he has :
(a) Completed at least five years of service ;
(b) Not been required to relinquish his appointment under
Article 18 of the Statute of the Court for reasons other than
the state of his health.
2. The amount of the retirement pension shall be determined
as follows:
(a) If the member has served a full term of nine years,
the amount of the pension shall be 10,000 dollars a year;
( b) If he has served for more than nine years, the amount
of the pension shall be increased by 33.33 dollars a. year for
each month of service in excess of nine years, provided that
the maximum retirement pension shall not exceed two-thirds
of his annual salary;
( c) If he has served for less than a full term of nine years,
the amount of the retirement pension shall be that proportion
of 10,000 dollars which the number of months of his actual
service bears to 108.
3. A member who ceases to hold office before the age of
sixty-five and who would be entitled to a retirement pension
when he reached that age may elect to receive a pension from
any date after the date on which he ceases to hold office.
Should he so elect, the amount of such pension shall be that
amount which has the same actuarial value as the retirement
pension which would have been paid to him at the age of sixtyfive.
30 Ibid., agenda item 54, document A/4424.
31 Ibid., documents A/4544 and A/4579.
