UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/927
7 October 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 7 OCTOBER 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
7 October 1998, which I have received from the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
I should be grateful if this letter could be circulated as a document of
the Security Council.

(Signed)

98-29571 (E)

081098

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/927
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 7 October 1998 from the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency addressed
to the Secretary-General

In paragraph 16 of its resolution 1051 (1996) of 27 March 1996, the
Security Council called for the consolidation of the periodic requirements for
progress reports under resolutions 699 (1991), 715 (1991) and 1051 (1996), and
requested the Director General to submit such consolidated reports every six
months to the Council, commencing on 11 April 1996.
It would therefore be appreciated if you could arrange to transmit to the
President of the Security Council the enclosed sixth consolidated semi-annual
report under paragraph 16 of resolution 1051 (1996). I remain available for any
consultations you or the Council may wish to have.

(Signed)

Mohamed ELBARADEI

/...

S/1998/927
English
Page 3

Appendix
Sixth consolidated report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency under paragraph 16 of
Security Council resolution 1051 (1996)

INTRODUCTION
1.
In paragraph 16 of resolution 1051 (1996), adopted on 27 March 1996, the
Security Council called for the consolidation of the periodic progress reports
required under resolutions 699 (1991), 715 (1991) and 1051 (1996), and requested
the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to submit
such a consolidated report every six months to the Council, commencing on
11 April 1996.
2.
The Director General submits herewith the sixtha such consolidated report
under paragraph 16 of resolution 1051 (1996).

ONGOING MONITORING AND VERIFICATION
Monitoring inspections
3.
In the period under review (1 April-1 October 1998), the IAEA Nuclear
Monitoring Group carried out 243 monitoring inspections at some 137 locations,
37 of which were carried out at locations not previously inspected. The number
of inspections carried out under the Agency’s ongoing monitoring and
verification (OMV) plan since the Nuclear Monitoring Group was established in
August 1994 now totals almost 1,540. The majority of those inspections were
carried out with no prior announcement; a number of them were conducted in
cooperation with the monitoring groups of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM). No indication of prohibited materials, equipment or activities was
detected during the inspections.
4.
Until 5 August 1998, IAEA and UNSCOM continued their implementation of a
joint programme of inspection of Iraqi sites that are deemed to have
capabilities suitable for conducting work on some aspect of weapons of mass
destruction, notwithstanding the lack of evidence or indication of such work.
The carrying out of inspections at "capable sites" on a regular basis
contributes to the effectiveness of the OMV plan in its ability to detect any
attempt to conduct activities prohibited by Security Council resolutions. The
current number of inspections at "capable sites" totals some 85. No indication
of prohibited equipment, materials or activities has been detected in the course
of those inspections.
5.
On 5 August, Iraq announced that it was suspending its cooperation with
UNSCOM and IAEA. Although IAEA received no formal notification or explanation
from Iraq of the suspension of cooperation, it obtained the following
information through contact with the Director General of Iraq’s National
Monitoring Directorate:

/...

S/1998/927
English
Page 4

(a) Iraq will continue to facilitate OMV inspections at sites for which it
routinely provides declarations under the OMV plan;
(b) Iraq will continue to allow IAEA access to locations for the purpose
of collecting environmental samples or carrying out radiation surveys;
(c) Iraq will not permit access to capable sites or indeed to any sites
other than those for which Iraq routinely provides declarations under the OMV
plan;b
(d) Iraq will not cooperate in any activity involving investigation of its
clandestine nuclear programme.
6.
The Agency’s OMV plan, which Iraq formally accepted on 26 November 1993,
obliges Iraq to accept unconditionally all of the rights of IAEA enumerated in
the plan. The rights include full and free access at any time to all sites,
facilities, areas, locations, activities, materials and other items, including
documentation, and to all persons and all information that, in the Agency’s
judgement, may be necessary for its OMV activities. Iraq’s restriction of
monitoring inspections to predefined sites limits the Agency’s right of full and
free access. As a consequence, IAEA is unable, through capable site
inspections, to ensure that prohibited activities are not being carried out in
Iraq, free from the risk of detection through direct inspection measures.
Iraq’s refusal to address any matters related to its clandestine nuclear
programme constitutes a further limitation of the Agency’s right of full and
free access, specifically to information. Thus, IAEA is unable to investigate
further its remaining questions and concerns about Iraq’s clandestine nuclear
programme. The OMV plan is an integral whole that can be meaningfully
implemented only in its entirety. Iraq’s suspension of cooperation
significantly reduces the effectiveness of OMV and the level of assurance
provided through ongoing monitoring and verification.
Other ongoing monitoring and verification activities
7.
The eleventh radiometric survey of Iraq’s main watercourses was carried out
from 14 to 28 April. The results of this and previous surveys have shown no
indication that Iraq had carried out any prohibited nuclear activities, but, as
previously reported, they have confirmed the sensitivity of the technology by
detecting Iraq’s permitted use of radioisotopes in medical applications.
8.
Routine interviews of key Iraqi personnel have continued, but difficulties
have been encountered in locating some personnel due to their stated transfer
from government jobs to the private sector. Actions are in hand with the Iraqi
counterpart to maintain a register of the places of work of key personnel. The
interview process is further complicated by Iraq’s current suspension of
cooperation with IAEA, which has included instructions to Iraqi personnel to not
respond to any questions relating to Iraq’s clandestine nuclear programme.
9.
The third helicopter gamma survey campaign of former Iraqi nuclear-related
installations was carried out from 20 May to 12 June. The 1998 campaign
included overflights of sites known to have been involved in Iraq’s clandestine
nuclear programme as well as test flights to verify the technical performance of
/...

S/1998/927
English
Page 5

the sensor system in various configurations. For the first time, near-real-time
analysis capabilities were available, permitting the investigation and
resolution, by follow-up inspections on the ground, of anomalies detected during
flights. Sites overflown in both 1997 and 1998 showed no statistically
significant measurement differences from year to year that might indicate
undeclared activities.
10. Work continues on the updating and expansion of the technological
components of OMV activities and procedures. Efforts are also under way to
consolidate a number of technical measures into a wide-area environmental
monitoring programme. In this regard, Iraq is providing the necessary practical
and technical support, particularly in connection with the Agency’s installation
and operation of air-sampling equipment.
Declarations under the ongoing monitoring and verification plan
11. Paragraph 22 and annex 2 of the OMV plan (S/22872/Rev.1 and Rev.1/Corr.1)
require Iraq to provide semi-annual declarations, in January and July, on the
current use of certain facilities, installations and sites, including those
formerly involved in its clandestine nuclear programme, and on changes during
the previous six months regarding the inventory and location of materials,
equipment and isotopes identified in annexes 3 and 4 of the plan.
12. Iraq’s declarations of nuclear material transactions and inventories
covering the period from 1 January 1989 to 31 December 1991 were reviewed in
detail with the counterpart to further clarify nuclear material flows and
inventories at the principal locations at which nuclear material was used or
stored during that period. The Iraqi counterpart has provided revised data,
which appear to take into account many of the requested clarifications, but some
inconsistencies remain to be resolved.
13. Based on the Agency’s evaluation of the declarations received in July 1998,
there remains outstanding the repeatedly requested implementation by Iraq of
quality assurance measures to deal with generic problems regarding accuracy,
completeness and internal consistency. In this connection, members of the IAEA
Action Team will visit Iraq in October to discuss the adequacy of Iraq’s July
declarations and to clarify the remaining inconsistencies in Iraq’s nuclear
material declarations. IAEA experience indicates that the goal of accurate and
complete declarations will be achieved only if Iraq assigns additional technical
personnel to the task.
Release, relocation and change of use of equipment, material and facilities
14. In the period under review, Iraq’s National Monitoring Directorate
submitted 27 requests to IAEA for approval of the release or relocation of
equipment and materials or of the change of use of monitored buildings. Such
requests are processed in consultation with UNSCOM. Twenty-four of the 27
requests have been approved, and 3 are awaiting the provision of additional
information by the Iraqi counterpart. Items for which release, relocation or
change of use is approved remain subject to ongoing monitoring and verification
at a frequency commensurate with their significance.

/...

S/1998/927
English
Page 6

Export/import mechanism
15. The export/import monitoring mechanism for Iraq, jointly administered by
UNSCOM and IAEA, has, since October 1996, received notifications of some 190
transactions involving the intended export to Iraq of items identified in the
annexes to the respective OMV plans. Seven of those notifications involved
items identified in annex 3 to the Agency’s OMV plan.
The adoption by Iraq of measures to implement its obligations
16. Paragraph 34 of the Agency’s OMV plan requires that Iraq adopt the
necessary measures to implement its obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions and enact penal laws to secure their enforcement. In
discussions with the leader of the IAEA Iraq Action Team, Iraq’s Deputy Prime
Minister, Mr. Tariq Aziz, stated in July that Iraq acknowledged the requirements
to adopt the necessary measures and to enact the penal laws, and that it planned
to satisfy the requirements before October 1998. No notification has been
received to date of Iraq’s progress in that regard.

STATUS OF THE AGENCY’S VERIFICATION ACTIVITIES IN IRAQ
17. As reported in detail in the progress report dated 8 October 1997 (document
S/1997/779), and based on all credible information available to date, the
Agency’s verification activities in Iraq have resulted in the evolution of a
technically coherent picture of Iraq’s clandestine nuclear programme. The
verification activities have revealed no indications that Iraq had achieved its
programme objective of producing nuclear weapons or that Iraq had produced more
than a few grams of weapon-usable nuclear material or had clandestinely acquired
such material. Furthermore, there are no indications that there remains in Iraq
any physical capability for the production of weapon-usable nuclear material of
any practical significance. In February 1994, IAEA completed the removal from
Iraq of all weapon-usable nuclear material - essentially research reactor fuel under IAEA safeguards.
18. In the same report, IAEA further reported that there were no indications of
significant discrepancies between the technically coherent picture that had
evolved of Iraq’s clandestine nuclear weapons programme and the information
contained in Iraq’s "Full, Final and Complete Declaration". The report,
however, referred to some elements of uncertainty in the completeness of that
picture because of the inevitable limitations of any countrywide verification
process. The report also indicated that the limitations in the verification
process were not helped by Iraq’s lack of full transparency in the provision of
certain information and the absence of certain documentation.
19. As previously stated, greater transparency by Iraq would contribute
considerably to clarifying the few remaining questions and concerns relevant to
Iraq’s clandestine nuclear programme. Specific areas are the provision of
certain documentary evidence of Iraq’s actual technical achievements in nuclear
weapon design and centrifuge development, the identification and location of the
foreign national allegedly involved in an offer of assistance to Iraq’s
clandestine nuclear programme and the provision of concrete evidence of the
/...

S/1998/927
English
Page 7

timing and modalities of its abandonment of that programme, including the
adoption of the measures and the enactment of the penal laws referred to in
paragraph 16 above.
20. It should be noted, however, that the uncertainties resulting from the
above questions and concerns would not of themselves prevent the full
implementation of the Agency’s OMV plan. Indeed, such elements of uncertainty
are factored into the plan, which takes fully into account the extensive
technological expertise developed by Iraq in the course of its clandestine
nuclear programme, particularly regarding the production of weapon-usable
nuclear material. The plan is also predicated on the assumption that Iraq has
the knowledge and technical expertise to exploit, for nuclear weapons purposes,
any relevant materials or technology to which it may gain access in the future.
Nonetheless, it must be recognized that Iraq’s direct acquisition of
weapon-usable material would present a serious technical challenge to OMV
measures, and great reliance must continue to be placed on international
controls.
21. To be effective, ongoing monitoring and verification in Iraq as required by
the relevant Security Council resolutions, must be comprehensive and intrusive.
The OMV plan is an integral whole that can be meaningfully implemented only in
its entirety. Its effective implementation is critically dependent upon the
full exercise of the Agency’s rights of full and free access enshrined in the
plan.
22. IAEA continues to allocate most of its resources to the implementation of
its OMV plan and to strengthen the technical content of its activities under the
plan. However, Iraq’s current suspension of cooperation with IAEA limits the
Agency’s right to full and free access. IAEA is currently unable to investigate
further any aspects of Iraq’s clandestine nuclear programme or to ensure,
through capable site inspections, that prohibited activities are not being
carried out in Iraq, free from the risk of detection through direct inspection
measures. As a result, the level of assurance provided under the plan is
significantly reduced.
23. Should Iraq recommence full cooperation with IAEA, there would be no
impediment to the full implementation of the Agency’s OMV plan and, as part of
that plan, the further investigation of the few remaining questions and concerns
and any other aspect of Iraq’s clandestine nuclear programme arising out of new
information coming to the Agency’s attention. The assessment of Iraq’s
fulfilment of its obligations under resolution 687 (1991) remains the
prerogative of the Security Council. However, since the inspection techniques
and procedures employed by IAEA, in both its monitoring and its investigation
activities, are essentially the same, the scope and content of the Agency’s
verification activities in Iraq would be largely unaffected should the Security
Council decide that Iraq has complied with its obligations under paragraph 12 of
resolution 687 (1991).
24. Finally, the attention of the Security Council is drawn to the eventual
need to put into effect a mechanism, based upon paragraph 4 of resolution
699 (1991), to secure long-term funding for the implementation costs of the OMV
plans of IAEA and the Special Commission.
/...

S/1998/927
English
Page 8

Notes
a

The previous consolidated reports of the Director General of IAEA were
circulated as documents S/1996/261 of 11 April 1996, S/1996/833 of
7 October 1996, S/1997/297 of 11 April 1997, S/1997/779 of 8 October 1997 and
S/1998/312 of 9 April 1998. Document S/1998/694, dated 27 July 1998, contained
the text of an interim status report provided in response to the statement of
the President of the Security Council dated 14 May 1998 (S/PRST/1998/11).
b

On 24 September 1998, the IAEA Nuclear Monitoring Group was denied access
to the Al Iraqi factory. The facility was originally announced to IAEA in
February 1995 and had been inspected on eight previous occasions. Iraq has not
been asked to provide routine semi-annual declarations for this facility.

-----
