United Nations

S/PV.4323

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4323rd meeting
Wednesday, 30 May 2001, 11.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cunningham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Cooney
Mr. Ward
Mr. Kassé
Mr. Neewoor
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Kuchinsky
Sir Jeremy Greenstock

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Security Council mission to the Great Lakes region, 15-26 May
2001 (S/2001/521)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-38863 (E)

*0138863*

S/PV.4323

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Security Council mission to the
Great Lakes region, 15-26 May 2001
(S/2001/521)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Namibia, Rwanda, South Africa and
Uganda, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

and the United Nations Security Council mission to the
Great Lakes region.
I would also like to welcome the SecretaryGeneral to this meeting.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I apologize for
interrupting the proceedings, Sir, but you referred in
your introduction to the point that we are meeting here
on the basis of prior consultations.
We were present at the consultations yesterday. I
just want to reconfirm that the proceedings this
morning will proceed on the basis of prior
consultations, which established that we will first hear
a representation by the leader of the mission,
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte, and that we will then
hear the representatives of the countries that we visited
and spoke to involving this issue. My understanding is
that this will be followed by the participation of the
members of the Council, who will signal their interest
in speaking and will be recognized in the order in
which their requests to be heard are made, and that
there will be no speakers’ list, as we agreed yesterday.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I just want to reconfirm the understanding that we
reached in the informal consultations yesterday.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi), Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the
Congo), Mr. Andjaba (Namibia), Mr. Gasana
(Rwanda), Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa) and
Mr. Beyendeza (Uganda) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I indeed have a speakers’ list
here. I will be working off the indication of members
who have indicated that they wish to speak and we will
proceed on that basis. I have a list of speakers here and
that is the basis on which we will proceed.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): My understanding
is that, at the informal consultations, we reached an
understanding that there would be no speakers’ list. I
am curious to see who made the decision to change the
Council’s decision.

Members of the Council have before them the
report on the Security Council mission to the Great
Lakes region from 15 to 26 May 2001, document
S/2001/521.
I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2001/525, which contains
the text of a letter dated 24 May 2001 from the
Permanent Representative of Zambia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the text of a communiqué
produced at a joint meeting of the Political Committee
for the Implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

2

The President: I apologize if there was any
misunderstanding. I am reminded that what I said
yesterday in summing up was that we would hear from
Ambassador Levitte, as chairman of the mission, then
from representatives of the countries that the mission
visited, if they wished to speak, and that we would then
hear from Council members who wished to speak. I
apologize if that implied that there was an agreement
on how indication would be registered that members
wished to speak, but I do have here a list of members
who have indicated a wish to speak and I will stick
with that list.

S/PV.4323

Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I will not hold up
the proceedings any more, but there is a reason for my
intervention. I think I owe an explanation to members
of the Council for holding up the proceedings.
From time to time, several of us have met
privately and have indeed expressed concern about the
way these speakers’ lists are prepared; that this is not
done in a transparent fashion; and that there is no level
playing field for all members of the Council when it
comes to speaking before the Council. It is unfortunate
that it had to surface in the way it did. I really do not
mean to disrupt the proceedings, but I hope that this
will be a useful signal to all members of the Council to
ensure that, henceforth, when it comes to preparation
of the speakers’ list, it will be done in an open,
transparent fashion, with a level playing field for all of
us.
I hope that is not an unreasonable request to
make. The only reason why I have raised it today is
because, before the meeting, I checked with several
members of the Council and they all have exactly the
same understanding that I had yesterday, which is that
there would be no speakers’ list. So in the process of
the last 24 hours a change has been made without
consulting the members of the Council. I think that is
not quite appropriate. That is the only reason why I
have raised the issue.
I apologize to all members of the Council for
raising the issue the way I did, but I think it is an
important issue that all of us should be aware of,
namely, that there is a problem that needs to be solved
in due course. Again, my apologies.
The President: I thank you for raising your
concerns. I can assure you as the President of the
Council that I had no intention that there would be a
speakers’ list, or not. We did not address that subject
yesterday.
Mr. Cooney (Ireland): If I may, I just want to
endorse the remarks of the Singaporean Ambassador.
The President: So noted.
Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): I wish to state that I
also endorse the statement made by the Ambassador of
Singapore.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
think that the problem is being exaggerated, actually. I
think we should discuss it in informal consultations.

The President: I want to repeat, since I am
sitting here in the Chair, that my understanding of what
we agreed yesterday did not include the question of
whether there would be a speakers’ list or not. I say
this just for the record, as this is an on-the-record
discussion. We will continue discussion of this subject
later.
We will now turn to the business at hand.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): The
conclusions and recommendations drawn up by the 12
Ambassadors who were part of the Security Council
mission are available in English, prior to being
available in all the official languages.
I will address four points in my presentation. First
I will make general comments about our mission;
secondly, about the results we were able to achieve for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; thirdly, about
the initiatives that should be taken for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the days and weeks to come;
and, finally, about the situation in Burundi. Let me
begin with general comments.
Members will recall that this is the second
mission in a year by the Security Council to the Great
Lakes region, and the fourth meeting in the course of a
year with the Political Committee for the Lusaka
Agreement. Made up of 12 Ambassadors, the mission
was an especially large one and, lasting 10 days,
particularly long. We visited eight countries and met at
length with 10 heads of State and two facilitators —
President Masire for the inter-Congolese dialogue and
President Mandela for Burundi. Beyond that, we had
occasion to meet with representatives of political
parties and civil society, with religious leaders and, of
course, with leaders of the armed groups, both in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi. On
behalf of the Security Council delegation, I would like
to convey my warm thanks to all the people we met,
whose warm reception of our mission was truly in
keeping with Africa’s great tradition of hospitality.
My second comment is to underscore the feeling
we all had that there is today a real window of
opportunity for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to move towards peace. The young President Joseph
Kabila has a lot to do with that. There is also a
widespread feeling in the region that there is no
military solution to that war, and a feeling of weariness
in the light of fighting that no longer makes much
sense. Quite simply, our objective was to help the

3

S/PV.4323

parties that negotiated the Lusaka Agreement and those
that negotiated the Arusha Agreement on Burundi to
turn the page on war and, what is more difficult, to
build lasting peace between them.

make progress towards peace. At times we had to
remind all the parties of their commitments and their
obligation to respect international law, human rights
and humanitarian law.

My third comment is to stress that with respect to
last year’s mission — and there were three of us on this
year’s mission who also participated in the mission last
year — the atmosphere between the parties and the
United Nations was radically different and, in fact,
much more positive and trusting. The meetings were
always constructive. We concluded that in fact a
negotiating structure had been set up little by little, one
that was without a doubt an optimal one.

If we can play this positive role, I think it is
largely because of two traits that bring us together
around this table: first, the duty of complete
impartiality towards all of the parties to the conflict;
and second, a strong unity joining all the members of
the Council on the approach to be followed. I believe
that our interlocutors were forced to acknowledge our
impartiality and were certainly struck by the unity of
our delegation. At this stage I would like to thank all of
the ambassadors who were part of the delegation. We
played together, as they say in sports, like a team
passing the ball well and in an unfailing harmony.

In that context, I would like to refer to what
happened about 12 years ago, when we were trying to
find a way out of the crisis in Cambodia. At the time,
we set up a conference that was including the countries
of the region and the Security Council and that had cochairmen. That is the same sort of arrangement we
have set up among the partners of the region, the
Political Committee for the Lusaka Agreement and the
Security Council. In fact, that partnership was sealed
when the United Nations and the Security Council gave
the green light to deploy on the ground the contingents
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the
observers. From that moment on, we are forced to
succeed together; otherwise we will fail together. We
are partners for peace.
My last comment is to once again clearly specify
the role of the United Nations in the region. This is a
question of helping the parties to implement their
commitments by sending observers to monitor respect
for those commitments on the ground, along with
contingents to ensure the safety of the observers and
the security of facilities, and to set up riverine units to
make real progress in the economic sphere. It is
therefore not at all a matter of imposing anything, and
certainly not a matter of imposing peace. Rather, this is
a matter of helping the parties to implement their own
commitments. Beyond that, it is also a question of
helping the parties to resolve their own differences in
the interpretation of the agreements they themselves
have negotiated. I believe that is an important role.
Our mission was not simply to observe events. At
times it took the form of a true contribution to bridging
differences. Indeed, it also provided for real
negotiations between partners on sensitive issues to

4

Beyond these comments, what were the results
that our mission was able to achieve?
We achieved results in the military sphere, which
is obviously the first area to be taken into
consideration. For four months the ceasefire has been
holding, which is a first success; yet we have to
strengthen it and move it forward. Beyond the
ceasefire, the next stage is disengagement. Before we
arrived, United Nations observers were able to confirm
implementation of the agreement on the ground, except
in Équateur Province, where the Front de libération du
Congo (FLC) lead by Jean-Pierre Bemba had made
demands that were not in accordance with the
commitments that were signed and endorsed.
The Political Committee of the Lusaka
Agreement and the Security Council obtained through
their joint action a firm announcement on the part of
Jean-Pierre Bemba, on the one hand, and the Political
Committee, on the other. The message is simple and
unambiguous: on Friday, 1 June, the FLC forces will
withdraw from the zones they are currently occupying
to the agreed positions. This is set out in the written
communiqué adopted jointly by the Political
Committee and the Security Council delegation
following our meeting, so that things would be
clarified. There was a parallel and unconditional
decision to send humanitarian observers to Équateur
Province, as elsewhere throughout the Congo, in order
to improve the human rights and humanitarian
situations.
The step following disengagement is naturally the
stage of withdrawal of foreign forces, all foreign

S/PV.4323

forces. The objective is total and complete withdrawal.
The Security Council has its own interpretation in
resolution 1304 (2000), but everyone’s concern is to
move towards this withdrawal. It is reassuring to say
before this Council that the ministers present at the
Lusaka meeting, as well as the heads of State whom we
met, all reaffirmed their agreement and their common
objective, which is a total withdrawal of all foreign
forces.
The date of 22 February 2001 as a D-day from
which the timetable is calculated was confirmed. In
fact, it should be stressed that the disengagement and
withdrawal of certain forces has already begun.
President Mugabe confirmed the withdrawal of several
thousand Zimbabwean forces from Congolese territory.
When we met with President Museveni in Kampala, he
very clearly indicated that in three weeks all Ugandan
forces will have left Congolese territory, with three
exceptions: a battalion will remain in Bunia for the
present; a battalion will remain in Buta; and finally,
forces from six battalions will remain deployed in the
Ruhenzori mountains along the border between Uganda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The final point concerning the military aspects in
general
is
the
disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration or resettlement of the so-called negative
forces. Events are not exactly in line with the Lusaka
Agreement at present. There were undeniably
thousands of Burundian Front pour la défense de la
démocratie (FDD) militia who left the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with their weapons to return to
Burundi, thus doing more to transfer the war than to
resolve the conflict.
Similarly, during our stay in Rwanda, there were
incursions along the border by hundreds of former
Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and Interahamwe,
and so we repeated to all of the heads of State
concerned that it was crucial for us to be able to
receive, under the auspices of the Joint Military
Commission, very specific plans providing for
disarmament and demobilization, then reintegration or
resettlement of the “negative forces”. We heard directly
from General Mwaniki, Chairman of the Joint Military
Commission, that he is working on an initial
programme involving several thousand militia
members, combatants, and he hopes to be able to
convey this programme to us in the days or weeks to
come.

In addition to these military aspects, it is very
important that we see progress in the inter-Congolese
political dialogue. There is no automatic link between
the two, but we feel, as does the Political Committee,
that these two approaches should move forward in
parallel. Otherwise the entire peace process will be
unbalanced.
From that point of view, the two meetings that we
had with former President Masire, facilitator of the
dialogue, were very encouraging. First, a date was set
for the opening of the preparatory dialogue, the
preparatory conference. The date is 16 July. Secondly,
in order to properly prepare this initial meeting,
Mr. Masire’s representative in Kinshasa, Professor
Ould Lebatt, and Ambassador Mogwe will travel
through the 11 provinces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to prepare this dialogue, to identify in
every province particularly representative individuals
beyond the representatives enrolled in office, if I may
say, which are the Government and the armed groups
who have signed the Lusaka Agreement, as well as the
political parties in Kinshasa.
Finally, one last particularly encouraging
development. On the eve of our arrival in Kinshasa,
President Kabila announced the abolishment of decree
194, which had forbidden any activity by political
parties. We were able to spend an entire morning in
dialogue with the political parties, while there were
demonstrations in the streets of Kinshasa, with banners
and slogans, for the first time in two and a half years.
The political parties are now authorized to express
themselves in public. We have heard the political
parties, civil society and religious leaders express their
hope that this inter-Congolese political dialogue can be
held on Congolese territory. Of course, we must still
identify the venue, but we have received this message
and it is important to convey it.
Apart from those two aspects of the Lusaka
Agreement, the Security Council delegation was
determined to make progress in two areas that we
thought were very important: the economic area and
the human rights area. In the economic field, we were
able to publicly announce some 40 small quick-impact
projects that will be carried out in areas where
MONUC contingents are deployed. It should be
pointed out that when MONUC moves in, security and
confidence are restored. In most cases the population
has literally doubled in the span of a few weeks in the
small communities where MONUC contingents are

5

S/PV.4323

deployed. If confidence is restored, in addition to
security, the economy will also be restored. It was in
this spirit, thanks to the mobilization of the
international community in Kinshasa — the
ambassadors there, the United Nations agencies and the
representatives of the Bretton Woods institutions —
that we were able to put together these 40 small
projects, which are funded and will be carried out in
the weeks to come.
More importantly, when the delegation was in
Mbandaka, on the banks of the Congo River, we were
able to announce the arrival on 7 June of the
Uruguayan riverine unit. This is a major development,
because it made it possible for us to announce the
reopening of the river to commercial navigation. It
should be known that in this country that no longer has
road or rail infrastructure the rivers are the only means
of transportation. It is a major and very positive
development because until three years ago the city of
Kinshasa was dependent on food products from
Kisangani for its survival, and conversely, the clothes,
salt and soap in Kisangani came from Kinshasa. It is
that two-way traffic that we will be able to restore,
thanks to the riverine unit and thanks to the
establishment of a commission that, with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamel
Morjane, will be able to bring together representatives
of the Government, of the Rassemblement congolais
pour la democratie (RCD-Goma) of the FLC and of the
two neighbouring countries concerned — the Central
African Republic and the Republic of the Congo. This
must all be achieved with everyone’s cooperation. It is
a major development. There should be no obstacles
impeding the achievement of this development so
anxiously awaited by millions of Congolese.
The second aspect that we think is very important
and that we have developed systematically with all our
interlocutors, as well as in all our public statements, is
the area of human rights and humanitarian rights. We
have strongly emphasized that we must make progress
in these two areas. Roberto Garretón, the Special
Rapporteur, will visit the country more frequently. As I
said, we will deploy human rights and humanitarian
observers with all MONUC contingents. We have
encouraged the non-governmental organizations and
the religious leaders to publicize the massacres of
which they become aware, because secrecy is often the
accomplice of these massacres. The very fact that
information is circulating is a deterrent. But beyond

6

that, we have said publicly, and to all our interlocutors
in the Congo, that impunity must come to an end, that
procedures must be established to prosecute those who
carry out massacres and that it is up to the Congolese,
within the framework of their dialogue, to decide what
procedures should be followed in this regard. Those are
the results we have achieved.
I will now turn to a third aspect: actions to be
undertaken in the weeks and months to come. In the
military sphere, the most urgent matter is to help the
Ugandan army leave Congolese territory, as was
decided by President Museveni. From that point of
view, two initiatives should be taken immediately. The
first is to help one of the Ugandan battalions, situated
east of Kisangani, leave by using one of Kisangani’s
two airports, because the alternative is for this battalion
to open a road through the Congolese forest. This,
obviously, would be a burden that we should spare that
battalion. Unfortunately — and we said this very
clearly at the Lusaka meeting — the town of Kisangani
is not demilitarized today. It should have been so a year
ago, in implementation of Security Council resolution
1304 (2000). It is still not demilitarized because armed
elements of the RCD-Goma are still in the town. They
are impeding the use of the airports by the withdrawing
Ugandan troops. Therefore, this must be handled
urgently. The authority of the Security Council is at
stake, and Kamel Morjane, with the Council’s active
support, should be able to deal with this item in the
days to come.
For the rules of the game to be respected, the
withdrawal of Ugandan forces, announced by
President Museveni, should be observed in the field,
through the presence of MONUC observers. Beyond
this initial aspect, we must carry out the co-location
between MONUC’s chiefs of staff, who are in
Kinshasa, and the Joint Military Commission’s chiefs
of staff, who are still in Lusaka. As regards the site,
everything is ready. From the security point of view,
the arrival of a contingent of 200 Tunisian soldiers and
officers when we were in Kinshasa provided a very
strong reassurance for those who might have had
doubts about their security. This was the response
awaited so that parties that hesitated to take this step
could come to Kinshasa. The co-location must take
place as soon as possible.
The third item from the military standpoint is
before us. On 15 June, the current MONUC mandate
comes to an end. We will have to find the means to

S/PV.4323

move forward. Since we are awaiting detailed plans
that the Political Committee must convey to us on the
basis of the work that has been done thus far by the
Joint Military Commission, whether concerning the
withdrawal of forces or the disarmament of the
negative forces, we are not in a position today to
recommend moving on to phase III. We have found a
formula that proposes a transition towards phase III.
The ceiling of 5,537 men that was decided by
Security Council resolution 1291 (2000) seems to be
adequate. It is a comfortable ceiling and gives us some
leeway for action. We remain under the ceiling of
5,537 men, and we are ready to move towards phase
III. We are opening the door of the transition to phase
III. Now the ball is in the court of the Political
Committee and of the Joint Military Commission to
provide us as soon as possible with the detailed plans
that we need in order to be able to plan, under the aegis
of the Secretary-General, the next steps of deployment
on Congolese soil, of MONUC observers, and, if
necessary, additional contingents. That covers the
military sphere.
As for the national dialogue, MONUC must
certainly assist the facilitator’s team in moving
throughout the country, which has no infrastructure,
with aeroplanes or by making helicopters available.
Our Security Council has the feeling that it could
discreetly help bring about a consensus, together with
President Masire, on which city would be the best site
for the national dialogue and would welcome it as a
symbol of the reconciliation of the Congolese people.
A difficult point for which we do not have a
solution at present is the provisional administration of
zones evacuated by foreign forces. It is clear that the
Congolese forces that are currently deployed will
remain in their zone, whether space is opened up by the
Government of Kinshasa, by the FLC or by the RCD
Goma. We are afraid that in some very well-identified
areas in the eastern part of the country the withdrawal
of forces could lead to security risks. We are very
aware of that point, even though I stress that it is not
up to MONUC but rather to the Congolese parties
themselves to ensure security in the zones under their
control. It is up to them to maintain law, order and
security in these areas. But this point concerns us as
well, because we are responsible actors.
From the economic standpoint, besides what I
have already mentioned, we returned from Kinshasa

with the feeling that the devaluation that was decided
upon immediately after our departure is bringing
considerable turbulence to the Congolese economy and
social life. We are attentive to this, because, while it is
good to set up a peace plan, we also have to concern
ourselves with social stability, especially in the capital.
This is a message that we will relay to the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, which are
concerned with this situation themselves.
Another economic point I wish to make regards
the pillaging of the Congo’s natural resources. This is
mentioned in the report, as it was at each of our
meetings with the heads of State concerned, and we
stressed that our message was clear: the pillaging must
stop. We are not aiming to punish; we are aiming to
encourage. The dialogue has begun. It is up to
everyone to take the necessary measures to rectify what
needs to be rectified. As for the Council, on the basis
of the addendum that is being prepared, we will meet in
three months to have a more detailed discussion of the
situation and of the developments that we hope will
have taken place within the next three months.
Finally, we proposed a project for the future that
is not new but that today is increasingly topical: the
idea of a conference of all the States concerned, those
of greater Central Africa — a regional conference — in
order to deal with the matter of security between States
in the region, their integrated economic development
and human rights issues, especially minority rights.
These are the three categories that we have suggested.
The idea was well received everywhere we went, even
if some stressed that we first had to make progress
towards peace in every country before organizing the
conference, but the idea is once again topical.
The fourth and last part of my statement deals
with Burundi. As much as we were encouraged by the
situation and developments in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we remain quite concerned about an
impasse — a kind of vicious circle — in which
Burundi finds itself locked at the present time. We met
with President Buyoya, with the political parties and
with the leaders of the two armed groups that are
threatening to renew hostilities. We visited President
Mandela at length in Johannesburg on the first day of
our visit to the region. We said very clearly to the
leaders of the two armed groups that there was no
military solution. We have the most respected
personality in the world dealing with the fate of
Burundi, and he has proposed a path to peace, so it is

7

S/PV.4323

certainly unacceptable that some would consider taking
the capital by force or pursuing offensives, even if only
to support a political process. The path of dialogue
exists, and President Mandela embodies it. The Arusha
Agreement is on the table. If some have corrections,
additions or criticisms to make, they must do so around
the negotiating table.
There is a temptation in the region to impose
sanctions against those two groups. We reached an
agreement with President Museveni, who is the
Chairman of the group of States concerned, that in the
immediate future the messages of the Security Council
to the two groups must be used in order to consult the
grass roots. We are waiting for their responses. We will
give them some time; but if by the deadline, which has
not been set, there is no positive response from the two
armed groups as to their intention to return to the
negotiating table, then perhaps the heads of State of the
region could decide among themselves to take
measures.
President Buyoya spoke about his deep concern
over the return, as I said earlier, of combatants from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We spoke about
this clearly with President Kabila. He also spoke of his
concern about the refugee camps that house 500,000
Burundian refugees on Tanzanian soil, on the other side
of the border, and that, according to President Buyoya,
are a starting point for quick operations carried out by
armed groups on Burundian soil. In our meeting with
President Mkapa in Dar es Salaam, we suggested that a
possible idea would be to set up a TanzanianBurundian commission in order to study this matter
and to find concrete, pragmatic ways of trying to
reduce the tension.
My final comment about Burundi is that we have
to find a way that would allow President Mandela, the
resident facilitator in Johannesburg, and the SecretaryGeneral’s Representative in Bujumbura, Mr. Jean
Arnault, who has done an excellent job, to be able to
work better together. We made contact with President
Mandela after having spoken with the SecretaryGeneral, but we undoubtedly need some imagination
and creativity when it comes to finding ways to help
President Mandela succeed in Burundi.
I would like to conclude by warmly commending,
on behalf of our entire delegation, the remarkable work
carried out by the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Burundi. The Senegalese

8

contingent, which we saw in the field in Mbandaka,
working under extremely difficult conditions, provides
a clear example of what the United Nations can
accomplish. As I said earlier, we were also very
impressed by the arrival of the Tunisians.
In addition, I would like to pay tribute to two
men: Kamel Morjane, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo who, with exemplary determination, caution,
wisdom, readiness and unremitting effort, has managed
to create something that last year seemed to be
impossible — the clear climate of trust and cooperation
that now exists between the United Nations and the
Congolese authorities, whoever they may be; and Jean
Arnault in Bujumbura, who, under equally difficult
conditions, has done a remarkable job of engaging all
the parties in dialogue. Finally, I would like to pay
tribute to all the members of the Secretary-General’s
team, who helped us to prepare for the trip. It was a
pleasure to be able to carry out such a well-prepared
mission.
Let us be clear: the United Nations will be
deployed for a long time. We must carefully follow up
the results of this mission on an almost daily basis. We
will have to move gradually towards peace. We cannot
stop along the path, because stopping would mean
retreating. I believe that our entire delegation has that
determination, because if the United Nations and the
Security Council does not get involved, who will go
there?
The President: I thank the Ambassador of France
for his report.
I want to express the Council’s appreciation for
the efforts of all the members of the mission and for
Ambassador Levitte’s leadership.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: At the outset, I wish to
pay tribute to the just-concluded Security Council
mission to the Great Lakes region. I believe that that
timely and important visit served to consolidate the
recent momentum for peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and demonstrated the
importance that the United Nations attaches to the
peace process there. We heard a very eloquent and
comprehensive briefing from Ambassador Levitte, who
led the team.

S/PV.4323

By visiting not only the States signatories of the
Lusaka Agreement, but also Burundi, the Security
Council recognized the linkage between the conflicts in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi. It
is clear that we will have to work to ensure the
implementation of both the Lusaka and the Arusha
Agreements if we are to achieve peace throughout the
region.
The Democratic Republic of Congo, a vast and
impoverished country devastated by conflict, with
virtually no infrastructure, presents an immense
operational, administrative and logistical challenge to
any outside mission. However, we are now faced with a
genuine window of opportunity for peace and security
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and I think
that Ambassador Levitte described it very clearly.
An important signal was the reopening of the
river network in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for humanitarian assistance and commercial exchanges
between Kinshasa and Kisangani. More specifically,
there has been progress on disengagement, and the
United Nations has been actively assisting the parties
in implementing their commitments. The United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) has deployed 490
military observers, who, supported by 1,660 troops, are
verifying the disengagement. Already, MONUC has
verified close to 60 per cent of the redeployment
positions.
In the near future, the parties will be finalizing
plans for the withdrawal of all foreign troops, as well
as for the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation and resettlement of armed groups. This
process will also present a major challenge to MONUC
and the international community as a whole. The
planning for these operations has already begun — of
course, we need to work with those on the ground —
and must be incorporated into the overall planning for
phase III of the Mission. I think that the insight that the
Council has brought will also be very helpful as we
move to transition and implementation of phase III. My
recommendations for that phase will be contained in
my forthcoming report to the Security Council, to be
issued in mid-June. I hope the international community
will also contribute generously.
Significantly, there has also been a change in the
political climate within the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Recently, we have seen progress in the inter-

Congolese dialogue, about which we have just heard;
that is an indispensable element of the peace process.
Recent developments include the signing by the
Congolese parties on 4 May in Lusaka of a Declaration
of Principles for the conduct of the dialogue; the
announcement on 17 May by President Kabila lifting
the ban on political parties; and the announcement by
the facilitator for the inter-Congolese dialogue, Sir
Ketumile Masire, that he will convene a preparatory
meeting for the dialogue on 16 July, as we have just
heard, which could open the way for political
reconciliation.
Among the remaining urgent challenges in the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I wish to highlight the following. First, with
regard to the humanitarian situation, recent political
and military developments have resulted in greater
access to vulnerable communities, including some
which had been beyond our reach since the start of the
war. Needs assessments are currently being carried out
in these areas. It is imperative that additional resources
be made available to address the emerging
requirements, as well as to fund quick-impact projects
that can bring immediate benefits to the population.
Frankly speaking, I believe that current
international support for humanitarian activities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is unacceptably
low, with only 20 per cent of the 2001 consolidated
appeal for $139.4 million being funded. The Council
may wish to take up this issue with donors as a matter
of urgency.
Secondly, I would like to speak about human
rights. I think we have heard quite a lot about human
rights. The dire situation concerning the human rights
of civilians is well known to Council members. I
believe that it is important to step up MONUC’s
monitoring activities in this area without delay. In
cooperation with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, I have taken steps to
increase the number of human rights officers in
MONUC. Within this area of concern, the question of
impunity has to be addressed by investigating alleged
massacres and other major violations of human rights.
Without accountability for the most severe crimes,
there can be no lasting peace.
Thirdly, as the Council is aware, the use of child
soldiers has been pervasive in all fighting forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My Special

9

S/PV.4323

Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Olara
Otunnu, is currently visiting the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and I am looking forward to receiving
his recommendations on how to address this issue in a
comprehensive manner.
Separately, the security situation continues to be
precarious, especially in the east of the county. In Ituri
province, where six workers from the International
Committee of the Red Cross were killed recently, only
one international organization, Memisa, has resumed
work outside Bunia, the provincial capital. At present,
there are only three United Nations field security
officers for the entire country, which is totally
inadequate.
We face a truly daunting challenge in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, I believe
that there is a foundation for peace, based on progress
in three areas: the holding of the ceasefire, about which
we have just heard; the steady implementation of the
disengagement of troops; and the liberalization of
political life. As members well know, peace will not be
brought to the Democratic Republic of the Congo by
MONUC alone. The leaders and the peoples of the
region must lead the way and create a new culture of
peace and coexistence. Beyond the region, every
member of the United Nations family has a role to play
in helping to secure the peace and in improving the
lives of the Congolese people.
I applaud the Council’s commitment and
contribution to this cause and look forward to building
on the progress that has been achieved. I think the
Council should be very proud of its mission and of
what it has achieved on the ground.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): I wish first of all, on behalf of my
Government and on my own account, to convey our
deep condolences to the Government and the people of
the Republic of Zimbabwe on the untimely death of
His Excellency Mr. Moven Mahachi, Minister of
Defence, who died last Saturday in a traffic accident.
Mr. Mahachi played a key role in defending my
country’s national sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence. His sudden death is a great loss
to the Congolese people. At this sad time, our thoughts

10

go first to Mr. Mahachi’s widow and children, and we
convey our condolences to the family of the deceased.
On 3 May, the Council heard my Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, His
Excellency Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, say how
pleased he was to see you, Sir, presiding over the work
of the Security Council for the month of May, which
has indeed been crucial and decisive for a final solution
to the war of aggression of which my country has been
the victim since August 1998. This is reflected also in
the important message of peace and reconciliation just
conveyed by the Security Council mission to all the
countries of the Great Lakes region.
My delegation welcomes the presence here today
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan; we take this
opportunity to pay tribute to him for having retained
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as one of his top priorities. Our thanks go also to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kamel Morjane, and to all the United Nations
personnel working in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for the excellent work they are doing in my
country.
My delegation conveys its sincere thanks to
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte of France and to the
other members of the Security Council mission for the
clarity of the report now before the Council, despite its
late publication. We thank them for having come and
for having successfully carried out a Council mission
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the
remainder of the region that bore a message of hope
and peace: a source of reassurance to the peoples of
Congo and of the rest of the region.
In my delegation’s view, the mission sent a strong
signal and conveyed the Security Council’s genuine,
unanimous determination to move ahead in the peace
process, to put an end to the plundering of the wealth
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to take
up the question of the massive violations of human
rights and of international humanitarian law that have
been taking place on the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since the aggression began.
My Government also welcomes the partnership
established two years ago between the Security Council
and the Political Committee for the implementation of
the Ceasefire Agreement for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is our hope that this cooperation will
continue until real peace is restored to my country.

S/PV.4323

It is time for the Security Council to declare that
the war of aggression has exceeded the bounds of what
is tolerable and acceptable, and that the occupying
forces must immediately return home without further
ado. The death of 3 million Congolese civilians, as
reported by the non-governmental International Rescue
Committee, is not a mere regrettable occurrence; it is a
genuine tragedy. The massacres in my country resulted
from a painstakingly planned policy of “cleansing”,
especially on the part of Rwanda, in reprisal for what
had taken place seven years earlier and in line with a
policy of settling people from that country in Kivu and
Maniema provinces. Those responsible for the
genocide of Congolese people must be prosecuted and
punished.
Responsibility is borne also by the Ugandan
authorities who instigated ethnic discord between the
Hema and Lendu communities and who have played a
decisive role in the three wars in Kisangani, where
more than 1,000 Congolese lost their lives. The
Burundian, Ugandan and Rwandan authorities
responsible for the flight of thousands of Congolese —
who are now either refugees or internally displaced
persons — must also be brought to justice. The leaders
of those countries must understand that the little regard
they still enjoy within the international community is
no guarantee of impunity. There is no amnesty for
them; they must realize that sooner or later they will be
brought to justice.
My Government reminds the aggressors of their
obligations with respect to the safety and security of
civilians under the Fourth Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949. We stress that the occupying forces
must be held responsible for human rights violations in
territory under their control. In that connection, my
Government regrets the deplorable events that led to
the April murder of members of the staff of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and
the recent abduction of members of a forestry company
that was illegally exploiting timber in the eastern part
of my country, which is under occupation.
It is important, indeed crucial, that the process of
disengagement and withdrawal be accelerated in order
to put an end to the wretched situation of the
Congolese people.
The Security Council can no longer be satisfied
with repetitive, thundering declarations about possible

movement towards disengagement or withdrawal of
troops. The Council should abide by its own
resolutions and force the parties to implement them as
well. In Lusaka, the mission and the Political
Committee welcomed a statement by one of the
signatories, relating to the Ugandan occupation zone,
that disengagement would occur in agreed areas as
from 1 June 2001. Security pretexts cannot be a
precondition for disengagement by that party.
That is a challenge that the Security Council must
take up. What will happen if that party makes no move
towards withdrawal in the next two days? Will the
Council await another statement of good intentions,
thus risking the loss of its credibility? Or will the
Council finally use its powers to impose enforcement
measures on that party in conformity with the
provisions of resolution 1341 (2001) of 22 February
2001? Those questions deserve an appropriate answer.
The approach to the withdrawal of foreign troops
includes a timetable that began on 22 February 2001;
this derives from resolution 1341 (2001). Our
understanding of this is that by 15 June 2001 the
parties should provide information about the
deployment of their troops and should issue the order
to withdraw.
A parallel process of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement of armed groups should be implemented in
conformity with the Lusaka Agreement, which, I would
recall, recognizes the need to address the security
concerns of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
of neighbouring countries.
In order to make a real contribution to the
preparation and implementation of the plans for
withdrawal and for disarmament, demobilization,
resettlement and reintegration in the context of the
third phase of MONUC deployment, my Government
intends to provide all the appropriate information in
due course.
The extent of the withdrawal, the geographical
area it covers, the rejection of a Congo divided in
perpetuity and the need to tackle the many tasks of
peacemaking after the withdrawal of all foreign troops
will require a significant and appreciable increase in
the civilian, military and associated personnel of
MONUC, as well as a broadening of its mandate to
allow it to carry out the accompanying policies aimed
at ensuring peace, security and stability in the

11

S/PV.4323

Democratic Republic of the Congo. My Government
therefore invites the Council to begin considering a
possible increase in MONUC personnel once phase III
of deployment is initiated.

were well known and have since been confirmed. It
was a struggle to control the natural resources of the
third economic hub of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

My Government has noted the proposal of
President Masire, the facilitator of the inter-Congolese
dialogue, to convene the preparatory meeting for the
dialogue on 16 July 2001. In this connection, I wish
once again to confirm that my Government will spare
no effort in helping the facilitator so that the meeting
can be held on the scheduled date.

The mission was able to see for itself that the
martyred city of Kisangani has yet to be demilitarized,
in violation of the relevant provisions of resolution
1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000. My Government would
ask the Security Council to take the appropriate
measures to ensure the effective demilitarization of
Kisangani and to require the notoriously recidivist
Uganda and Rwanda to provide reparations for the loss
of human life and the material damage in the city.

Similarly, it is our hope that, together, we will be
able to convene the inter-Congolese dialogue as soon
as possible, bringing together all the socio-political
stratums and movements in our country without any
outside interference or military pressure so that they
can consider and reflect on the future of the Congolese
nation and have their say on the new institutions of the
next Republic. The promulgation on 17 May 2001 of
law 001/2001, on the organization and functioning of
political parties and groupings, may be appreciated in
that light.
The dates and venue for the inter-Congolese
dialogue will be decided by its participants. As of now,
my Government can affirm its readiness for the
preparatory meeting and the dialogue to be held in the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My Government will do its utmost to ensure
security for all participants in the preparatory meeting
and in the dialogue itself. Likewise, my Government
assures the Council that it will take all possible
measures to provide for the security of the members of
the Joint Military Commission (JMC), which is to
share the headquarters of MONUC in Kinshasa. In so
doing, my Government will undoubtedly enjoy the
support of the Tunisian troops of MONUC deployed in
the capital. This co-location must take place so that the
JMC can discharge its mandate in the best possible
conditions.
Last year, the city of Kisangani was ground-zero
in the war of aggression. Kisangani was the theatre of
exceptionally violent clashes between the regular
armed forces of Uganda and Rwanda, in flagrant
violation of the Ceasefire Agreement. The fighting, the
most recent outbreak of which took place under the
eyes of MONUC, caused enormous loss of human life
and the destruction of the economic, social and cultural
infrastructures of the city. The reasons for the fighting

12

The Rwandan troops must totally evacuate
Kisangani. The Ugandan troops mired and blocked in
the outskirts of the city must be authorized to return
home. The welcome given by the people of Kisangani
to the Moroccan troops is an indication in itself of the
entire Congolese people’s weariness and rejection of
the presence of these uninvited and unwanted troops.
The Moroccan troops of MONUC are perfectly able to
provide the necessary security for the city of
Kisangani. Their presence must be reinforced. The
ability of the United Nations to meet the challenge of
demilitarizing Kisangani will bear witness to the
authority of the Security Council.
With respect to the situation in Burundi, my
delegation is pleased that, for the first time, a
delegation led by the Minister of Defence of Burundi
was invited to participate in the joint meeting of the
Political Committee for the Implementation of the
Ceasefire Agreement in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Security Council of the United Nations
in order to discuss the process of disarming,
demobilizing, resettling and reintegrating all the armed
groups. We are also pleased that, during its visit, the
Council was able to meet with the leaders of the
Burundian Front pour la défense de la démocratie.
As members of the Council know, although
Burundi is not a signatory to the Ceasefire Agreement
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, that country,
despite ever less credible denials and refutations,
continues to maintain a significant number of troops in
the territory of my country.
The Lusaka meetings are thus very important in
that they may encourage Burundi to continue the
withdrawal of its troops that was observed last March,
as we emphasized in a note addressed to the Security

S/PV.4323

Council last April and which the Secretary-General
noted in paragraph 28 of his seventh report on
MONUC. These meetings are also a warning to that
country that it must immediately halt the redeployment
of its troops observed last week in the Kalemie region
and withdraw from that city and from the regions of
Fizi and Uvira, which are currently under the complete
control of the regular army of Burundi.
Last April in Libreville, Gabon, the question of
the withdrawal of Burundi’s troops was addressed in
talks at the highest level between my country and
Burundi. We had intended to continue our discussions
in Bujumbura in conjunction with the work of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa. We would have
made significant progress had it not been for an
attempted coup d’état by young officers of the
Burundian army.
The Lusaka meetings are therefore very important
to us because, on the one hand, they have cleared my
Government of any involvement and borne witness to
its impartiality in that country’s domestic crisis and, on
the other, they have created a new dimension in the
inter-Burundian negotiations.
We are convinced that a settlement of the crisis in
Burundi will have a positive impact on the settlement
of the war of aggression. We therefore ardently hope
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo will no
longer have to suffer the negative impact of the
situation in Burundi. We hope that the brotherly people
of Burundi will be able to re-establish national concord
as soon as possible. We urge President Nelson Mandela
to spare no effort to refloat the good ship Burundi and
to pilot it safely to port, in particular through the
process begun at Arusha.
The Congolese people has suffered and continues
to suffer with exemplary courage the consequences of a
lengthy political transition that has had devastating
consequences for its economic infrastructure, as well as
of two armed conflicts, one of which is ongoing.
Indeed, the Democratic Republic of the Congo today is
a poor and heavily indebted country, whose
consecutive conflicts have exacerbated the rapid
destruction of its economic fabric and social
infrastructure, which had already been heavily
damaged by years of mismanagement.
Throughout the provinces of our country, access
to the villages has become extremely precarious as a

result of the destruction of roads and of the lack of
security. The entire health-care system has crumbled,
bringing malnutrition, recurring epidemics and a
shortage of medicine. According to figures of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
approximately 16 million people — 33 per cent of the
Congolese population — are directly affected by the
war. Likewise, the chronic devaluation of our national
currency, in particular the most recent such
recommended by the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, has had a devastating impact on daily
life in the Congo.
The Congolese people were therefore greatly
relieved to learn of the opening of the River Congo
between Kinshasa and Mbandaka. We have great hope
that the imminent arrival of Uruguayan troops of
MONUC at Mbandaka will provide security along the
river, allow goods and people to resume travel and
contribute through such trade to relaunching economic
activity in the affected areas.
The international community is therefore invited
to help my country to emerge from the crisis in which
it finds itself by, among other things, participating in
initiatives aimed at restoring lasting peace and
resuming partnerships and bilateral and multilateral
cooperation in accordance with our national
development plans that will be formulated for the
economic and social well-being of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As peace is a prerequisite for
development, the Security Council and the
international community are also invited to address the
issue of the Congolese situation from the perspective of
an appropriate post-conflict response.
In its tireless quest to live in peace and harmony
with all of its neighbours, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo fully endorses the idea of an international
conference on peace and security in the Great Lakes
region. My country is convinced that the holding of
such a conference will be one of the peaceful ways of
bringing peace and understanding to our entire region,
which has suffered so much for almost 10 years now.
All countries in the region face the same task of
strengthening domestic peace and achieving economic
reconstruction. Resuming good-neighbourly relations
will be essential for all of our countries. It is up to us to
restore peace to the Great Lakes region and to create
the appropriate conditions for economic and social
development. If it is well nurtured, recovery in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can only be positive

13

S/PV.4323

for the whole Great Lakes region, of which Rwanda
and Burundi are part. Although of course in a different
way, we will together be able to rebuild the regulatory
mechanism that existed not so long ago between our
three countries to help ensure peaceful coexistence.
That mechanism also played an important role in
conflict prevention and was aimed at stabilization
throughout the Great Lakes region.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to say
that my Government and the people of the Congo were
greatly impressed by the visit of the Security Council
mission, by the members themselves and by their
commitment to the cause of peace in my country. We
believe that the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
regain peace, dignity and its territorial integrity. That
will be a victory for the Security Council and for the
entire international community. We extend an
invitation in advance to the members of the Security
Council to visit us again in the Great Lakes region once
peace is restored in order to see the great achievement
to which they will have contributed.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Rwanda. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): The
Government of Rwanda would like to congratulate the
Security Council on its important initiative, under the
auspices and with the support of the Secretary-General,
to visit the Great Lakes region of Africa. For us, that
visit was a success not only for the Council, which
conducted the visit, but also for the countries of the
region that it visited. With the arrival in the field of the
most important body of the United Nations, the Lusaka
peace Agreement has been reinvigorated and its
signatories have been given determination to see it
succeed.
Nevertheless,
the
disarmament
and
disengagement of the negative forces, which include
those who planned and carried out the genocide in
Rwanda — namely, the Interahamwe militia and the
former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR), which have
been welcomed with open arms on Congolese soil
since the time of the Mobutu regime — continue to be
necessary. Those forces will continue to be an obstacle
unless they are brought under control. All support
provided for those forces, no matter by whom, must
immediately and definitely come to an end.

14

The Government of Rwanda is pleased to see that
in the report presented by the Ambassador of France,
who headed the mission, the Security Council
concluded from its visit that there is a need for
assistance for the rehabilitation, reconstruction and
social and economic development of countries that
have been victims of conflicts. That international
solidarity must take shape very urgently, especially for
Rwanda, which is unfortunately the African victim that
has suffered most from the odious crime of genocide.
The members of the Council were able to visit
genocide sites during their visit to Rwanda and were
able to realize the enormity of the crimes that were
committed.
In that regard, were the Security Council to pay
particular attention to the report of the commission led
by former Swedish Prime Minister Carlsson and to the
implementation of its recommendations regarding postgenocide financial assistance to Rwanda, it would be of
great assistance to us.
The Political Committee for the Lusaka peace
Agreement, which is headed by Rwanda, will continue
to cooperate closely with the Security Council in order
that our desire to see the Lusaka peace Agreement
implemented in all its clauses can be realized.
Allow me to conclude this brief statement by
warmly congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
remarkable presidency of the Council in the month of
May 2001, as well as on having so effectively
conducted the current and previous debates.
The President: I thank the representative of
Rwanda for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of South Africa. I invite her to take a
seat at the Council table and to make her statement.
Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. We would also like to commend the Security
Council, under your presidency, for the important
initiative it took in dispatching a mission to the Great
Lakes region and for conducting this open briefing.
My delegation would also like to thank
Ambassador Levitte for his comprehensive briefing.
The mission’s visit to the region was of historic
importance in that it engaged, and consulted with, a
wide range of interested parties. The visit has also been

S/PV.4323

able to refocus world attention on the conflict in the
Great Lakes region. Similarly, the visit will go a long
way in promoting the credibility of the Security
Council among the people of the Great Lakes region.
My delegation believes that, now more than ever,
there exists a great chance to achieve peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
hope that the momentum developed towards peace will
be sustained, and that it will bring about an accelerated
end to the conflict. That momentum could be greatly
sustained by the speedy deployment of phase III of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
My delegation has taken note of the report of the
mission, and though we have not yet had the
opportunity to study it, we hope that the views and
proposals put forward by the interested parties will
better inform the future course of action to be taken by
the Security Council. The Council’s involvement
should be further supported by the Lusaka signatories
by observing the ceasefire and by abiding by their
commitments under the Kampala and Harare
disengagement plans.
The inter-Congolese dialogue still remains key to
the establishment of a broad-based, democratic process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this
regard, my delegation welcomes the recent
announcement by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to allow political parties to
participate in the inter-Congolese dialogue.
In order to establish a sustainable peace, it is vital
that the peace process be complemented by a
rejuvenation of economic activity in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The re-establishment of the
communications and transportation infrastructure will
be critical in achieving this rejuvenation. In this regard,
my delegation wishes to stress the importance of the
international
community’s
support
for
the
implementation of quick-impact projects. Such a dual
approach to achieving peace and stability will ensure
that as the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo trade their guns for peace, they will be able to
focus their energies on the reconstruction of their
country.
My delegation believes that ultimately it is the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo who
will determine their destiny. However, we believe that
the international community can contribute to the

restoration of peace, stability and development in that
country. South Africa would like to see a situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo where all the
people could benefit from the enormous natural
resources that the country has been endowed with. If a
state of freedom from fear can be achieved, freedom
from want will be a long-term benefit.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Namibia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. It
is once again testimony to the seriousness with which
your delegation views the situation in the Great Lakes
region and particularly in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his presence this morning and for the very important
statement he delivered. We commend him for his
continued peace efforts in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I also wish to thank Ambassador Levitte for his
excellent presentation of the report of the Security
Council mission to the Great Lakes region and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is clear from the
report that the mission benefited greatly from
Ambassador Levitte’s outstanding leadership qualities
and professionalism. His diplomatic skills in
discharging the responsibilities of the Council have
allowed the mission to successfully execute its mandate
and to provide the Council with a comprehensive report
with valuable conclusions and recommendations.
My delegation is glad to note that the Security
Council mission found much that was encouraging in
its visit to the Great Lakes region. My delegation
wishes to underscore the fact that the window of
opportunity for peace clearly exists mainly because of
plausible peace initiatives by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
commitment of the parties to the implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. It is therefore our hope
that the Security Council is now convinced about the
urgent need for its continued strong support to enable
the speedy and successful implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement.
The timely planning and approval of phase III in
the deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) is crucial for the smooth implementation of

15

S/PV.4323

the peace process. In this regard, we welcome the
mission’s recommendation that the Security Council
consider approving a transition to phase III for
MONUC activities. In all this, it is again submitted that
the complexity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo peace process should be taken into account
when considering the size and mandate of deploying
phase III of MONUC.
My delegation shares the concern expressed by
the mission about the reluctance to disengage on the
part of the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo
(MLC). We agree that the Security Council should
closely monitor the situation and ensure that the MLC
disengages, as was promised at the meeting with the
Political Committee.
Another concern that remains is the continuing
occupation of Kisangani. We call on the Security
Council to continue to insist that Kisangani be
demilitarized without further delay, as provided for in
resolution 1304 (2000). We also support the mission’s
recommendation that the Council consider further
measures to promote compliance with this resolution. It
is correct that this city could play a much broader role
in the economic and political life of the country.
My delegation furthermore reiterates its deep
concern for the dire humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly in the
eastern part of the country. We call on the Security
Council to ensure that those responsible for human
rights violations in that part of the country are brought
to justice.
My delegation also welcomes the progress made
in the preparation for the inter-Congolese dialogue. We
wish to commend Sir Ketumile Masire, the neutral
facilitator, and we welcome his proposal to convene a
preparatory meeting for the dialogue on 16 July.
However, we wish to emphasize that the dialogue is for
the Congolese people, and it should be conducted
without foreign interference.
With regard to the extension of civil
administration to zones vacated by foreign forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in our view the
Government should take over such functions. We call
on the international community to assist the
Government in carrying out these responsibilities.
My delegation agrees that a complete return to
peace will be stimulated by an increase of economic

16

activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
welcome the reopening of the Congo River, which,
apart from the economic advantages, will also have
positive consequences for confidence-building and the
strengthening of a sense of national unity. The
implementation of quick-impact projects will be
welcome, but we share the recommendation that the
international community consider much broader
economic assistance to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to accompany the onset of peace.
Furthermore, my delegation wishes to reiterate its
concern regarding the plundering of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Security Council should adopt urgent measures to
stop these practices. In this regard, we welcome the
Council’s recommendation that if no progress is made
within three months, the Council should consider
taking the measures necessary to put an end to any
continuing illegitimate exploitation.
My delegation welcomes the efforts of the
Security Council mission to provide momentum to the
peace process in Burundi, and we support its
recommendations. We also commend the efforts of the
facilitator of the Burundi peace process, former
President Nelson Mandela, and we continue to support
his important work. My delegation also reiterates its
full support for an international conference on the
Great Lakes region at an appropriate time.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
its continued commitment to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and the Harare and Kampala disengagement
plans and their speedy and full implementation. We
also wish to reiterate our full cooperation with
MONUC.
The President: I thank the representative of
Namibia for his kind words addressed to the United
States delegation.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Uganda. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Beyendeza (Uganda): It is an honour for me
to participate in this open briefing of the Security
Council on the important subject of the Great Lakes
region. This follows the Security Council mission to
the area. Therefore, on behalf of the Government of
Uganda, I thank you, Mr. President, and all the
members of the Council for this opportunity.

S/PV.4323

In welcoming back the Security Council team that
visited the Great Lakes region, including my country,
my delegation hopes not only that the team succeeded
in carrying out the terms of reference with which it was
mandated, but also that the Council will now be
enriched by the tremendous experience the members
must have acquired on this visit and that it will be able
to use it to further the cause of peace in the region.
Within the framework of the terms of reference of
the mission, my delegation would like to use this
opportunity to update the Security Council on two
areas: the progress in Uganda’s troop withdrawal,
which is in support of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement,
and the issue of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The withdrawal of Ugandan troops is progressing
well. I could say that it is progressing according to
schedule. Last Friday, the Uganda People’s Defence
Forces completed its troop withdrawal from the
northeastern Congolese town of Isiro. The second
phase of complete withdrawal of the Ugandan troops
started yesterday, Tuesday, from a town called Gemena.
Members may remember that in February 2001, our 7th
Battalion was withdrawn from Gemena, but some units
remained behind, guarding the airport. It is hoped that
by the end of this week the last group will be pulled
out.
After the Gemena pullout, our troops will then
leave eight other Congolese towns: Dongo, Basankusu,
Gbadolite, Lisala, Bitembo, Beni, Kanyabayonga and
Bafwasende.
Uganda has requested the Security Council to
allow it to use Bangoka International Airport in
Kisangani to pull out some of its troops and heavy
equipment that are in Bafwasende. The leader of the
Council delegation referred to this matter. We are
pleased that the United Nations has accepted for us to
use Kisangani, but this is still “in principle”, and we
understand that the matter has been referred to the Joint
Political Committee of the Lusaka Agreement. I would
like to emphasise that the use of Bangoka International
Airport is very crucial, because our 65th Battalion in
Bafwasende has no other route on which to pull out. So
we appeal to the Security Council to assist us in this
exercise.
The second issue on which my delegation would
like to update the Council concerns the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Members may recall that during the Council debate on
3 May 2001, in this Chamber, following the release of
the report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2001/357), the Uganda delegation stated that the
Government of Uganda took the allegations in that
report seriously and welcomed the opportunity to lay
these matters to rest.
On 23 May 2001 the Government of Uganda
appointed an independent judiciary commission of
inquiry to investigate these allegations. The
Government has named Justice David Porter, a
distinguished retired British judge, as the chairman of
this judiciary commission. Other members include
Justice Joseph Berko, a judge of the Court of Appeal,
and Mr. John Rwambuya, a retired Ugandan senior
United Nations official.
This independent commission will investigate
these allegations in an open and transparent manner
and will report to the Government for appropriate
action. The commission will start its work on Monday,
4 June. The Security Council will be updated on the
outcome of this commission at the appropriate time.
I am sure that the members of the Security
Council who were on the team to the Great Lakes
region may recollect the undivided attention they
received from President Museveni, who spent many
hours, putting almost all other State matters aside,
discussing and sharing with the members of the team
all possible combinations of formulas to find a solution
to the problem of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Such attention and concern by President
Museveni was not accidental. It demonstrated the
seriousness that Uganda attaches to the need to end the
conflict and to have peace in the Great Lakes region in
general and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in particular.
Uganda has strongly maintained that the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement addresses two fundamental areas
which are at the root of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. It addresses the
security concerns of all countries in the region,
including the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its neighbours; and the internal dimension of the
conflict, through a national dialogue involving all the
Congolese parties with equal say. This is part of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

17

S/PV.4323

Uganda therefore reaffirms its support for the
inter-Congolese dialogue under the neutral facilitator,
Sir Ketumile Masire. I would like to inform the
Council, through you, Mr. President, that President
Museveni and Sir Ketumile Masire concluded a
meeting along those lines this morning in Kampala.
Uganda believes that our security will be ensured
if there is peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we believe that this can be
achieved through the most viable framework, which
remains the Lusaka Agreement. That is why Uganda’s
troop withdrawal from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo would not affect our participation in the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Burundi. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you sincerely, Mr. President, for
having organized this important public meeting on the
Great Lakes region. I would also like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte for his brilliant
statement introducing the report of the Security
Council mission to the Great Lakes region and for his
leadership of the Council mission.
The delegation of Burundi welcomes the
Council’s mission to the Great Lakes region and, in
particular, its visit to Burundi, which enabled the
Council to examine and assess the conflict ravaging my
own country and the region at large.
The Council’s report has tried to deal with the
main issues of the Burundi conflict: the problem of
security and the future of the peace process. On
security issues, the Government of Burundi is pleased
to note that finally the Council was able to hear from
the mediator and other leaders in the Great Lakes
region about the danger of total war in Burundi due to
spillover from the war in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. My delegation welcomes the very clear
message given by the Council to all the protagonists in
the Burundi conflict.
In the course of its talks with the two rebel
groups, the Council was also able to recognize that
those groups regard the ceasefire as the lowest priority
in their plans. As for the role of the region in seeking a
solution to the security problem in Burundi, the
Council will have seen that some are really committed

18

to helping right now, while others are still reluctant and
keep repeating to whoever will listen that there is no
infiltration or cross-over along their borders with
Burundi.
My delegation would like to reaffirm that the
rebel groups and those that support them are nurturing
the hope that there can be a military solution in
Burundi, thus endangering the peace process. My
delegation is equally convinced that some of Burundi’s
neighbouring countries have adopted an attitude that is
contrary to the spirit of the peace agreement, despite
the fact that they have co-sponsored it. The Security
Council must therefore act without delay. It must
receive responses from those countries and those armed
groups to the proposals made to them by the Council
during the visit to the effect that they must truly
cooperate with the Government in settling security
issues along the common border. The Council can no
longer delay, because the longer the delay, the less
likely it is that full-scale war can be averted. The
Government of Burundi supports the position of the
mediator and of some leaders in the region who are
calling for the imposition of immediate sanctions on
armed groups and those that support them. These
sanctions are envisaged in the Arusha process and in
the Lusaka process.
My delegation proposes that the next meeting
with the armed groups, the third Libreville meeting,
should be scheduled as soon as possible, and that the
date set should be taken as a deadline for determining
the definitive approach to be taken concerning the
armed groups and other actors in the Burundi conflict.
To wait any longer would be to spoil any chance of
achieving an end to the Burundi conflict.
The Burundi Government is particularly pleased
at the Security Council’s proposal to establish a joint
Tanzanian-Burundian commission to deal with the
issue of refugees. Indeed, three weeks ago, a tri-partite
agreement on repatriating Burundi refugees was signed
in Dar es Salaam by the Government of Burundi, the
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). My Government would like to
repeat here that it is prepared to take in these refugees
and calls on the Tanzanian Government to accept the
immediate establishment of this joint commission so
that together we can launch a campaign to mobilize for
the return of those who wish to come back, who could

S/PV.4323

then return to their homes or wait temporarily in
reception centres.
All questions relating to psychological and
logistical preparations for repatriation, for receiving
these people in Burundi, for the security aspects of
repatriation and for reintegration — all of this has to be
considered jointly by the three signatories to the
Agreement mentioned earlier. The United Nations,
through UNHCR, is invited to encourage this project
and, for some time, to maintain the level of resources
being used for the refugees currently in the camps in
Tanzania. In making this proposal, the Burundi
Government intends to help maintain the civilian
nature of the refugee camps, and to end their use as
centres for recruiting fighters, as places for organizing
infiltrations by the rebel groups and as fall-back points.
The Government of Burundi has taken note of the
intention of the Tanzanian authorities to repatriate the
Burundian
refugees.
This
is
an
interesting
development, which the Government of Burundi
welcomes. We invite all partners to work together to
harmonize its realization. Certainly, such an operation
will contribute to the progressive improvement of
security within the borders of Burundi and enable those
who are repatriated gradually to feel as safe as their
brothers who remained in the country already do.
Specific proposals such as those I have just
described deserve the support of the Council, as the
many meetings between the Burundian and Tanzanian
authorities have not yet yielded positive results on the
ground.
The intensification of the war since last February
has dealt a severe blow to the peace process, in
particular to the implementation of the peace
agreement, which has become difficult simply because
of the fact of the war. The establishment of transitional
institutions has been delayed because there has been no
ceasefire, and people are hoping for peace and security
above all else.
My
delegation
welcomes
the
Council’s
willingness to professionalize the mediation team. We
especially welcome the proposal to strengthen the
office of the Representative of the Secretary-General in
Bujumbura and to broaden its mandate. The
Government of Burundi has always hoped that the
process will be brought back home to Burundi. We
hope that the group dealing with the follow-up and
implementation of the peace agreement will shift its

headquarters from Arusha to Bujumbura, and that the
question of the neutrality of some of the members of
the mediation team will be settled once and for all.
In conclusion, the Security Council has now been
to Burundi and to the other countries in the region. It is
an encouraging initiative. Conclusions have already
been drawn; action is now needed in order to prevent
disaster in Burundi. We hope that the messages
addressed to one and all will soon have a positive
impact. If not, the Council will quickly have to reassess
the situation and take further steps to ensure the wellbeing of the people of Burundi and the Great Lakes
region.
For its part, the Government of Burundi has
already demonstrated its willingness to encourage
compromise solutions. It remains open to all attempts
to implement the peace agreement insofar as is
possible. Burundi pays tribute to the remarkable work
carried out by Nelson Mandela, the regional initiative
and the representatives of the Secretary-General on the
ground, in particular Mr. Jean Arnault, and we hope
that the momentum created by the recent Security
Council visit to the Great Lakes region will not be lost.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
meeting. We appreciate the presence earlier this
morning of the Secretary-General and the statement
that he made.
The Council mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo was very useful. It demonstrated the
Council’s commitment to pursuing peace and security
in a proactive manner. The report introduced by
Ambassador Levitte bears testimony to the fact that the
Council could, by taking such an initiative, make a
difference in the areas of conflict. Colleagues
participating in the mission deserve our great
appreciation for their individual and collective
contributions. I would like to pay a special tribute to
Ambassador Levitte for his leadership in this crucial
undertaking of the Council.
Bangladesh agrees with all the recommendations
of the mission report. We will not go into details, but
look forward to interacting with our colleagues in
shaping the action to be taken by the Council on this
report.
We recognize five major issues in the conflict on
which our attention should be focused.

19

S/PV.4323

The first is the withdrawal of foreign forces. This
requirement under Council resolutions must be fulfilled
by all the parties, as stressed by the mission, without
any further delay, in a phased and orderly manner. We
would like to emphasize that the monitoring of the
withdrawal, the blocking of any security gaps and the
protection of civilians are fundamentally important
aspects to focus on. We understand the difficulties to
be expected with regard to gaining a clear idea about
the administrative arrangements to be set up in those
areas.
Secondly, the message we received from the
mission report is the imperative of the inter-Congolese
dialogue. We expect the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to facilitate the dialogue as
outlined in the Lusaka Agreement. The international
community must come forward with the necessary
support. This really is the key to peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Thirdly, with regard to the question of “negative
forces”, we would like to underline that, in pursuing
the Lusaka Agreement and subsequent plans, the
parties must take a realistic approach. We stress that
the resolution of the most complex and intractable
conflict of recent times will naturally require the most
courageous decisions on the part of the leadership of
the region. It will require hard concessions, difficult
compromises and, above all, a lot of pragmatism and
courage.
In our view, the security concerns of neighbours
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and related
issues will need careful consideration. Given the
sensitivity of the issues, we stress that the imperative
of justice should be pursued, with the ultimate goal
being
healing
past
wounds
and
promoting
reconciliation between societies.
Fourthly, in view of the report of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
all concerned should have to assume due responsibility
and adopt measures to break the nexus between the
illegal exploitation of the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the continuation of the war.
Yesterday’s New York Times editorial on the looting of
the Congo deserves our particular attention.
With regard to the economic situation, we would
like to underscore the appeal made by the team leader,
Ambassador Levitte, about sending a message to the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank about
the critical economic situation in the Democratic

20

Republic of the Congo and its close linkage to the
peace process. We also believe that the process to set
up the Congo River Basin Commission should be
expedited.
My final point relates to the preparation for the
third phase of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
With the recommendations of the mission to hand, we
should now decide on concrete actions at our end. We
attach the greatest importance to the preparations for
the third phase of MONUC. In this regard, we support
the recommendation in paragraph 120 of the mission’s
report and the outlines provided therein. The United
Nations must now start the mobilization of the
resources for this phase, which, as the SecretaryGeneral noted in his last report, will be a major
undertaking.
The Council mission brings us a worrying
assessment of the Burundi situation. The Arusha
process must not be allowed to fall apart. We would
recommend serious consideration of that situation by
the Council at an early date. Council members should
give the next presidency of the Council a clear message
on this.
Let me conclude by saying that Bangladesh
appreciates very much the Secretary-General’s
statement to the Council this morning, particularly his
emphasis on the need for adequate resources to address
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; the proactive initiatives he has already
taken in the area of human rights; and the special
attention he is giving to the issue of child soldiers with
the dispatch of his Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, to the area.
The Secretary-General’s raising of the security
situation in general and of the security situation of
United Nations and humanitarian personnel in
particular has been very timely. Yesterday, under the
Arria formula, the Council had its first meeting in
history with United Nations staff members to discuss
security issues. We would like the Council to give
special attention to that aspect in its follow-up to the
report of the mission.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers on the list. In view of the lateness of the hour,
I propose, with the concurrence of members of the
Council, to suspend this meeting until 3.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.
