United Nations

A/RES/63/271

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 May 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 123

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 7 April 2009
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/63/639/Add.1)]

63/271. Amendments to the Staff Regulations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 61/244 of 22 December
2006, 62/248 of 3 April 2008 and 63/250 of 24 December 2008,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on amendments to the
Staff Regulations 1 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 2
0F

1F

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;1

2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2 subject to
the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Approves the amendments to the Staff Regulations as contained in the
report of the Secretary-General, subject to the provisions of the present resolution
and the modified amendments contained in the annex hereto;
4.

Reaffirms section II of its resolution 63/250;

5.
Stresses that staff regulation 4.5 (b) does not prejudice the possibility of
renewal of a temporary appointment, taking fully into account the provisions of
paragraph 7 of section II of its resolution 63/250;
Also stresses that staff regulation 4.4 shall not preclude consideration of
6.
external candidates in filling vacant positions under conditions defined by the
Secretary-General in accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant provisions of the resolutions of the General
Assembly;
Emphasizes that the change of the term “personnel” to the term “human
7.
resources” in the “Scope and purpose” of the Staff Regulations, as well as in
regulations 8.1 (a) and 8.2, is strictly to harmonize the language of the Staff
Regulations with the current terminology in effect at the United Nations;
_______________
1
2

08-48705

A/63/694.
A/63/754.

A/RES/63/271

8.
Reaffirms that staff members recruited through the national competitive
examinations and language competitive examinations who hold probationary
appointments as at 30 June 2009 will be considered for conversion to permanent
appointments upon successful completion of their probationary appointments on or
after l July 2009;
Emphasizes that nothing in the regulations approved in the present
9.
resolution and the annex to it precludes persons with disabilities from being
considered for employment under any type of contract in full compliance with the
Charter, in particular Article 101, paragraph 3;
10. Recalls paragraph 4 of section II of its resolution 63/250, and stresses
that the implementation of the part of the new staff regulation 4.5 concerning
conversion to continuing appointments shall require further decisions by the General
Assembly on the criteria for eligibility;
11. Also recalls paragraph 2 of section I of its resolution 63/250, and stresses
the importance of a meaningful and constructive dialogue between staff and
management to overcome differences;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to it at its sixty-fourth session
on the full implications of converting all currently eligible staff to permanent
appointments, including the financial impact and the effects on workforce
management;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-fifth session regarding the status of the review of staff
members eligible for consideration as at 30 June 2009 for a permanent appointment;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Staff Rules and
related administrative issuances derived from the Staff Regulations comply with the
provisions of its relevant resolutions;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the
main part of its sixty-fourth session on the provisional new Staff Rules.
79th plenary meeting
7 April 2009

Annex
Modified amendments to the Staff Regulations
Regulation 4.5
...
(c) A fixed-term appointment does not carry any expectancy, legal or
otherwise, of renewal or conversion, irrespective of the length of service;

2

A/RES/63/271

Regulation 9.3
(a) The Secretary-General may, giving the reasons therefor, terminate the
appointment of a staff member who holds a temporary, fixed-term or continuing
appointment in accordance with the terms of his or her appointment or for any of the
following reasons:
…
(vi) In the interest of the good administration of the Organization and in
accordance with the standards of the Charter, provided that the action is not
contested by the staff member concerned;
(b) In addition, in the case of a staff member holding a continuing
appointment, the Secretary-General may terminate the appointment without the
consent of the staff member if, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, such action
would be in the interest of the good administration of the Organization, to be
interpreted principally as a change or termination of a mandate, and in accordance
with the standards of the Charter;
...
(d) The Secretary-General may, where the circumstances warrant and he or
she considers it justified, pay to a staff member terminated, provided that the
termination is not contested, a termination indemnity payment not more than
50 per cent higher than that which would otherwise be payable under the Staff
Regulations.
Annex I
Salary scales and related provisions
...
6.
The Secretary-General shall fix the salary scales for staff members in the
General Service and related categories, normally on the basis of the best prevailing
conditions of employment in the locality of the United Nations Office concerned,
provided that the Secretary-General may, where he or she deems it appropriate,
establish rules and salary limits for payment of a non-resident allowance to General
Service staff members recruited from outside the local area. The gross pensionable
remuneration of such staff shall be determined in accordance with the methodology
specified in article 54 (a) of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund and are shown in the salary scales applicable to such staff.
Annex II
Letters of appointment
...
(viii) That a fixed-term appointment does not carry any expectancy, legal or
otherwise, of renewal or conversion, irrespective of the length of service;

3
