S/2020/791

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 August 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 11 August 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime; and Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General, United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism; as well as the statements delivered by Her Excellency
Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia;
Her Excellency Ms. Selma Ennaifer, Secretary of State to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Tunisia; and His Excellency Mr. Nguyen Minh Vu, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam; and by the representatives of Belgium, China,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
South Africa and the United States, in connection with the video-teleconference on
“Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts: Addressing the
issue of linkages between terrorism and organized crime” convened on Thursday,
6 August 2020.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Afghanistan, Australia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Cuba, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
the European Union, Guatemala, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kenya, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
Turkey, Ukraine and the United Arab Emirates.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the enclosed briefing and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Dian Triansyah Djani
President of the Security Council

20-10643 (E) 260820 201020

*2010643*

S/2020/791

Annex 1
Statement by the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, Ghada Fathi Waly
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the Council. I am
grateful to the presidency of Indonesia and Minister Marsudi for holding this meeting
on this issue of growing concern to the international community.
As the Security Council has recognized, linkages between terrorism and
organized crime are complex and multifaceted, posing a serious threat to international
peace and security. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis poses a host of new
challenges to national authorities. Organized criminal groups and terrorists may
seek to capitalize on and exploit new vulnerabilities, and transit patterns are shifting
in view of travel restrictions and lockdown measures, adding further challenges for
border security. Comprehensive and cooperative responses are needed now more
than ever.
In view of the broad criminal justice mandates of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) that address terrorism and organized crime, building
the capacities to deal with those threats represents a key priority of our support to
Member States, and I welcome the chance to discuss these issues with members today.
It is an honour to join my colleague, Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, to
present the findings of the report of the Secretary-General on action taken by Member
States and United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities
to address linkages between terrorism and organized crime (S/2020/754).
The report was prepared by UNODC and the Office of Counter-Terrorism
in response to the request contained in resolution 2482 (2019). It reflects the
contributions of 50 Member States and 15 United Nations Global Compact entities
and benefited from valuable United Nations system inputs, including from the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team.
The report provides a valuable overview of measures taken by Member States
and United Nations entities to address linkages between terrorism and organized
crime, as well as recommendations for action going forward. In their contributions,
Member States highlighted a range of linkages between terrorism and organized
crime, often in connection with the financing of terrorism.
Challenges vary by region and some States could not confirm the existence
of links, citing limited terrorist activity in their countries or constraints with
investigative capacities. Linkages between terrorism and organized crime may be
opportunistic, based upon shared territory or other mutual interest. Alliances may
also draw on personal connections, possibly developed in prisons in cases where
terrorists have prior criminal backgrounds.
Many States reported that terrorists benefit from organized crime, including
trafficking in persons and migrant smuggling, trafficking in drugs, firearms, cultural
property and other goods, kidnapping for ransom, robbery and other illicit acts.
In some cases, returning foreign terrorist fighters have taken part in
organized criminal activities, while in other States organized criminal groups have
been involved in transporting terrorists across borders. However, some Member
States also observed that criminal organizations are increasingly disinterested in
cooperating with terrorist groups, potentially to avoid additional scrutiny from
national authorities.

2/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Actions reported by Member States to counter these threats show that many
Governments have taken steps to adopt the legislative, policy and operational
responses identified in resolution 2482 (2019). In their contributions, Member States
emphasized the following measures: ratifying relevant legal instruments, including
the global counter-terrorism instruments, the Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the international drug control conventions; fighting moneylaundering, terrorist financing and corruption by strengthening financial intelligence
units (FIUs), complying with the relevant United Nations instruments and resolutions
and Financial Action Task Force recommendations, as well as building publicprivate partnerships; strengthening border security and international coordination,
for example by collecting and analysing advance passenger information/passenger
name record data; implementing comprehensive responses to drug demand and
illicit drug trafficking; improving prison management to prevent radicalization to
violence and recidivism; and developing strategies that incorporate whole-of-society
approaches to prevent and counter violent extremism.
States highlighted inter-agency and international cooperation as key enablers
for success across all these areas. Building links between FIUs and counter-terrorism
investigators was cited as a particular priority. The importance of joint task forces,
operations centres and other coordination mechanisms among intelligence, border
and criminal justice practitioners to detect and counter crimes in an integrated
manner was also highlighted.
Member States further emphasized the need for cross-border cooperation to
address the transnational nature of crime and terrorism threats, including through
regional platforms, bilateral information-sharing agreements, the exchange of law
enforcement liaison officers, INTERPOL and regional organization databases and
tools, and mutual legal assistance treaties.
The report also identified several areas for intensified action to fully respond
to resolution 2482 (2019) and to further develop and disseminate the good practices
reported by Member States. National legal frameworks could be updated to include
precise definitions of terrorism and organized crime offences and the criminalization
of facilitation acts. More resources could be directed towards reinforcing national
intelligence and criminal justice coordination and capacity through the establishment
of specialized units and inter-agency mechanisms, as well as through a greater focus
on intelligence-led policing and evidence collection and preservation, including for
electronic evidence. Targeting entire organized criminal or terrorist networks when
building criminal cases should also be a priority.
Further necessary steps include strengthening land, air and sea border
security through data collection tools, control systems and enhanced coordination
and continuing efforts to deepen regional and international cooperation.
The report also highlights the importance of measures targeting specific
links between terrorism and organized crime, for example between drug trafficking
and terrorism financing, or to stop the illicit exploitation and trafficking of natural
resources, small arms, wildlife and other goods.
More support is needed to comprehensively address all forms of trafficking
in persons, including when such crimes are committed by terrorist groups. Member
States could also be encouraged and provided with support to bring all measures
in line with relevant international legal frameworks, including international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee laws. These observations correspond with
the strategies and good practices that UNODC has noted in its years of working at
the field level to counter organized crime and terrorism and that the Office promotes
in capacity-building assistance to Member States.
20-106433/97

S/2020/791

Finally, the report highlights the need for more research to better understand
the nature of linkages between terrorism and organized crime and the vulnerabilities
of different sectors to exploitation. My colleague Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
will brief the Council on the efforts of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact entities to support Member States in addressing these
complex and evolving challenges.
As part of the Global Compact, UNODC remains committed to leveraging
its experience and expertise on organized crime and terrorism. UNODC is uniquely
placed to support Member States in addressing these linkages, as our Office serves
as the custodian of the United Nations conventions on transnational organized crime
and corruption, and supports the implementation of the international drug control
conventions, the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and
criminal justice and the international instruments against terrorism.
In collaboration with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
the Global Compact and other partners, UNODC looks forward to putting this
knowledge to use in working with States to deliver technical assistance and engage
with communities, parliamentarians, civil society, the private sector, youth, women
and all stakeholders in promoting comprehensive, integrated and victim-centred
responses to linkages between organized crime and terrorism.
I thank you once again, Sir, for this opportunity to brief the Council. UNODC
stands ready to support you.

4/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 2
Statement by the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, Vladimir Voronkov
I would like to thank the Security Council, under the presidency of the
Republic of Indonesia, for convening this open debate on addressing the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime. I am especially pleased to be at this meeting
with Ms. Ghada Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC).
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/754) sets out how the ability of
terrorists to draw on organized crime, whether domestic or transnational, online
or offline, can exacerbate the threat posed by terrorism to international peace
and security.
Last month, we discussed this complex threat during the first Virtual CounterTerrorism Week at the United Nations on the strategic and practical challenges
of countering terrorism in a global pandemic environment. Over 1,000 people
participated in 10 interactive meetings during the week, including representatives of
134 Member States, 88 civil society and private sector organizations, 47 international
and regional organizations and 40 United Nations entities.
I am delighted that we were also joined in some of the week’s most important
sessions by Ms. Waly and Ambassador Djani, Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Indonesia to the United Nations and Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities.
The Virtual Counter-Terrorism Week helped maintain the momentum we built
over the past year through eight regional high-level conferences on critical counterterrorism issues covering all four pillars of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. It improved our collective understanding of the impact and
potential consequences of the coronavirus disease crisis on the terrorism landscape,
as well as Member States’ counter-terrorism needs, priorities and expectations,
and other key stakeholders’ views, including civil society organizations and the
private sector.
Our discussions showed there is a shared understanding and concern among
Member States that terrorists are generating funds from illicit trafficking in drugs,
goods, natural resources and antiquities, as well as kidnapping for ransom, extorting
and committing other heinous crimes. This concern is clearly reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General.
Speakers highlighted a significant rise in cybercrime in recent months, with a
350 per cent increase in phishing websites in the first quarter of this year. Many of
these digital attacks have been against hospital and health-care systems, hindering
their vital work in responding to the pandemic.
Speakers also noted the importance of ensuring that efforts to address the
nexus between terrorism and organized crime are proportionate to the threat and
fully respect human rights and fundamental freedoms.
These views will feed into our postponed second, in-person counter-terrorism
week next year, which will coincide with the seventh biennial review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We are yet to fully understand the impact and consequences of the pandemic on
global peace and security, and more specifically on organized crime and terrorism.
20-106435/97

S/2020/791

We know that terrorists are exploiting the significant disruption and economic
hardships caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) to spread fear, hate and
division and radicalise and recruit new followers. The increase in Internet usage and
cybercrime during the pandemic further compounds the problem.
We heard from Executive Director Waly about how Member States are tackling
the nexus between terrorism and organized crime.
The report of the Secretary-General also includes a number of examples of
how the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities
are providing capacity-building support and technical assistance to Member States
to address the linkages between terrorism and organized crime, as requested by
resolution 2482 (2019).
The General Assembly mandated the Office of Counter-Terrorism to lead
the United Nations system counter-terrorism efforts by enhancing coherence
and coordination, including through the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact. We also continue to work closely with the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council that are mandated to enhance the capacity of Member States to prevent and
respond to terrorist acts.
The Global Compact leverages the expertise of each entity in supporting
legislative, policy and operational measures to fight organized crime and terrorism
financing. For example, UNODC chairs the Global Compact working group on
criminal justice, legal responses and countering the financing of terrorism. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) chairs the Global
Compact working group on border management and law enforcement relating to
counter-terrorism. And INTERPOL chairs the Global Compact working group on
emerging threats and critical infrastructure protection, using its analytical capacity
and access to international law enforcement databases.
My Office works closely with UNODC, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), INTERPOL and other entities to assist Member
States in anti-money laundering and counter-financing of terrorism; interdiction and
border security; law enforcement; prison management; combating illicit trafficking
and other efforts to address threats to international peace and security.
Together with UNODC, the Office of Information and Communications
Technology (OICT), CTED and the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
my Office is also developing a project to enhance criminal justice responses to
prevent and combat the illicit trafficking of small arms and light weapons and disrupt
their illicit supply to terrorist groups.
The United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme — led by my
Office in partnership with CTED, UNODC, OICT, the International Civil Aviation
Organization and INTERPOL — supports Member States in building detection
capabilities through the provision of legislative assistance, the establishment of
Passenger Information Units and the installation of the required hardware and
software systems. To date, 36 Member States are formally participating in this
programme, contributing to their efforts to map and identify links between suspected
terrorists and serious criminals.
The management of violent extremist prisoners is also crucial in addressing
the nexus between terrorism and organized crime. UNOCT, UNODC and CTED are
supporting Member States in building the capacity of their prison services to prevent
radicalization to violence among prisoners.
UNOCT, UNODC, the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute and INTERPOL also work together to support Member States’
6/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

efforts to prevent organized crime and terrorist groups from gaining access to
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear materials and dual-use equipment,
including through the darknet.
The adoption of resolution 2482 (2019) underscored the importance of Member
States working together to strengthen the global response to the linkages between
international terrorism and organized crime. More work needs to be undertaken to
study how these linkages evolve, without automatically conflating both threats.
Member States are rightly focused on tackling the health emergency and
human crisis caused by COVID-19, but we must not forget or be complacent about the
continuing threat of terrorism. In many parts of the world, terrorists are exploiting
local grievances and poor governance to regroup and assert their control.
The pandemic has the potential to act as a catalyst in the spread of terrorism
and violent extremism by exacerbating inequalities, undermining social cohesion
and fuelling local conflicts. We must continue our fight against terrorist groups and
criminal networks to deny them the opportunity to exploit the COVID-19 crisis.
Collective action and international cooperation are needed now more than ever.

20-106437/97

S/2020/791

Annex 3
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Retno
Lestari Priansari Marsudi
Our fight against the pandemic should not hinder our fight against terrorism.
We should not let the pandemic create conditions conducive for terrorism to regain
power, regroup and grow.
Resolution 2532 (2020), on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), adopted last
month, accurately anticipated the calling for an immediate cessation of hostilities
during the pandemic, except for the fight against terrorism.
During the pandemic, the impact of terrorism has become more severe, as we
witness terror and cyberattacks on vital public infrastructure, including hospitals. The
situation will become even worse when terrorism intertwines with organized crime.
That link may take many forms and may vary across regions. We have seen
terrorist groups directly involved in organized crime. Some use kidnapping as a
means to fund their terrorist operations. Others are resorting to smuggling drugs
and weapons. There are also instances where terrorists collaborate with members of
organized crime by facilitating border-crossings, arms and human trafficking, and
money transfers and laundering.
One thing is certain — a stronger terror-crime nexus, in any form, can lead to
devastating global impacts and make it more challenging for us to address COVID-19
and existing security challenges. We must therefore step up efforts to address the
terror-crime nexus, as mandated by resolution 2482 (2019). With that in mind, allow
me to share three key points.
First, we must adjust our policies to address the nexus of terrorism and
organized crime, as these are generally considered separately. We cannot continue
doing so; there must be greater synergy between the relevant authorities. During the
pandemic, with limited resources, greater synergy becomes even more important.
Budget constraints should not diminish our efforts to tackle the terror-crime nexus.
Necessary adjustments are also required to thwart the terror-crime connection
in prisons, which often become breeding grounds where terrorists interact with other
criminals. To that end, it is Indonesia’s policy to separate convicted terrorists from
other prisoners.
Secondly, we must strengthen our legal and institutional infrastructure. Our
domestic legislation must have the capacity to address the terror-crime nexus. In
that connection, it is pertinent to ensure that international legal instruments to
combat terrorism and organized crime are translated into domestic legislation.
As mandated by the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, Indonesia’s stand-alone terrorist financing legislation, enables us to punish
financiers separately from terrorists, thus broadening the scope of our enforcement
to address the nexus.
Equally important is enhancing capacity-building for law enforcement
to increase its ability to address this new phenomenon. The Jakarta Centre for
Law Enforcement Cooperation has been actively promoting the capacity of lawenforcement officials from more than 100 countries in the field of terrorism and
transnational organized crime. We will ensure that the terror-crime nexus is
addressed as part of the programme.
Finally, regional mechanisms must also be able to respond to this nexus. The
Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crimes of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations is an avenue where counter-terrorism and organized crime are deliberated
8/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

under one platform. This joint platform can serve as an example for other regional
mechanisms to address the nexus.
As the terror-crime link varies in each region, synergizing efforts among
regional organizations is key. That entails efforts to intensify the timely exchange
of information and best practices and enhancing our understanding of the linkages
between the two, including regional differences. Greater synergy and unity among
United Nations bodies and agencies is equally important.
As the terror-crime nexus is a fairly new phenomenon, Indonesia underscores
the urgent need for the United Nations to undertake more detailed reports and
analysis on the matter.
In conclusion, our ability to adapt and strengthen synergies will determine
how effectively we can respond to this emerging threat.

20-106439/97

S/2020/791

Annex 4
Statement by the Secretary of State to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Tunisia, Selma Ennaifer
Let me first take this opportunity to congratulate Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, for convening this high-level open debate on such
an important topic as addressing the linkages between terrorism and organized
crime. We wish Indonesia a successful and productive second presidency of the
Council. Allow me also to extend my appreciation to the delegation of Germany for
its excellent leadership of the Security Council for the month of July.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Ghada Fathi
Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for their
informative briefings.
Resolution 2482 (2019), adopted a year ago, has been instrumental in
highlighting the linkages between organized crime and terrorism. The international
community expressed its growing concern regarding the use of criminal activities
to finance terrorist acts, and identified the commonalities between the illicit and
violent behaviours of terrorists and those of organized criminal groups as a means
to conduct and support their activities. The nexus between terrorist and criminal
groups is extremely opportunistic and has become increasingly clear. They share
several similarities.
First, terrorism and organized crime are transnational phenomena that
engage in cross-border criminal activities. Secondly, terrorism can benefit from the
provision of information and services by criminal groups, including counterfeit travel
documents and firearms. Thirdly, terrorists can mimic criminal tactics and activities
that constitute an attractive source of revenue for terrorism financing, such as drug
and human trafficking and illicit trade in arms, natural resources and artefacts. Both
groups share the same routes for trafficking, smuggling and relocation of foreign
terrorist fighters.
Finally and most importantly, both terrorist and criminal groups exploit local
grievances about public services and security. Both groups thrive in negative local,
national or regional circumstances, such as political instability, armed conflict,
corruption, poor economic conditions and social unrest, as well as in areas where
Government authority is limited and borders are porous. They share the same hostility
towards State authorities and make use of barbaric force against populations. Both
terrorism and organized crime can have global ramifications for international peace
and security, as they threaten human rights and the rule of law and undermine the
foundations of peaceful and prosperous societies.
It is therefore important that States adopt and implement comprehensive and
integrated measures that enable them to efficiently prevent and combat terrorism and
organized crime in a manner that allows the detection and assessment of potential
links between them as well as the provision of unified and coordinated responses,
in full respect of domestic law and international obligations and commitments. This
can be done mainly through the enhancement of interagency coordination and the
development of rapid information-sharing tools between national authorities in
charge of monitoring, investigating and prosecuting organized crime and terrorism
in order to detect potential links. This can be a complicated and challenging task,
particularly with the increasing abuse by terrorists and criminal groups of such new
technologies as digital wallets and cryptocurrencies. For this reason, we need to
ensure robust capacity-building programmes and sharing of experiences and best
practices for police forces, prosecutors and judicial authorities, and financial- and
10/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

economic-intelligence authorities, in order to enable them to analyse financial flows
used to prepare or carry out terrorist attacks.
The cooperation with other relevant actors can also contribute to an efficient
monitoring and risk assessment of potential links between terrorism and other
criminal activities. Effective communication with the private sector and not-for-profit
organizations can lead to more accurate mechanisms for prevention and management
of terrorism financing. Furthermore, considering the frequently transnational nature
of terrorism and organized crime networks, regional and international cooperation is
essential through the establishment of bilateral and multilateral tools and frameworks
for information-sharing, border security and mutual legal assistance.
Without proper mitigation measures, prisons can also exacerbate the nexus
between terrorism and organized crime. They provide opportunities for criminal
and terrorist groups to interact, cooperate and facilitate the transfer of knowledge,
skills and contacts. It is therefore essential to prevent the exploitation of prisons
as incubators for the development of links between terrorism and organized crime
through, inter alia, the separation of prisoners and the implementation of education,
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes as well as mental-health programmes
in prisons.
It is also important to emphasize in this context that armed conflicts attract
terrorists and mercenaries of all stripes. It is therefore essential that any search for
peaceful solutions to armed conflicts should include States and international and
regional organizations contributing to efforts to counter any possible voluntary
or sponsored use of terrorists or mercenaries and to control the flow of weapons
that could reach them. Resolution 2532 (2020), introduced by Tunisia and France,
specifies in this context that the humanitarian truce in armed conflicts referred to
in the resolution’s paragraph 2 does not apply to terrorist groups designated as such.
As mentioned earlier, terrorism and organized crime find commonalities in
their underlying drivers. It is therefore important to increase prevention efforts,
address root causes and empower local communities to build resilience against
transnational organized crime and terrorism. We need to bolster sustainable
development, ensure the peaceful settlement of conflict, tackle inequalities, protect
human rights, ensure women and youth participation, crack down on corruption and
promote good governance.
Finally, it is important to highlight that, while efforts aimed at detection of
and response to the nexus between terrorism and transnational organized crime are
important, Member States need to ensure that all measures taken to counter terrorism
comply with their obligations under international law. Addressing the nexus between
the two phenomena should not lead to a systematic conflation of their distinct legal
regimes. Terrorism is a serious offence that usually requires more restrictive legal
measures than other criminal law provisions. It is essential that counter-terrorism
legislation is not broadly and systematically applied to other criminal acts to ensure
the legality and the legitimacy of counter-terrorism efforts.
A comprehensive approach to prevent and combat terrorism and organized
crime has been placed at the centre of Tunisia’s national efforts since we adopted a
comprehensive law and national strategy to counter terrorism and money laundering
in 2015. The Tunisian National Counter-Terrorism Commission was recently able
to roll out its first set of domestic financial sanctions on individuals and entities
based on their ties to terrorist organizations. A national guide on frozen assets is
currently being developed in cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Office of Counter-Terrorism in order to ensure the
coordinated dissemination of information to all relevant public and private entities
20-1064311/97

S/2020/791

and to guarantee human rights and access to remedies. Several other pieces of
legislation — on access to information, combating illicit enrichment and the
protection of whistleblowers — have also been enacted.
In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to sparing no efforts in combating
terrorism and organized crime and to renewing our will to do so, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and while respecting our
obligations under international law, including human rights law, humanitarian law
and refugee law. We stand ready to cooperate with our partners and all relevant
stakeholders to achieve our common objective of a world free of terrorism and
organized crime.

12/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 5
Statement by the Deputy Foreign Minister of Viet Nam, Nguyen
Minh Vu
I am very happy to hear Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi speak today and
to join today’s important debate. I sincerely thank the President of the Council for
convening this open debate and thank the briefers for their informative briefings.
The long-known nexus between terrorism and organized crime is turning into
a greater and more real threat, presenting each and every society — all of us —
with deadly consequences. I believe that we are all in a very dangerous situation at
present. As we speak, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has somewhat
diverted our attention and resources away from our common fight against terrorism
and organized crime and their nexuses. As we speak, COVID-19 and its dire
consequences are hampering our efforts to realize the Sustainable Development
Goals. The pandemic is not only deepening development gaps and exacerbating
poverty, but it is also creating fertile breeding grounds for organized crime and
terrorism, permitting them to flourish in many parts of the world. As we speak,
terrorists and organized-crime actors are wasting no time to hone their deadly skills
and schemes to attack innocent people and the general public. Indeed, these actors
have become more organized, digitalized and globalized.
I truly appreciate the leadership of Foreign Minister Marsudi and particularly
her convening today’s important debate. Unless and until concerted efforts and
effective measures are taken against the threats of terrorism and organized crimes,
the efforts and accomplishments that we have made towards maintaining peace and
security and towards spreading prosperity may be lost.
Against this backdrop, we believe that the Security Council should and
could play a more active role in these endeavours. Of course, the United Nations
addressed this issue early on and, over the years, has adopted several resolutions
and set aside resources for tackling it. However, it is time we address this issue not
only from the technical perspective but also from the strategic perspective, both in
the short term and for the long term. In this regard, I wish to share four points from
Viet Nam’s perspective.
First, it is important to stress that the States Members of the United Nations,
with their exclusive legal right to the use of force within their jurisdictions, have the
primary responsibility for countering terrorism and organized crime. The measures
adopted against terrorism and organized crime, as well as their linkages, should
be taken in conformity with the United Nations Charter, international law and
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the countries
concerned. In addition, they should abide by and help to further the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council.
Secondly, it is time we develop, mainstream and substantially invest in
a comprehensive approach to address the root causes of terrorism and organized
crimes in Member States, including, but not limited to, extreme poverty, inequality,
unemployment and social marginalization. We are also facing the risk of human
crisis as a consequence of COVID-19.
Thirdly, we need to enhance regional and international cooperation in
combating terrorism and organized crimes, particularly in preventing financing for
terrorism and the recruitment flows. To that end, we support closer coordination
among United Nations relevant agencies, namely, the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
20-1064313/97

S/2020/791

Directorate (CTED) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
And I am very happy that UNODC Executive Director Ghada Fathi Waly and UnderSecretary-General Voronkov are here with us today.
Fourthly, the international community can further support countries,
especially developing ones, in exchanging information and sharing experience and
best practices in building up capacity. Areas needing special attention include border
control and management, legislation and judiciary assistance.
Viet Nam has in recent years done its utmost to improve the legal, economic
and financial framework to better reduce the risk of terrorist financing, combat
organized crime and fulfil our obligations under Security Council resolutions and
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
At the regional level, Viet Nam and the countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) view the fight against terrorism and organized
crime as an issue of utmost importance. As ASEAN continue its community building
process with greater levels of exchanges of people, goods and services, consequently
the risks of organized crime and terrorism also increase. The Organization has
repeatedly reaffirmed its political commitment and coordinated actions to adopt
various frameworks to better share information and best practices, with a view to
enhancing regional and international cooperation in the fight against terrorism and
organized crime and their potential linkage. Among those, the 2019-2021 Work
Plan of the Senior Officials Meeting on Transnational Crime detailed 10 crimes that
ASEAN should focus on, namely, terrorism, illicit drug trafficking, illicit trafficking
of wildlife and timber, trafficking in persons, piracy, arms smuggling, international
economic crime, cybercrime, people smuggling and money laundering.
In conclusion, let me quote Secretary-General Guterres, in his remarks just
last month at the launch of the Virtual Counter-Terrorism Week:
“Like the virus, terrorism does not respect national borders. It affects all
nations and can only be defeated collectively. So we must harness the power
of multilateralism to find practical solutions.”
In response to this call, Viet Nam reiterates its commitment to working
closely with Member States and all relevant stakeholders in combating the threats
of terrorism and transnational organized crime to regional and international peace,
security and prosperity.

14/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 6
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for the organization of this open
debate, as well as the briefers with us today.
In July last year, on the impulse of the Republic of Peru, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2482 (2019) on the link between terrorism and organized crime
by consensus, thereby acknowledging the importance of both phenomena, as well as
their interconnection. Today, we must ensure that this resolution is fully and correctly
put into practice. The concluding observations formulated by the Secretary-General
in the report (S/2020/754) requested by this resolution constitute valuable guidance
in our way forward.
The links between terrorism and national and transnational organized crime
are manifold and evolving and vary between regions. The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic did not break those links, which instead adapted to this new
framework, and can be, for example, increasingly witnessed online.
Although many Member States have already adopted responses to address
those linkages, both terrorism and organized crime continue to dangerously
undermine the rule of law and human rights, and thereby exacerbate the threat posed
by terrorism to international peace and security.
Some measures adopted by Member States in their fight against terrorism and
organized crime may have negatively impacted the respect of fundamental rights
and the work of humanitarian actors on the ground. My country wants to recall the
fundamental principles enshrined in the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and to underline that respect for international humanitarian law, human
rights and the rule of law must remain a top priority, everywhere and under all
circumstances. It is even more the case in the framework of the COVID-19 pandemic.
An efficient fight against terrorism and organized crime requires intense
cooperation and coordination at the international, regional and national levels, as
well as a global, whole-of-society approach. Strengthening the capacity of States is
of key importance, and we wish to underline the central role played in this endeavour
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team, as well as all other United Nations entities involved.
Our efforts to fight terrorism and organized crime should increasingly benefit
from the expertise of civil society organizations, the innovations of the private sector
and the involvement of local communities, including the youth, women and girls.
Belgium, like many other countries speaking today, has been harshly hit by
terrorist attacks and violent extremism. Together with our European and United
Nations partners, we will remain committed to efficiently addressing the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime, as well as to cutting off the sources of
terrorism financing in all its forms.

20-1064315/97

S/2020/791

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Indonesia on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August and welcome Her Excellency
Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, to preside over
the meeting.
China supports the initiative of convening this open debate and thanks
Ms. Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) and Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for their briefings. We thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/754).
At present, terrorism and organized crime have been mutually colluding and
infiltrating and posing serious threats to international peace and security and should
be addressed seriously. The international community must strengthen cooperation
at all levels, exchange intelligence and information, share best practices and take
concerted actions, so as to effectively combat terrorism and organized crime and
jointly maintain international peace and security.
China wishes to stress the following points.
First, counter-terrorism must be carried out by upholding the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations while respecting the central
coordinating role of the United Nations and adhering to unified standards.
Member States have the primary responsibility in countering terrorist acts.
The sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the countries concerned
should be fully respected.
Countries must strictly implement the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly in that regard, including Security Council resolution 2482 (2019), while
abiding by and implementing international laws on combating organized crime.
Tangible and comprehensive measures must be taken to counter the linkages
between terrorist organizations and organized crime in areas, such as trafficking
in arms, persons, drugs, artefacts and cultural property; the illicit trade in natural
resources and wildlife; and the abuse of legitimate commercial enterprise and
non-profit organizations, among others.
Secondly, it is imperative to enhance actions and synergy at international
and regional levels to more effectively fight terrorism and organized crime. As
international terrorism, transnational organized crime and other global security
issues grow increasingly connected and diversified, no country can remain immune
to the scourge of these common threats.
It is of the utmost importance to further promote multilateralism and
international cooperation to tackle the new and evolving challenges of terrorism,
both during and after the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The international community must actively support regional and subregional
organizations in playing their important roles and conducting effective regional
cooperation in the field of counter-terrorism and the fight against organized crime.
China supports closer coordination between United Nations agencies such as
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the UNODC and INTERPOL, in accordance with their
16/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

respective mandates, and regional organizations in order to utilize their respective
strengths and expertise.
Thirdly, it is important to support the domestic efforts of Member States and
build their capacities to address the most prominent challenges. As part of capacitybuilding efforts in areas such as border control, customs, drug enforcement and
judiciary matters, the international community must provide tangible assistance to
Member States — especially African and developing countries — that considers the
security situation and distinctive culture and history of each country.
We should effectively combat the financing of terrorism, stop internet-based
terrorism and put an end to the illegal activities of terrorist and organized crime
groups in order to sever the linkages between terrorism and organized crime.
We must follow international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions,
and support the efforts of Member States to deradicalize, enhance prevention and
keep organized crime groups from participating in extremist and terrorist activities.
In the face of the terrorist threat, we must stand united in solidarity. Terrorism
is our common enemy, and there is no difference between so-called good and bad
terrorists. Double standards and politicization must be avoided.
China will always side with multilateralism and international justice. China has
been rigorously implementing all United Nations counter-terrorism resolutions and
actively engaging in counter-terrorism cooperation at the global and regional levels.
As a State party to the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, China has been actively fulfilling its obligations under the
Convention with an all-fronts approach across the legislation, law enforcement and
judiciary sectors.
We will continue to conduct bilateral and multilateral exchanges and cooperate
with all Member States, particularly developing and African countries, to build
capacities on issues related to counter-terrorism and combating organized crime. We
will also continue to support — politically and financially — United Nations counterterrorism efforts in a joint endeavour to maintain international peace and stability.

20-1064317/97

S/2020/791

Annex 8
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Dominican Republic to the United Nations, Joan M. Cedano
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive
Director Waly for their detailed and complete briefings.
We welcome the excellent work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) and
contributing Member States in the preparation of the first report of the SecretaryGeneral on actions taken by Members States and United Nations entities to address
the issue of linkages between terrorism and organized crime (S/2020/754). This is a
very illustrative document that will enable us to have an updated view of the progress
and challenges in implementing resolution 2482 (2019).
The Dominican Republic applauds the good practices that Member States
have been developing in strengthening their national mechanisms for the prevention,
control, prosecution and investigation of the crimes and offences linked to terrorism.
In addition, it is important to highlight the efforts of the UNOCT, UNODC
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in creating support
mechanisms to help Member States develop strategies to counter linkages between
terrorism and organized crime. These bilateral cooperative relationships must also
continue and be enhanced with relevant regional and subregional organizations.
For the Dominican Republic, addressing the issue of linkages between
terrorism and organized crime is necessary to continue to be a country with a low
risk of terrorism. Our legislative branch has established strong regulations for
criminal offences originating from organized crime, and has regulated the issues
related to financing terrorist acts or activities.
Dominican national institutions have developed important mechanisms
to prevent, control, prosecute and sanction any financial activity originated from
identified organized crime. Those institutions collaborate continuously with
UNODC and other regional and subregional organizations, such as INTERPOL, the
Financial Action Task Force of Latin America, which we will continue to chair until
December, and the World Customs Organization, where we hold the vice-presidency
for the Americas.
The Dominican Republic has already ratified the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Budapest Convention. These important
counter-terrorism legal instruments are key to supporting and complementing
national and other international legal framework to combat terrorism.
The Dominican Republic would like to stress the importance of a secure
cyberspace. Cybersecurity is a pressing matter. Increasingly, our daily lives develop
in cyberspace, even more so in recent months due to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which took our social order out of the physical plane and
moved it, in good part, to a virtual one. The presence of terrorist activities like
radicalization and financing in cyberspace has been amply demonstrated. We must
therefore maintain our active collaboration with UNODC and other relevant United
Nations offices to strengthen and develop national and international mechanisms
and strategies that can keep up with the rapid pace of organized crime and terroristrelated activities in cyberspace.
The Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to the prevention and
eradication of terrorism in all its forms. In that regard, we recognize the importance
18/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

of securing all borders, addressing all forms of trafficking in persons and combating
illicit drug trafficking and corruption as key to complying with resolution 2482 (2019).
In that sense, the Dominican Republic had the intention of hosting a conference
on border control in the fight against terrorism and the arrest of the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters in the travel cycle, in March of this year. Unfortunately, that was
not possible due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Finally, the fight against terrorism must not stop until we achieve our common
goal: its eradication. Together, as the international community and, particularly, as
members of the Security Council, we must commit to strengthening, updating and
implementing national and international regulations, programmes and mechanisms
designed to attack this terrible evil that threatens and violates global peace
and security.

20-1064319/97

S/2020/791

Annex 9
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Estonia to
the United Nations, Gert Auväärt
We welcome Her Excellency Mrs. Marsudi for presiding over this
important debate.
I note that this week, six years ago, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
unleashed massacres against Yazidi men and women in Iraq. Those atrocities are a
vivid example of how terrorism not only poses a threat to international peace and
security, but also significantly affects the lives of millions of ordinary people across
the globe.
Very often, the spread of extremist violence relies on weapons and finances
delivered through organized crime networks, as noted in today’s substantive
briefings of Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov and Executive Director
Ghada Fathi Waly.
Countering terrorism requires a better understanding of the intricate link
between transnational crime and terrorist activities. In that regard, Estonia recognizes
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in providing
the membership of the United Nations and the Security Council with updates on the
development of the complex relationship between terrorism and organized crime.
Those contributions enable us to coordinate comprehensive national, regional
and international efforts to stop the fuelling of violent extremism. For its part,
Estonia has benefited from insights gleaned at the United Nations in developing a
counter-terrorism plan and priorities for 2020-2030.
At the regional level, we highlight the role played by European Union
agencies, namely, the European Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation and
the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation, in combating all
forms of international organized crime and terrorism. We welcome the increased
cooperation of these agencies with the United Nations.

20/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 10
Statement by the Chargée d’affaires a.i. of France to the
United Nations, Anne Gueguen
Allow me first to thank Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly for their
very enlightening briefings. They have shown, if proof were needed, that, more than
a year after the adoption of resolution 2482 (2019), on the links between terrorism
and organized crime, much remains to be done to overcome those two scourges,
which are linked and mutually reinforcing.
Today, there is an undeniable overlap between criminal and terrorist groups,
the nature and extent of which varies in different parts of the world. Both terrorism
and organized crime often recruit from within the same populations, particularly
in prisons, where radicalization is a scourge. They use the same routes and often
the same means of communication to carry out their activities, particularly on the
Internet, with the use of the darknet.
France’s commitment to fighting terrorism and organized crime is unfailing
and our mobilization is on all fronts, from preventing radicalization to combating the
use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, for which we are proud to have launched,
with New Zealand, the Christchurch Appeal, which already brings together some
50 countries and organizations with the major Internet companies.
One of our top priorities remains the fight against the financing of terrorism.
The growing exploitation by terrorist groups of funds derived from criminal
activities is well documented and the sources of funding are unfortunately numerous:
kidnappings for ransom, the illicit trade in arms, exploitation of oil and cultural
property, drug trafficking, human trafficking and piracy.
Evil must be dealt with at the root by drying up the sources of funding for
terrorist organizations, which use all the contemporary tools at their disposal.
Resolution 2462 (2019), on combating the financing of terrorism, clearly identifies
the risks posed by the links between terrorist financing and organized crime in
different regions of the world, and calls on States, in close cooperation with relevant
regional organizations and the United Nations, to redouble their efforts to address
these links. On this basis, we need to adapt our legal and operational frameworks
to improve the transparency of financial flows, strengthen information-sharing and
develop cooperation with the private sector.
International cooperation — among States and within the United Nations — is
more necessary than ever. I am delighted to see Mr Voronkov and Ms. Waly together
in the virtual gallery today. Their joint presence shows the good and essential
cooperation between the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Office
of Counter-Terrorism. I would also like to commend in this regard the essential work
of INTERPOL in promoting information exchange and enhancing trust between
operational partners. States need to use INTERPOL’s databases and other tools with
greater frequency.
I would like to conclude by recalling that the fight against terrorism, as well as
the fight against organized crime, must be conducted in full respect of human rights
and fundamental freedoms, the rule of law and international humanitarian law.
The fight against impunity is also a priority. Those who have committed atrocities
abroad must never, wherever they go, be allowed to go unpunished. In this regard,
cooperation between intelligence services and judicial authorities is essential to
neutralize the threat and to deliver justice.

20-1064321/97

S/2020/791

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
I would like to thank the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s timely debate. I also wish to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and
Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly for their briefings.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/754) shows that close links
between transnational organized crime and terrorism have increasingly been
observed in several regions of the world. This adds to the complexity of the fight
against terrorist organizations that States Members of the United Nations and the
Organization itself have been conducting for several years now.
The African continent is one of the most vulnerable areas affected by the
development of the specific threats related to security and transnational organized
crime, the most emblematic of which are trafficking in drugs, arms, persons and
counterfeit cigarettes, smuggling of migrants, terrorism and violent extremism.
In the Sahel region, the existence of a link between terrorism and organized
crime is obvious, as there is substantial evidence of a partnership between the two
types of criminals. Terrorist groups use criminal networks to finance their activities
through kidnapping for ransom, trafficking in drugs, arms, cigarettes and precious
metals, the exploitation of artisanal mines, and illegal migration. Similarly, informal
taxation is imposed by terrorist organizations on goods that cross the territories
under their control.
Several studies have also reported that drug traffickers pay for services
provided by the Organization of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb fighters to secure
the trafficking of their goods through the Sahel region. In the Horn of Africa, it has
also been reported that the terrorist group Al-Shabaab finances itself through human
and drug trafficking, cattle rustling and piracy.
All the foregoing threats take advantage of the weak presence of certain States
in some areas of their territories, and, as the saying goes, nature abhors a vacuum.
Indeed, terrorists and other highway criminals have come to replace legitimate State
institutions, often providing basic social services to needy local populations that
feel marginalized by the central Government. In such troubled areas, the restrictions
triggered by the fight against the current coronavirus disease pandemic have
exacerbated the already dire situation and have allowed terrorist armed groups to
take of it to escalate their attacks, notwithstanding the Secretary-General’s call for a
global humanitarian ceasefire in order to focus on fighting the pandemic.
In the Sahel, the upheavals in Libya and Mali between 2011 and 2012 accentuated
the fragility of this region and strengthened the establishment of criminal networks.
Local economies, totally controlled by terrorists and smugglers, have emerged in
lawless areas. These activities thrive, thanks to the complicity of local populations
that benefit from the income generated by these various illicit activities.
This tangle of issues and interests between terrorist groups and organized
criminal groups, while complicating the fight against terrorists by Governments in
the region, is also progressively eroding the Governments’ sovereign capacity to
maintain law, order and public security. It also constitutes a threat to international
peace and security.
In response to these real threats, the Niger has, in accordance with United
Nations recommendations, strengthened its legislative and institutional framework
in order to effectively combat the gateway or enabling crimes that facilitate this
22/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

union of criminals, such as money-laundering, financing of terrorism, trafficking in
persons and cybercrime. My country has therefore set up several structures, including
the Central Service for Combating Terrorism and Cross-Border Crime, the National
Financial Information Processing Unit and the Judicial Centre Specialized in the
Fight against Terrorism. It has also adopted a national plan to combat trafficking
in persons.
At the subregional level, the Niger is a party to the Drug Action Plan to Address
Illicit Drug Trafficking, Organised Crime and Drug Abuse in West Africa, under the
auspices of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). In terms of
the regional fight against the sources of financing for these illicit activities, ECOWAS
has created an institution that deals with that issue, namely, the Intergovernmental
Action Group against Money-Laundering. That body, in collaboration with the
relevant national institutions, is making a significant contribution to tracing and
stopping those criminal and illicit financial flows.
The global nature of these threats requires greater cooperation among States.
Therefore, the United Nations has an important role to play, in particular through
its specialized agencies. In that regard, we welcome the adoption by the Council in
2019 of resolutions 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019), which address the links between
terrorism and organized crime.
Let me also take this opportunity to welcome all the actions carried out by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Africa in the context of capacitybuilding for actors involved in the fight against illicit drug trafficking and against
the gateway crimes of terrorism and organized crime, such as corruption and
radicalization in detention centres.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to appeal to all Member States, the
United Nations and all partners to intensify and diversify their efforts to combat this
threat. The Governments of the African States most confronted with these scourges
must be accompanied in their efforts to secure their borders. They must also be
supported in the implementation of their development programmes and projects,
which will enable them to have an effective presence throughout their territories.
That is why I call for the effective implementation of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and all the development
strategies and programmes adopted by the United Nations, including, inter alia, its
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

20-1064323/97

S/2020/791

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
Let me join others in congratulating Indonesia on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August, and we thank you, Sir, for
having organized this important open debate. We also thank our briefers for
their presentations.
The effective fight against terrorism and crime necessitates an understanding
of how poverty, underdevelopment, socioeconomic and political exclusion,
irresponsible arms sales, persistent conflict and other factors contribute to this
scourge. We must attack root causes and terrorism itself sensibly and collectively.
Anti-terrorist intervention should not be shaped by the side of the border that
atrocities are committed on or by whether particular groups are useful to narrow and
cynical short-term political objectives.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines condemns all forms and manifestations
of terrorism, whether State-sponsored or not. We remain committed to the
implementation of the relevant international instruments, resolution 1373 (2001)
and all subsequent resolutions — 2195 (2014) and 2462 (2019). Further, as a small
island developing State with limited resources, porous borders and a large maritime
territory to patrol, we believe that regional and international coordination is critical.
Consequently, we continue to work closely with a wide array of partners in our region
and beyond through initiatives such as the Caribbean Community’s Implementation
Agency for Crime and Security, the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative and the
Regional Security System, in order to address transnational crime in our region.
Today transnational crime is on the rise. It has become increasingly difficult
to eliminate illicit activity across widespread networks of disparate groups,
especially since many of those groups are dynamic, amorphous and constantly
evolving. Similarly, Member States must also be dynamic and genuinely committed
in their efforts to address those threats. Rising to the challenge will require greater
cooperation among United Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
increased support to vulnerable countries and adequate training, both on the evolving
threats posed by crime and terrorism, and on intelligence-collection and reporting
techniques. Strategic-level decision-makers should place particular emphasis on
the reporting of transnational crime and terrorism by State, local and nationallevel authorities to the appropriate domestic, regional and international intelligence
entities, where appropriate.
The evolving and interconnected dimensions of crime and terrorism present
a number of challenges, especially in the field of domestic intelligence. We urge
States to improve the flow of criminal intelligence and information-sharing across
all levels of Government and at the national, regional and international levels. We
also encourage a renewed focus on initiatives geared to enhancing sustainable
development in fragile contexts in order to draw people away from the lure of illicit
activity and fully embed them in legitimate economic enterprise. Further, initiatives
to combat transnational organized crime must be designed in such a way that they
bolster rather than undermine legitimate socioeconomic activity.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is
confident that with capacity-building, the strengthening of law-enforcement
agencies and other institutional arrangements, enhanced regional and international
cooperation and the use of financial intelligence, Member States can better confront
crime and terrorism and the other security challenges that they face.
24/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
I would like to congratulate Indonesia on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of August. We are also grateful to the briefers for their
insightful contributions.
At a time when the world’s attention has been overwhelmingly focused on
dealing with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its significant
disruptions to society, we are also grateful to Indonesia for keeping the Council’s
attention on the threat of international terrorism and the linkages with organized
crime, which has affected many parts of the world, including some regions on the
African continent.
The Secretary-General’s report on the actions taken by Member States
and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities
to address the issue of the potential linkages between terrorism and organized
crime (S/2020/754) provides us with a useful and comprehensive analysis of the
areas where these dual threats to international peace and security may converge.
The report makes clear that while the nature of the threat posed by these issues
varies considerably throughout the world, there has nevertheless been significant
progress in strengthening and harmonizing legislation and strategies to address
these challenges.
The steady development of a body of international law, with the support of
specialized agencies of the United Nations, including the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and partner
organizations such as INTERPOL, has contributed significantly to shoring up our
global response to these tandem threats.
South Africa’s commitment to fighting terrorism and organized crime,
whether transnational or national, remains unwavering. South Africa has integrated
the provisions of the various international instruments on terrorism and organized
crime into its national legislation, supported by national strategies and mechanisms
that attempt to address the myriad sub-elements that comprise these illicit webs.
South Africa’s robust national counter-terrorism strategy, aligned with the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, provides for the implementation
of the relevant conventions and Security Council counter-terrorism resolutions.
Our national strategy is supported by national counter-terrorism legislation, the
Protection of Constitutional Democracy against Terrorist and Related Activities Act,
as well as a number of other statutes criminalizing activities related to terrorism
and organized crime, including terror-financing activities and support for terrorist
organizations and individual terrorists.
South Africa is also an active member of the Financial Action Task Force, as
well as the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money-Laundering Group, and complies
with all review processes in an ongoing effort to improve our domestic systems.
We understand that these challenges are by their very nature adaptive and
continually evolving and that they require that we be similarly adaptive and evolve
to address new manifestations and trends. We wish to emphasize the importance of
international cooperation and coordination as well as the sharing of information,
best practices and technology on these issues. The transnational nature of these often
multi-layered threats can effectively be countered only by equally robust international
countermeasures allowing real-time information sharing and cooperation. In further
developing these systems, we must remain cognizant of the fact that they can only
20-1064325/97

S/2020/791

ever be as strong as their weakest point, which means that it is vital that we continue
to support those Member States with capacity constraints and unique challenges
such as large, porous borders.
It is also critical that we work to address the root causes and drivers of both
terrorism and organized crime. The best investment that we can make in addressing
these issues is to prevent our citizens from ever considering these terrible paths as
viable options by providing them with the opportunities to flourish in positive ways
that benefit society.
In conclusion, South Africa will continue to support the evolving global
response to these threats. We believe that the United Nations should continue to
lead in that regard, given the evident need for a multilateral and multidimensional
approach to these international challenges. As always, we encourage the further
development and enhancement of regional strategic partnerships between the United
Nations and regional organizations on these issues, including with the African Union.
We also wish to propose that consideration be given to establishing and/
or strengthening regional fusion centres to enhance cooperation with regional
organizations to prevent and counter terrorists from benefiting from organized
crime. Finally, it is also paramount that our efforts across the board be conducted in
accordance with international human rights law and international humanitarian law
and in close partnership with one another, international and regional organizations,
as well as civil society and the private sector.

26/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 14

Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I wish first to thank the briefers. We applaud their teams’ efforts to strengthen
the Council’s understanding of the linkages between terrorism and organized crime.
It is clear that in some cases and some regions, terrorist and organized criminal
groups exploit and benefit from weak democratic institutions and law enforcement
and take advantage of porous borders and ungoverned or undergoverned territories.
In some parts of the world, those conditions provide opportunities for terrorists and
transnational criminal groups to coexist in the same territory, develop alliances
based on common interests and even collaborate.
Based on trends we have seen, transnational criminal organizations are
unlikely to risk attracting the attention of authorities through collaboration with highprofile terrorist organizations or involvement in terrorist activity. In the instances
where we see a linkage between terrorists and organized criminal groups, wholeof-Government and whole-of-society approaches are vital to addressing the complex
nature of the crimes. Strong border security, regional cooperation and intelligencesharing between security agencies allows for effective responses to combat both
and can prevent nefarious actors from taking advantage of trafficking routes and
networks in regions with underpoliced or porous borders.
In that regard, an important tool for Member States is resolution 2396 (2017),
in which the Security Council obligated all Member States to collect and analyse
advance passenger information and passenger name records and to develop watch
lists. Such data can help investigators identify connections between individuals
associated with terrorist and organized criminal groups. We urge Member States
that need technical assistance or capacity-building in that area to please request it.
Existing treaties, including the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, and international counterterrorism instruments
and protocols also provide a useful framework for facilitating law-enforcement
cooperation. The United States has used the that Convention as a legal basis more
than 650 times since 2005 to provide or request mutual legal assistance, extradition
and other forms of international legal cooperation with at least 99 countries.
In addition to law-enforcement efforts to counter criminal and terrorist linkages,
it is also important to engage local communities and civil society to address the
underlying conditions conducive to the spread of violent extremism or transnational
organized crime. Local civil society is often attuned to the complex issues in play on
the ground and can assist Member States in finding practical solutions.
Since the adoption of resolution 2482 (2019) last year, the United Nations has
made great strides towards better understanding the linkages between terrorists and
organized criminal groups. The United States applauds the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime’s capacity-building programming to address those linkages.
The United States recommends that the United Nations strengthen its cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations as well as international platforms such
as the Global Counterterrorism Forum. The Forum has created good practices to
assist Member States in addressing potential linkages and brings together traditional
criminal investigators and those handling terrorism cases.
The United States looks forward to hearing the experiences of our partner
countries on how they are identifying and addressing those linkages. We will
continue to work with the United Nations; organizations such as the Financial
Action Task Force, the Group of Seven and the Global Counterterrorism Forum; and
partner countries around the world to address both transnational organized crime
and terrorism.

20-1064327/97

S/2020/791

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Adela Raz
Allow me to first thank the Permanent Mission of Indonesia for having
convened this very timely high-level open debate on addressing the issue of linkages
between international terrorism and organized crime. I would like to also thank
the Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations Office for Counter-Terrorism,
Vladimir Voronkov, and the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime for their insightful briefings on the importance of tackling
this threat.
Afghanistan believes in the imperative need to address the symbiotic relations
between these two heinous threats. Organized crime is a broad and complex
phenomenon, and its links with international terrorism are evident. As a State that
is both the prime victim of terrorism and which finds itself on the front line in the
fight against the threat, we are well aware of the ways in which organized crime
can strengthen the operational capabilities of terrorist groups and, as part of its
activities, further exacerbate insecurity, particularly by enabling a continuous flow
of weapons, extremist elements, drugs and dangerous chemical precursors used for
the development of explosive devices and other materials.
This is a threat that should be analysed not only through a national lens but
also with consideration given to the broad regional implications as seen through
the nexus of regional and international terrorist groups. Addressing the threat
posed by such groups requires effective and cohesive coordination among regional,
international and local efforts aimed at preventing terrorist and extremist groups and
organized-crime groups from benefiting from any disconnect between our efforts.
Even with the ongoing pandemic, at the national level Afghanistan has
continued to focus on disrupting that linkage through a multipronged approach that
encompasses various areas. As part of that, our country has worked diligently in
tackling the illicit drug trade, which has served as a particularly strong source for
the funding of terrorist organizations. Our efforts cover an approach that involves
tackling the issue at all levels, from eradication to interdiction and, ultimately,
the prosecution of individuals involved in the process. In that regard, the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces have conducted efficient operations, which
led to the dismantling of numerous drug laboratories and processing facilities.
Operations have also taken place at various points of entry in the country, including
border crossings and airports. They have prevented 100 tons of illegal substances
from entering our country. In parallel, the anti-drug department of the CounterNarcotics Justice Centre has also played an effective role by ensuring the transparent
processing of suspects engaging in the illicit drug trade.
In addition to those operations, our National Inter-Agency Task Force on
Combating Terrorism continues its work to implement a national framework to
counter money laundering and other forms of financial criminal activities. As part
of that, the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Afghanistan
(FinTRACA) has worked diligently to ensure that Afghan financial institutions are
prevented from being used for illegal activities. As part of that work, FinTRACA
cooperates with institutions at the regional level in order to effectively comply with
the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Crime and the United Nations
Convention against Corruption.
Afghanistan has also engaged with regional platforms, including the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the South
28/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia and the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia in order to further complement efforts to
address the linkage between organized crime and terrorist organizations through
efforts in line with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the
relevant Security Council resolutions on the matter. Nevertheless, a stronger focus
on that, particularly with regard to monitoring the movement of those under United
Nations sanctions regimes and their backers, must remain an important priority in
our fight to effectively diminish this threat.
In conclusion, I would like to once again thank the Permanent Mission of
Indonesia for hosting this valuable meeting and to reiterate the full collaboration of
Afghanistan in continuing to work on this issue.

20-1064329/97

S/2020/791

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Australia to the
United Nations
Australia commends Indonesia for convening this open debate of the Security
Council on linkages between terrorism and organized crime. Australia is proud
of its long history of partnering with Indonesia in efforts to combat terrorism and
transnational crime and welcomes its leadership on this important issue.
The link between terrorist groups and transnational, serious and organized
crime continues to present a complex and evolving threat to international security,
particularly in environments where such groups can exploit poor governance and
a weakened rule of law. We recognize that this linkage manifests itself differently
in different countries. While linkages between terrorism and organized crime have
fortunately been less pronounced in the Australian context, we have continued to
focus our efforts on prevention, disruption and responding to such threats.
Underpinning Australia’s response is our strong counter-terrorism financing
regime. Working collaboratively across law enforcement, intelligence, policy
agencies, industry, the community and international counterparts, that regime
has enabled Australia to detect and respond to emerging financing threats and to
undermine the capacity of violent extremists to fund and carry out acts of terrorism.
Within South-East Asia, we have helped to foster multilateral cooperation
through the annual regional Counter-Terrorism Financing Summit. This forum
harnesses the collective capability of the region’s financial intelligence units to
develop actionable strategies to combat terrorism financing and serious crime.
In November 2019, Australia was pleased to host the No Money for Terror
ministerial conference on counter-terrorism financing. The event, attended by
65 delegations, sought to strengthen global responses against terrorism financing,
including global responses to kidnap for ransom, identifying risks and opportunities
from emerging technologies, enhancing public-private partnerships and preventing
the exploitation of not-for-profit organizations for terrorism purposes.
Recognizing that terrorist and organized criminal groups are innovative, the
utilization of modern technologies, such as encrypted communications, by such
groups presents a significant challenge to law enforcement, which will likely be
exacerbated during the coronavirus disease pandemic, where resources will be
stretched and investigations may be increasingly reliant on the use of data and
digital information. Responding to that challenge, Australia has passed legislation
to facilitate law enforcement access to communications and data for criminal
investigations, introduced computer access warrants for law enforcement, continued
to update anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing laws, introduced
legislation designed to establish an international production order, or cross-border
access to data, regime and enhanced public-private partnerships.
Strengthening governance and the rule of law is essential to combating
both threats of terrorism and organized crime. Australia has worked closely with
regional partners to provide assistance in developing and implementing laws to
combat transnational crime and violent extremism. Australia is firmly committed
to the robust implementation of international anti-corruption standards, including
those set by the United Nations and the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development. The Australian Government has also committed to establishing a
Commonwealth integrity commission to further strengthen integrity arrangements
across the federal public sector. Australia also welcomes the development of
international good practices in understanding and combating the nexus between
transnational organized crime and terrorism by the Global Counterterrorism Forum.
30/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to the
United Nations, Yashar Aliyev
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Government of Indonesia on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council, and I commend its initiative to
hold this open debate.
Terrorism and related criminal activities continue to pose a serious threat to
international peace and security, the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the political independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and social
and economic development of all Member States. These activities are unjustifiable
regardless of their motivation, constitute serious crimes and must be condemned
and prosecuted.
The sensitive geographic location of Azerbaijan, the continued occupation of
its territories by Armenia, in grave violation of international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, and other unresolved armed conflicts in the region
increase transborder threats. Since the end of the 1980s, as a means of realizing its
groundless and unlawful territorial claims and as a method of warfare, Armenia
and various Armenian terrorist organizations have perpetrated numerous terrorist
attacks against my country, claiming the lives of thousands of its citizens.
In resolution 2482 (2019), the Security Council expressed serious concern that
terrorists could benefit from organized crime, whether domestic or transnational. It is
of particular concern that areas of armed conflict, especially territories under foreign
military occupation, often create opportunities for terrorists, organized criminal
groups and networks to benefit from the exploitation of and the illicit trade in natural
resources, illicit drug trafficking, trafficking in cultural property, money laundering
and other crimes. The occupied territories of Azerbaijan are a graphic example of
interpenetration of the occupying forces and the unlawful puppet regime established
by Armenia in those territories with terrorist and organized criminal activities.
The strict compliance by States with their international obligations, including
the relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council, is critical to ensuring, inter
alia, that their respective territories are not used for terrorist and related criminal
activities, in particular for financing or providing, directly or indirectly, any support
to such activities under whatever pretext or disguise.
It is important that, where terrorists or organized criminal groups are
engaged in unlawful commercial activities, including in conflict zones and occupied
territories, targeted sanctions, corporate liability and criminal responsibility
function in tandem to ensure prosecution for violations of international law.
In that connection, in addition to measures that States are entitled to take at
the national level to assert criminal jurisdiction over crimes perpetrated by their
nationals overseas, international cooperation in criminal matters, with mutual legal
assistance as its component, is the key to combating impunity for acts of terrorism
and related offences.
Azerbaijan strongly supports enhanced individual and collective counterterrorism measures, including in particular those aimed at degrading and ultimately
defeating terrorist organizations, their affiliates and networks. It is important that
such efforts continue and expand.
Although terrorism and organized crime have different motivations and legal
regimes, there is a need for the further comprehensive examination of evolving
linkages between them. We consider it useful to continue discussions on the topic.
20-1064331/97

S/2020/791

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing this virtual high-level open
debate. I also express my sincere appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
and Executive Director Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly for their insightful briefing.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has brought about new dimensions
in the growing linkages between terrorism and organized crimes. As the State
security apparatus remains seized with the pandemic, organized criminal networks
are getting increasing leeway. Movement restrictions have increased the use of
irregular transaction channels, creating favourable conditions for criminals and
terrorists alike. The closure of educational institutions has led young people to
immerse themselves more in the cyberworld, making them susceptible to online
criminal activities, including violent extremism. These new challenges require due
understanding, recognition and new dispensations. The Council’s attention to this
issue at this trying time is therefore reassuring.
Bangladesh maintains a policy of zero tolerance towards terrorism and
organized crimes. We have been investing heavily in these areas through various
preventive measures, which include awareness-raising, community engagement and
resilience, the empowerment of women, creating opportunities for young people
through the digital Bangladesh campaign, et cetera.
We have developed a strong legal and regulatory framework to address
terrorism, which also takes into account the potent linkage between terrorism and
organized crimes. Let me share some of our national efforts.
Our anti-terrorism law automatically transposes United Nations designations
into domestic obligations to prohibit any kind of funding to Security Council-listed
persons and entities, freezing their assets, et cetera. Furthermore, we were the first
among South Asian nations to enact an anti-money laundering law, which defines
terrorist financing as one of the 27 predicate offences.
To address human trafficking, people smuggling and related criminal
activities, Bangladesh has adopted laws and rules in strict compliance with
international standards, including the United Nations Convention on Transnational
Organized Crimes and the Palermo Protocol. We are a State party to both. The
implementation of a national action plan to combat human trafficking is under way,
involving all key stakeholders, including the CSOs. Our Department of Narcotics
Control is empowered to investigate possible illicit financial transactions by drugrelated accused, dealers or peddlers.
To facilitate international cooperation, we have enacted legislation on mutual
legal assistance in criminal matters and the extradition of criminals. We have joined
a number of regional initiatives with regard to terrorism and organized crimes
within the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and the Bay of Bengal
Initiative for Multisectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation. That is also a
manifestation of the importance that our region attaches to the linkage. We have
concluded bilateral agreements with others, including our neighbours, in the areas of
international terrorism, organized crime and illicit drug trafficking.
The capacity-building of national stakeholders is critical to addressing the
menace of terrorism and organized crimes. In close coordination with the United
Nations country team, the respective United Nations agencies have been providing
such support to Bangladesh.
32/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Terrorism is a threat to global peace and the risks of terrorism are compounded
by the global network of organized crime. To break that unholy alliance, we must
take a holistic approach. In that regard, we wish to make a few points.
First, vulnerability, deprivation, repression and desperation lead people to
fall prey to terrorist and organized crime networks. National Governments should
address such root causes.
Second, effective and real time intelligence and information-sharing platforms
among Member States need to be established. We must strengthen cooperation
on the investigation, prosecution and execution of sentences through the transfer/
extradition of criminals under trial and those who have been convicted.
Third, vigorous efforts are needed to ensure the universal acceptance and
application of international conventions and related protocols on transnational
organized crimes and terrorism.
Fourth, organized crime networks and terrorist networks are increasingly
abusing digital platforms and specific features of globalization, such as the
liberalization of financial markets and electronic and off-shore banking, to expand
their unscrupulous activities. Countering extremist propaganda requires digital
means. Digital surveillance and the use of information and communications
technology should therefore be strengthened, which would require the capacity
enhancement of national Governments.
Fifth, women and girls are disproportionately affected by organized crimes,
including trafficking. On the other hand, they are capable of making a distinct
contribution to prevention efforts. We must therefore redouble our efforts to integrate
the gender dimension in national and international campaigns against terrorism and
organized crimes.
Sixth, terrorist networks and organized criminal networks both recruit from
the same social catchment, the prevention of which would serve to disrupt the nexus
between the two. For that, we need to take a whole-of-society approach, involving
key agents, such as the business community, civil society, non-governmental
organizations, religious and community leaders and young people.
Seventh, the deployment of resources is usually skewed towards anti-terrorism
efforts vis-à-vis anti-organized crime efforts. The uneven progress limits overall
accomplishment, whereas a balanced resource allocation may better serve to break
the linkage between terrorism and organized crimes.
Finally, during pandemics or other health emergencies, we need to stop, to
the extent possible, the diversion of resources and attention from anti-terrorism and
anti-organized crimes efforts. There is no doubt that it is a tall order but it can be
achieved through concerted efforts and with international cooperation. We expect
the Security Council to continue its lead in that regard and to complement and
collaborate with other relevant bodies.

20-1064333/97

S/2020/791

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
Brazil thanks the Indonesian presidency for convening this debate on
linkages between terrorism and organized crime. Brazil remains committed
to multidimensional responses to terrorism, in line with international law and,
particularly, the Charter of the United Nations.
The repudiation of terrorism is enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution as a
guiding principle of our foreign policy. This repudiation goes beyond words and
has been translated into action. Over recent years, our national legislation has been
updated to match the challenges of preventing and countering terrorism and its
financing, and our agencies are working tirelessly to fight this scourge.
As the Council has already recognized, the nature and scope of possible
linkages between terrorism and transnational organized crime vary considerably,
depending on the geographic, social and political context. We will be able to tackle
possible linkages only with conceptual clarity; the international community will
hardly find a solution to a problem it does not understand. More research is needed
to properly grasp the proclivities of potential connections between terrorism and
organized crime so that we can jointly design adequate strategies to address them.
Although terrorism and organized crime are regulated by different legal
frameworks, there are some practices that may be beneficial to address both
phenomena. First, it is imperative to investigate the financial and operational
support networks that may equally benefit terrorist groups and transnational
criminal organizations. In this regard, we should strengthen our efforts to combat
money-laundering and facilitate the timely exchange of financial intelligence. In
addition, the international community should invest more resources in technical
assistance aimed at developing expertise in domestic agencies. Moreover, regional
and international cooperation should be at the centre of both counterterrorism and
organized crime-control strategies.
The broad scope of measures described above demonstrates the comprehensive
approach required to prevent and counter terrorism, including possible linkages with
transnational organized crime. Hence, these potential linkages should be interpreted
as an encouragement not to bring the issue of organized crime to the Security Council,
but rather to once again place the General Assembly at the centre of the United
Nations debate on counter-terrorism. All Member States have a legitimate interest
in actively contributing to the fight against terrorism. Integrating counter-terrorism
concerns with domestic law-enforcement challenges is a task for the General
Assembly, which is the United Nations organ mandated to address multidimensional
factors that a security-centred approach fails to capture.
The seventh review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
represents a unique opportunity to further debate potential interactions between
both types of crime. It provides a deliberative space where all Member States
may share successful practices that contributed to disrupting both terrorist groups
and criminal organizations. It may also show that some approaches will work for
neither category of crime, such as military responses detached from socioeconomic
measures aimed at more structural changes. Finally, it might confirm that some
challenges are exclusive to terrorism, as are the responses needed to overcome them.
To give just one example, countering terrorist narratives is of crucial importance
to preventing radicalization, but has hardly any impact on combating transnational
organized crime.

34/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Terrorism defies our sense of humanity and attempts to create an environment
of indifference and chaos. To counter this scourge, the international community must
distinguish itself from it, acting with solidarity and order — solidarity to honour
the victims of terrorism, to cooperate in forestalling future attacks and to avoid
unintended negative consequences of counter-terrorism measures; and orderliness to
act within the parameters of international law, to respect human rights, humanitarian
law and refugee law, and to work in a manner consistent with the division of labour
among United Nations organs as established in the Charter. Brazil remains committed
to actively contributing to these efforts.

20-1064335/97

S/2020/791

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations
[Original: English and French]
I thank you, Mr. President, and the Republic of Indonesia for organizing
this important debate to address the issue of linkages between terrorism and
organized crime.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/754) on action taken by
Member States and United Nations entities to address the issue of linkages between
terrorism and organized crime, will provide a comprehensive basis for Member
States to address this issue going forward.
Canada is concerned about the growing linkages between organized crime
and terrorism, and the ways in which these groups are exploiting the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic environment to advance their nefarious objectives.
New challenges have emerged in this complex security environment that require
a comprehensive understanding of how, why and when the crime-terror nexus
develops. The COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately impacted vulnerable
groups, such as migrants, refugees and stateless people, and increases the risk
of exploitation by criminal actors. Women and girls are particularly vulnerable,
including in areas such as kidnapping for ransom, where the nexus between humantrafficking and terrorist financing has been particularly profound. For this reason,
Canada supports capacity-building projects that consider and address these specific
risks and transnational threats.
Our coordinated international response to linkages between terrorism and
organized crime needs to be gender-informed in order to fully assess and address the
drivers of insecurity that perpetuate criminal and terrorist activity and to develop
effective and sustainable ways to combat these ongoing threats. Our efforts must
also fully respect and comply with obligations and commitments under international
law, particularly, international human rights law, international refugee law and
international humanitarian law.
Canada is active in many complementary multilateral and regional fora on this
issue. As Co-Chair of the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) with Morocco,
Canada would like to highlight that the GCTF is a critical partner in strengthening
international good-practice norms through the development of tools and materials for
policymakers and practitioners, and supports United Nations efforts to advance the
implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and relevant resolutions.
For example, the Criminal Justice and the Rule of Law Working Group of
the GCTF has launched initiatives to develop good practices to address and prevent
various issues relating to the crime-terrorism nexus. The Working Group is currently
developing an addendum focusing on criminal justice to the GCTF Hague Good
Practices on the Nexus between Transnational Organized Crime and Terrorism
of 2018. These good practices documents explore the linkages among terrorism,
the financing of terrorism and various forms of illicit trafficking of goods from a
criminal-justice perspective and build on the United Nations Transnational Organized
Crime Convention and its additional protocols on trafficking in persons, smuggling
of migrants and firearms, the United Nations Convention Against Corruption and
the 19 international legal instruments on counter-terrorism.
Canada also supports enhancing regional security in the Americas, as
current Chair of the Organization of American States Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism (CICTE). As part of our work within CICTE, we see the value
36/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

of establishing standards, best practices and measures to improve border, port and
documents security. Doing so provides the dual benefit of making the hemisphere
more resistant to the spread of terrorism, while also impeding transnational
organized crime.
Another critical aspect of our efforts to address the linkages between organized
crime and terrorism is the need to deprive criminals and terrorists of the proceeds
and instrumentalities of crime. To this end, Canada advocates for implementation
of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) standards to ensure that Member States
cannot be used to raise, move and use funds from, or intended for, criminal activity.
However, the efficacy of the FATF framework and its regional bodies in
combatting money-laundering and terrorist financing, as with other counter-terrorism
and anti-organized crime initiatives, lies in implementation by Member States.
In recognition thereof, Canada provided $47.6 million in 2019-2020, through the
Counter-Terrorism Capacity-Building Programme and Anti-Crime CapacityBuilding Programme, for training, equipment, technical assistance and other
capacity-building initiatives to support Governments in responding to threats posed
by terrorist and criminal activities.
In summary, Canada remains strongly committed to tackling transnational
organized crime and terrorism and to working collaboratively with Member States
in doing so. By working together, the United Nations and Member States can not
only disrupt terrorist groups and criminal organizations, but also more effectively
address linkages between them.

20-1064337/97

S/2020/791

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Chile expresses its appreciation to the Permanent Mission of Indonesia for
having convened this open debate of the Security Council on the link between
terrorism and transnational organized crime. The significant presence of the UnderSecretary-General of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Office, Mr. Vladimir
Voronkov, and of the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, demonstrates the relevance of this topic to
international peace and security and for the coordinated work of the United Nations.
The organization of this debate is timely and necessary, since it allows us
to adequately monitor resolutions 2482 (2019) and 2462 (2019), dedicated to this
topic, and note with concern that the links between terrorism and organized crime
are evolving rapidly, especially in the current context of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, which is helping to deepen both traditional and emerging threats.
Although at the onset of the health crisis the closure of international borders
and the intensification of police controls helped decrease the flow of illicit goods,
criminal groups have demonstrated a great capacity to adapt to meet demand, while
increasing their cybercrime capacities and taking advantage of the gaps generated by
the diverted attention of the authorities.
The possibility of a post-pandemic global economic and social crisis would
herald a number of greater challenges in fighting this phenomenon, including the
weakening of the State institutions tasked with preventing and combating such
crimes at the national level, which could lead to an increase in corruption. On the
other hand, economic despair and a lack of job opportunities could create recruitment
opportunities for terrorist and criminal groups.
Chile therefore believes it is essential to begin to better understand the links
between terrorism and organized crime as a multidimensional, evolving threat with
impacts at the national, regional and international levels. Against this backdrop,
international cooperation in areas such as border security, financial intelligence and
investigation and prosecution is of the utmost importance.
In this context, Chile’s Financial Intelligence Unit gathers and analyses
intelligence to identify patterns and links between terrorism and organized crime,
and regularly exchanges this information with its peers through the secure Egmont
Group network. Likewise, the Unit monitors the sentences handed down by Chilean
courts in order to identify typologies and warning signs derived from moneylaundering and terrorist financing, as well as their preceding crimes, such as drugand human-trafficking.
Our country is in the midst of an evaluation process by the Financial Action
Group for Latin America evaluating Chile’s compliance with the 40 recommendations
of the Financial Action Task Force on money-laundering and terrorist financing.
We attach high priority to this process, since it allows us to strengthen and update
national regulations to prevent and combat these crimes, which facilitate organized
criminal activities due to the need for criminal groups to hide the illicit origin of
their funds.
The problems before us today are matters of high priority for Chile and the
Latin America region. This is because the terrorist threat in the region to a great
extent comes from drug-trafficking groups, which have increased their arsenals
and violence, to the detriment of the human security of our societies. Furthermore,
38/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

these groups increasingly collaborate and converge with regional and transnational
terrorist groups.
Chile is looking forward to the publication of the report of the Secretary General
pursuant to resolution 2482 (2019), which will serve as a guide for identifying areas
for priority action to counter the multiple challenges relating to this phenomenon
and the consequences of the pandemic. In this regard, we encourage the Security
Council and the United Nations system in general to continue supporting the efforts
of Member States to maximize international cooperation and better face the complex
times ahead.

20-1064339/97

S/2020/791

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Cuba to the United Nations
[Original: English and Spanish]
The Cuban Government remains strongly committed to preventing and
confronting terrorism, as well as to combating various manifestations of transnational
organized crime that may contribute to its financing, which has prevented these
phenomena from proliferating in Cuba.
Although transnational organized crime can be a source of funding or logistical
support for terrorism, the linkage between them established by the Security Council
is not automatic and varies in different contexts.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whatsoever the motivation.
Cuba is a State party to 18 of the 19 international conventions on terrorism
and is finalizing the domestic legal requirements to ratify the last one.
In accordance with the agreements signed, legislative, institutional,
administrative and other measures seeking to effectively fight against this scourge
have been implemented. We have a specific legislation on this matter.
For instance, decree-laws 316 and 317 were passed in 2013. The first,
“Amending the Penal Code and the Counter-Terrorism Act”, adjusted criminal
offences relating to acts of terrorism with the use of nuclear, radioactive material
and ionizing substances, and expanded the range of predicate offences of moneylaundering, in accordance with the United Nations Conventions against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances and against Transnational
Organized Crime. The second, “Prevention and Detection of Transactions in the
Fight against Money-Laundering, Financing of Terrorism, Proliferation of Weapons
and Illicit Capital Flows”, raised the normative hierarchy regarding the identification
and freezing of assets linked to terrorist individuals or organizations, pursuant to the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
Cuba’s commitment to the fight against terrorism was elevated to constitutional
status in the national Constitution, adopted by referendum on 24 February 2019
following a process of constitutional reform and broad-based popular consultations.
The new Constitution of the Republic, in Chapter II, on international relations,
reaffirms in Article 16, paragraph (l), the long-standing position defended by Cuba
and repudiates and condemns terrorism in any of its forms and manifestations, in
particular State terrorism, as one of the principles of its foreign policy.
That commitment and Cuba’s institutional capacity to prevent moneylaundering and the financing of terrorism have been recognized on several occasions
by the Financial Action Task Force of Latin America, a regional structure of the
Financial Action Task Force.
Our country complies strictly with its obligations under the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council. In 2020 it submitted its response to the survey on effective
measures adopted by Member States to end the financing of terrorism, conducted
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and
2253 (2015). It provided inputs to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism for the preparation of the report
on terrorism and organized crime pursuant to resolution 2482 (2019). Likewise, it
has submitted contributions on the implementation of the United Nations Global
40/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Counter-Terrorism Strategy and General Assembly resolution 74/194, on “Measures
to eliminate international terrorism”.
Transnational organized crime has no significant impact on Cuba, which
is due mainly to the actions aimed at preventing and combating it that have been
implemented in the country, the zero-tolerance policy against that phenomenon and
the absence of organized-crime networks on the national territory.
In order to combat transnational organized crime, Cuba has implemented a
total of 11 extradition treaties and 25 legal assistance agreements, 16 of which also
include extradition.
The Cuban State is committed to the fight against transnational organized
crime, drug trafficking, terrorism, the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in persons
and other crimes, pursuant to its obligations as a State party to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols.
We reject in the most absolute terms the arbitrary and unilateral qualification
made by the Government of the United States by including Cuba in the worst
category of the 2019 Trafficking in Persons Report by the Department of State,
which disregards our country’s international efforts to combat that phenomenon.
Cuba, which has been the victim of terrorist acts that have claimed 3,478
lives and disabled 2,099 persons, reiterates its profound rejection and condemnation
of all terrorist acts, methods and practices, in all their forms and manifestations,
whatever their motivations. Our country has never permitted, nor will it ever permit,
its territory to be used to plan terrorist acts against any State.
Arbitrarily and unilaterally, Cuba has been included in the United States
Department of State’s list of countries that supposedly do not fully cooperate in the
fight against terrorism, issued on 13 May 2020. Subsequently and without any basis,
our country was included in a Department of State annual report on international
terrorism in which Cuba is depicted as a safe haven for terrorists.
We reject such unilateral lists and certifications, which are politically
motivated and contrary to international law. They serve only defamatory purposes
and represent coercion against countries that refuse, in their sovereign decisions,
to abide by the will of the United States Government. It is the United States
Government itself that has chosen not to publicly condemn or reject the serious
terrorist attack committed using a firearm against the Embassy of the Republic of
Cuba in that country on 30 April, which endangered the safety of the staff of the
diplomatic mission and their families. The conspiratorial silence of the United States
Government might encourage similar actions against diplomatic missions in both
Washington, D.C., and New York.
The record of violent and hostile acts is well known, including terrorist acts
committed against Cuban diplomatic officials appointed to the United States, at the
Embassy in Washington, D.C., as well as the Permanent Representation of Cuba to
the United Nations in New York. It should be recalled, for instance, that the Cuban
diplomat Félix García Rodríguez was assassinated in New York on 11 September
1980 and that direct attacks with explosive devices were carried out against the
Permanent Mission of Cuba in that city.
The groups and individuals that have committed terrorist acts against Cuba in
the past have operated for years, and continue to operate, with impunity on United
States soil; the law-enforcement agencies of the United States Government are fully
aware of all this. It is unacceptable that some terrorist acts are condemned while
others are silenced, tolerated, encouraged, justified or manipulated for political and
economic interests.
20-1064341/97

S/2020/791

Facts confirm that terrorism continues to be a serious challenge facing the
international community. We reiterate that the United Nations must assume the central
role in international efforts to combat it. International cooperation is essential in the
fight against terrorism. We reject the application of unilateral coercive measures that
limit the capacity of States to eradicate this scourge, in violation of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.
We strongly reject the use of the pretext of an alleged fight against terrorism
and organized crime to commit acts of aggression, undermine national sovereignty,
interfere in the internal affairs of other States and violate the human rights of
their peoples.

42/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Denmark to the
United Nations, Martin Bille Hermann
I have the pleasure to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark. We are grateful to the
Indonesian presidency for having placed this very pertinent topic on the Security
Council’s agenda. Your excellent timing, Sir, allows us to build on the discussions
of last month’s United Nations Counter-Terrorism Week and the Secretary-General’s
recent report on this issue (S/2020/754).
While it is still too early to fully understand and assess the impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on the global terrorism landscape, the
pandemic leaves the world more vulnerable to terrorism, with the possibility that
already existing negative dynamics are coming into play earlier than expected and
with more severe consequences. Furthermore, terrorist groups have set up local and
regional systems to generate and move funds through illicit and organized criminal
activity. This makes it all the more important to ensure that our national, regional
and global counter-terrorist financing architecture is fit for purpose.
Terrorist networks depend on external financing to run their organizations.
That financing must be cut off. We must disrupt the links between organized
crime and terrorism in order to identify and stop illicit financial flows to terrorist
organizations and criminal networks. We encourage the expansion of existing
initiatives as well as the development of new ones to deal more effectively with the
nexus between terrorism and organized crime.
The Nordic countries fully support the important message delivered by the
Secretary-General in his opening remarks during last month’s United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Week: that counter-terrorism laws and security measures cannot
be an excuse to shrink civic and humanitarian space, curtail freedom of association
and deny other human rights.
We are currently faced with multiple international crises requiring
humanitarian, development or security-led responses, and the COVID-19 global
pandemic and its effects has only increased competition for Member States’
scarce resources. We fully agree with the Secretary-General’s point made during
last month’s United Nations Counter-Terrorism Week that we must harness the power
of multilateralism to find practical solutions. Terrorism does not respect national
borders. It affects us all and can be defeated only collectively. Hence the demand for
a coordinated approach ensuring effective and demand-driven responses that create
tangible, gender-sensitive and sustainable outcomes on the ground in Member States
has never been made in a more outspoken manner.
United Nations Headquarters in New York and the United Nations offices in
Vienna must work effectively together, including by making the best possible use of
their field presence and by finding the right balance between Headquarters and field
presence. We call on the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism to develop strategies to that end, drawing on
the specific strengths and mandates of each Office.
Similarly, we as Member States must also work together, both within our
countries and between authorities and sectors as well as with other Member States.
Indeed, coordination and cooperation between authorities has been identified as one
key factor in countering organized crime and terrorism. Furthermore, it is important
to build and improve partnerships with civil society, including humanitarian and
private-sector actors.
20-1064343/97

S/2020/791

The Global Counterterrorism Forum has developed a number of practical
guidelines and best practices relevant to today’s debate that can assist us in
translating our shared visions and priorities into concrete partnerships. We welcome
the increased collaboration between the United Nations and the Forum, and we
call for an even further realization of the potential synergies between the United
Nations and the Forum, in particular through Forum-inspired institutions such as the
International Institute for Justice and the Rule of Law. That training institute, located
in Malta, presents an obvious platform for addressing many of the gaps identified in
the Secretary-General’s report through capacity-building and experience-sharing.
A key prerequisite for promoting a rule-of-law-based approach is the need to
move from convictions based on confessions alone to sentencing based on objectively
verifiable evidence, not only as a way of ensuring a rule-of-law-based and humanrights-compliant criminal justice response to terrorism but also to ensure a more
efficient and more comprehensive investigation and prosecution process, increasing
the possibilities of exposing linkages between terrorists and individuals or networks
involved in other forms of crime. Such an approach shows that effective counterterrorism measures and the protection of human rights are indeed complementary
and mutually reinforcing objectives.

44/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 24
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Ecuador to
the United Nations, Helena Yánez Loza
[Original: Spanish]
I would like at the outset to congratulate Indonesia on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of August and on having organized
this debate of pivotal importance.
I am also grateful for the briefings by the Under-Secretary-General of the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, Vladimir Voronkov, and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Ghada Fathi Waly.
Terrorism poses a serious threat to international peace and security, human
rights, democratic stability and the economic and social development of States and
of the international community as a whole. The same is true of organized crime
and organized transnational crime. We therefore strongly and unequivocally
condemn all acts of terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, regardless of their
motivation, whenever and by whomsoever committed. We equally strongly condemn
organized crime and reiterate that its links to terrorism must continue to be debated
and countered.
As no State is immune from terrorism, Ecuador is convinced that strengthening
the international fight against terrorism is a task that must be undertaken cooperatively
with the application of joint and concerted measures and actions in order to counter
terrorism and its effects.
The prevention of terrorism is as important as its repression. It is vital,
therefore, to determine and eliminate the causes and factors that can promote acts of
terrorism, including its financing; political, ethnic, religious and racial intolerance;
and the social and economic gap among nations, the latter exacerbated by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the accompanying health, economic
and social crisis.
In that respect, in Ecuador measures are being drawn up and implemented for
the progressive application of resolution 1373 (2001) by classifying as a crime the
financing of terrorism and the associated money-laundering, and through preventive
measures and international judicial cooperation. I shall mention a few examples.
The Ecuadorian Comprehensive Criminal Code, adopted in 2014, expressly
classifies terrorism and its financing, recognizing the direct relationship between
the crime of money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, and underlining the
advances made in the control of money-laundering and the financing of terrorism.
The Law on the Prevention, Detection and Eradication of the Crime of MoneyLaundering and the Financing of Crimes aims to prevent, detect in a timely manner,
punish and eradicate money-laundering and the financing of crimes in its various
modalities. The Continuous Action Plan for the Prevention of Money Laundering
and against the Financing of Terrorism, with the same objective, was also approved.
In the area of public policy, an inter-institutional committee is being formed
among State bodies to address the problem in the banking, aeronautical, immigration,
police and security spheres.
In early 2018, acts of violence were committed on Ecuador’s northern border
as a result of the actions of irregular armed groups linked to transnational organized
crime, which led to a dozen terrorist attacks; wounded, killed or displaced people;
and affected State infrastructure.
20-1064345/97

S/2020/791

As an immediate response, the Government of Ecuador created the National
Committee for Comprehensive Border Security as the entity responsible for the
coordination and harmonization of policies, guidelines, procedures and actions in
the field of comprehensive border security, and it implemented the Defence Security
Plan for the Northern Border, which provides guidelines for strategic planning and
comprehensive defence, security and development policies in order to address the
complex transnational threat of terrorism in all its dimensions.
It is also important to note the connection between terrorism and corruption.
For that reason, Ecuador condemns acts of corruption committed by networks
that seriously threaten the stability of States and entire regions, and it stresses
the importance of achieving fluid cooperation through confidential informationexchange agreements, particularly in the financial area, to carry out effective
investigations into the financing of terrorism and money-laundering.
The United Nations is the global platform that is called on to lead the fight
against terrorism and organized transnational crime. We therefore reiterate our
commitment to work to strengthen the international fight against those scourges,
which threaten peace and security worldwide.

46/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the
United Nations, Mohamed Edrees
Allow me at the outset to congratulate Indonesia on commencing its presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August. We thank you, Sir, for presiding
over this meeting, which tackles the crucial issue of addressing the linkages between
terrorism and organized crime.
We are pleased to participate in this year’s open debate via video-teleconference
after taking part in last year’s open debate, held on 9 July 2019 (see S/PV.8569).
Egypt has always promoted the adoption of a comprehensive approach to counterterrorism, one that addresses all of its root causes, impacts and linkages.
The link between organized crime and terrorism is not only evident at the
normative level in the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, of 2000, and the numerous Security Council resolutions that followed, ending
with resolution 2482 (2019), it is also a reality that we continue to see every day in
many parts of the world, including Africa.
From Boko Haram in the west, through terrorist organizations in the Sahel
area, all the way to the Horn of Africa, terrorist groups have been coexisting and
partnering with organized crime groups to secure funding and logistical support.
The unfortunate result is stronger terrorist groups and an increase in all forms of
organized crime, including trade in arms and narcotics, human and organ trafficking
and migrant smuggling. This promiscuous, mutually reinforcing relationship between
organized criminal and terrorist groups constitutes a destabilizing catalyst for most
Governments in conflict areas, thus significantly contributing to the deterioration of
peace and security in conflict areas worldwide. A vivid example of this is the current
situation in Libya, where fanatic militias coexist and cooperate with organized
criminal bands and facilitate human trafficking and illegal migration in exchange
for fees from the latter.
That is why in recent years, particularly during Egypt’s membership in the
Security Council in 2016 and 2017 and its chairmanship of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counterterrorism, we have been generally supportive of all initiatives targeting organized
crime in the context of counter-terrorism and have played a leading role in adopting
many of them.
At the national level, Egyptian law enforcement agencies are heavily invested
in targeting organized crime syndicates and obstructing any potential partnership
between them and terrorist groups in Egypt. In recent years, counter-terrorist
financing and anti-money laundering mechanisms have also been further enhanced
to achieve that goal.
At the regional and international levels, we remain of the view that
strengthening State foundations and institutions is one of the most efficient ways
to counter terrorism and organized crime in fragile areas. These groups seek to
benefit from the power vacuum and the weakness and lack of capacity of national
institutions in such areas. Egypt has therefore been providing many capacity-building
programmes for its brotherly countries in the Sahel in the areas of military and
policing, including through specialized training courses provided by the Egyptian
Agency of Partnership for Development. That is why Egypt believes that the longoverdue peace and stability in Libya can be achieved only through strengthening and
unifying its national institutions, including the Libyan National Army. Only then

20-1064347/97

S/2020/791

can we fill the current power vacuum that armed militias, terrorist organizations and
organized criminal groups are abusing.
In conclusion, as we approach the seventh biannual review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which was postponed to the seventy-fifth
session of the General Assembly after Spain and Egypt commenced the co-facilitation
process this year, we are looking forward to insightful ideas emanating from this
open debate, which could guide further substantive discussion on this crucial issue
within the context of the seventh review of the Strategy.

48/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Representative of El Salvador to the
United Nations, Egriselda González López
[Original: Spanish]
First of all, El Salvador thanks the Security Council for its continued attention
to the threats to international security posed by terrorism and organized crime,
as a whole, My country reaffirms its commitment and unconditional support for
all initiatives to combat terrorism and organized crime with a view to promoting
international security, the culture of peace and the promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
I take this opportunity to reiterate my country’s deep solidarity with the
victims of acts of terrorism and their families. El Salvador condemns all acts of
terrorism, regardless of their motivation and whomever commits them, and calls for
the ongoing commitment of the United Nations system and the Secretary-General to
eradicate this practice and assist the victims and survivors of such acts.
My country appreciates the preparation and presentation of the report on
measures taken by Member States to hinder the financing of terrorism (S/2020/754),
as it constitutes an important source of information on measures and good
practices undertaken by States and the Organization that could help promote better
capacity-building for the prevention of the various manifestations of terrorism and
organized crime.
While their objectives may differ, criminals and terrorists share the need to
act outside the law by taking advantage of its gaps to fulfil their missions and avoid
being brought to justice, a practice that is common in different countries and regions
of the world.
There is a wide variety of types of interactions between organized crime and
terrorism, Understanding them can provide very useful guidance on their varying
manifestations, depending on their geographical, regional and national contexts.
These actions are undertaken not only to generate income but also to instil fear and
recruit new followers. This link is complex, fluid and ever-changing.
El Salvador recognizes that terrorism constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security and that all acts of terrorism are criminal
and unjustifiable. In that regard, all counter-terrorism efforts must recognize those
complexities and develop common strategies to effectively address that challenge.
Despite having reached peace agreements in 1992, El Salvador suffered
considerable damage to its social fabric, as well as economic and social marginalization
that created conditions for the emergence of a new form of organized crime:
gangs. The phenomenon of gangs was poorly addressed by different Government
Administrations. Over time, gangs became organized structures with diversified
operations such as extortion, control of territories and of the local drug market, thus
becoming a growing threat to the rule of law.
With regard to the national legal framework, El Salvador approved the Special
Law against Acts of Terrorism, which recognizes and defines gangs as criminal
organizations and terrorist groups.
Faced with that reality, the Government of El Salvador has prioritized its
territorial control plan, a comprehensive and firm response to protect the Salvadoran
population from those terrorist groups and from the various forms and manifestations
of organized crime. The plan aims at restoring and guaranteeing the security of
20-1064349/97

S/2020/791

Salvadorans, rebuilding the social fabric, recovering territories and public spaces
and empowering young people. A year into the implementation of the territorial
control plan, El Salvador has seen a historical reduction of homicides, including days
with zero homicides.
At the international level, El Salvador considers extremely timely the
promotion, implementation and universalization of international commitments, such
as conventions on transnational organized crime, corruption and drugs, as well as
instruments against terrorism, and principles, norms and standards of the United
Nations on crime prevention and criminal justice.
At the same time, my country considers it crucial to enforce human rights
obligations in the context of the fight against terrorism, including the right to privacy
and freedom, minority rights, children’s rights and compliance with the Geneva
Conventions and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment. My country also welcomes vital coordination
within the United Nations system to combat this scourge.
El Salvador recognizes that the fight against terrorism transcends national
borders. Further work must be done to strengthen regional and international
cooperation mechanisms to prevent and combat terrorism, focusing on an agile
exchange of information and good practices, standardizing legal frameworks and
using new technologies to fight organized crime.
Regional and international cooperation has an important role in preventing
and combating terrorism. In that connection, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of El
Salvador made a call during the third Hemispheric Ministerial Conference on the
Fight Against Terrorism, held in January in Colombia, in which she highlighted
the need for an agile exchange of information and good practices, standardizing
legislation and strengthening legal frameworks when necessary, and using new
technologies and computer platforms to fight crime.
In that sense, El Salvador expresses its wish to secure the support and
cooperation of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Their full cooperation is needed to help us
effectively counter all the threats posed by terrorism and organized crime.
The development of new technologies represents a great opportunity to promote
the economic and social development of States. However, such information systems
are vulnerable to attacks by people who try to manipulate those communication
networks for ideological purposes or for their own benefit. As criminals and
terrorists exploit new technologies, efforts and resources must be invested to work
on specialized guidelines for the development and implementation of laws that help
prevent this type of crime and to bring to justice those who operate outside of the law.
The fight against terrorist groups has not diminished during the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as cyberattacks and attacks against national health
infrastructure have increased. This once again underscores the importance of
addressing this issue and of strengthening national capacities.
Even with the threat of the COVID-19 pandemic, El Salvador continues to
work not only to hold on to the areas recovered from gangs but also to significantly
reduce extortion, drug trafficking, femicide, forced disappearances and other
manifestations of terrorism and organized crime.
Finally, El Salvador reaffirms its commitment to the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and to developing the measures established therein as
the most effective way to end the threat of terrorism, while ensuring full respect for
the rule of law, human rights and fundamental freedoms.
50/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 27
Statement by the Permanent Delegation of the European Union to
the United Nations
The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union (EU) and its member States thank Indonesia for pursuing
this subject and leading us to focus on the need to better understand and address any
evolving linkages between international terrorism and organized crime, recognizing
that motivations and legal regimes for both are different.
The Addendum to the Madrid Guiding Principles, adopted in December 2018,
called upon all of us to continue to conduct research and collect information to
enhance knowledge and better understand the nature and scope of the links that may
exist between terrorism and transnational organized crime.
As stated in the recent European Council conclusions on EU External
Action on Preventing and Countering Terrorism and Violent Extremism, adopted
on 16 June, the EU recognizes the importance of continued monitoring and of an
effective response to the threat emanating from linkages between organized crime
and terrorism. There is a need to strengthen international cooperation in order to
improve information exchange and cooperation among counter-terrorism, law
enforcement, judicial and border control authorities. That includes mitigating the
security risks of linkages in prisons between organized crime and terrorist inmates.
In that regard, the EU strives to achieve a multidisciplinary, multi-agency,
integrated approach to effectively tackling crime, including terrorism, while ensuring
that any measures taken respect human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as
principled humanitarian action and international humanitarian law. To ensure that
and find best solutions, we need cross-sectoral cooperation among humanitarian,
financial and counter-terrorism experts. It is crucial for various law enforcement and
other agencies, specializing in either field, to work together, share information and
intelligence and coordinate efforts at all levels in order to effectively respond to the
challenges posed in both areas.
A new EU Security Union Strategy for the period 2020 to 2025 focuses on
priority areas where the EU can bring added value to support member States in
fostering security. From combating terrorism and organized crime to preventing and
detecting hybrid threats and increasing the resilience of our critical infrastructure,
to promoting cybersecurity and fostering research and innovation, the Strategy
lays out the tools and measures to be developed over the next five years to ensure
security in our physical and digital environment. It also recognizes the increasing
interconnection between internal and external security.
In the EU, legislation to prevent and combat money laundering and the
financing of terrorism is designed to prevent the financial markets from being misused
for those purposes. Legislation must aim to address both issues simultaneously. It
is imperative that we bar criminals from gaining access to capital by effectively
fighting money laundering and disincentivizing terrorism and organized crime.
That legislation increases transparency about the beneficial owners of companies
and trusts in order to prevent money laundering and terrorist financing via opaque
structures and improve the work of financial intelligence units, with better access to
information through centralized bank account registers; tackles terrorist financing
risks linked to the anonymous use of virtual currencies and prepaid instruments;
20-1064351/97

S/2020/791

and improves the cooperation and exchange of information between anti-money
laundering supervisors and with the European Central Bank; among other things.
With regard to drugs, the new EU Agenda and Action Plan on Drugs 2021-2025
sets out the political framework and priorities for action for the next five years. It
aims at enhancing security measures that focus on all aspects of illicit trafficking
of drugs, from organized crime groups to external border management and illicit
distribution and production. It is also increasing prevention, including through
raising awareness on the adverse effects of drugs, notably the intersection between
drug use, violence and other forms of crimes. Moreover, the EU Agenda and Action
Plan on Drugs 2021-2025 addresses drug-related harms through access to treatment,
risk and harm reduction, and a balanced approach to the issue of drugs in prisons.
More significantly, the EU commits to tackling drug-related financial flows, as
the EU member States have agreed to increase the number of financial investigations
and encourage their relevant authorities to focus on the seizure, confiscation and
recovery of proceeds of crime, particularly money-laundering, corruption and other
criminal activities, including organized crime.
On 24 July 2020, a new EU action plan on trafficking of firearms between
2020 and 2025 was published. To safeguard the legal market for firearms and avoid
diversion, it focuses on the enforcement and modernization of EU legislation on
controlling acquisitions and movements of firearms. To improve our knowledge
of the threat of firearms trafficking, it proposes measures to develop comparable
statistics on firearms events and seizures across the EU. To improve the crackdown
on firearms-related crime, it proposes to give a new push to national firearms focal
points, develop new tools to better detect weapons in fast parcels and modernize
legislation on sanctions and police cooperation. Finally, it proposes to step up
international cooperation, in particular with South-Eastern Europe, for which the
action plan includes a number of specific actions.
We highlight the important role played by the European Union Agency for
Criminal Justice Cooperation, which contributes to improving judicial cooperation
in the fight against serious crime, including terrorism and the role of the European
Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation (Europol), which supports member
States in preventing and combating all forms of serious international and organized
crime and terrorism. Europol prepares a terrorism situation and trend report every
year. In the latest report, which has just been published, the entity noted that EU
member States observed that a substantial number of terrorists have prior criminal
records, mainly in different forms of non-organized crime. The illicit acquisition of
material resources, such as theft of weapons and documents, has been identified as
directly contributing to terrorist activity.
The EU will strengthen its cooperation with the United Nations, including its
offices, in particular the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime — for example,
on the annual report questionnaire to monitor the world drug situation — and the
Office of Counter-Terrorism in this area.
As we stated last year, the EU and its member States continue to consider it
useful to increase efforts to better understand further linkages between terrorism
and organized crime (see S/PV.8569). For these reasons, we welcome today’s debate
and the opportunity it affords to sharing and highlighting experiences.

52/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
The delegation of Guatemala thanks the Indonesian presidency for convening
today’s open debate, which is of particular relevance because terrorism is a criminal
scourge that continues to affect the international community and peace and security
in the world and reflects the Security Council’s interest in addressing the links
between transnational organized crime and terrorism, a relationship that must
be treated comprehensively if we are to prevent and suppress the indiscriminate
violence that the phenomenon entails.
Due to its geographical location, the Central American region, and my
country in particular, have been besieged by transnational networks that promote
crime in all its forms, especially drug trafficking, money- or other asset-laundering,
assassination, human trafficking and indiscriminate and illegal use and trafficking
of weapons, in order to commit acts of excessive violence. Despite the enormous
efforts that my Government is undertaking to strengthen and modernize justicesector institutions, allocating greater resources and reinforcing the prosecution of
organized crime organizations and the operational capacities of the Office of the
Prosecutor, we continue to be victimized by international networks that overwhelm
the operational capacities of that Office. We continue to be victims of international
networks that overwhelm our capacities, given that these networks possess highcalibre firearms and other war materials and that they dispose of inexhaustible
financial power, both of which enhance their ability to engage in criminal conduct.
We recognize that, despite current legislation, when weapons fall into the
hands of criminal organizations, the threat against our civilian populations is
imminent. The deplorable conduct of terrorists threatens the most important thing in
the human person: a person’s life and dignity. When we see how innocent civilians
are attacked by extremist radicals who, in an atrocious and cowardly manner, indeed
in acts of perversity taken to the extreme, take innocent lives, we must urgently
reflect on joint actions that prevent or counteract this scourge.
Guatemala therefore reiterates that terrorism is a global phenomenon that,
apart from triggering anxiety, trauma and desolation, must be addressed at its very
origins. International terrorism and transnational organized crime have similarities,
despite being two different phenomena: while terrorism is a form of violent struggle
that indiscriminately victimizes the civilian population in order to confuse, frighten
and capture the attention of public opinion for political, ideological or sectarian
purposes, organized crime is a way of committing planned crimes in order to profit
economically. Both benefit from illicit and surreptitious trafficking in arms and
drugs, mainly by weakening democratic institutions, undermining the rule of law
and subverting social life. Further, both have capacities, which, when they enter
into a symbiotic relationship, causes extreme anxiety in our peoples. The pernicious
link between the two phenomena is the question that we must examine to legislate
against it, and we must take concrete actions to suppress all sources of financing and
acquisition of materials that can be used for criminal acts.
For this reason, Guatemala, through the Presidential Commission for the
Coordination of Efforts against Money-Laundering or other Assets, Terrorist
Financing and Financing of Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, works
hard to create inter-institutional policies and counteract these acts, monitoring the
international conventions ratified by the State of Guatemala that regulate these
matters, as well as the recommendations issued by the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
20-1064353/97

S/2020/791

In the last five years we have noted progress, but also vulnerabilities,
related to strengthening multilateral mechanisms that promote better coordination
in the fight against terrorism and organized crime. A milestone in this progress,
which, in turn, constituted an achievement for the region, was the adoption of the
Inter-American Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials, which was ratified
by the vast majority of States in our hemisphere. The objective of the Convention
is for the countries that produce, export and import weapons to adopt measures to
eradicate their manufacture and illicit trafficking.
Although the international community has valuable legal instruments for
combating terrorism and organized crime, the general perception of our population
is that such regulations are insufficient in the face of the devastating onslaught of
terrorism and transnational crime. Accordingly, the United Nations and the Security
Council must harmonize efforts to implement the four pillars of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and consider shared actions to fight this scourge.
Those efforts will be insufficient if the international community does not
adopt more rigorous controls over the illegal small arms and light weapons market,
and the related ammunitions market, since the illicit trade in these weapons and
their indiscriminate use make it easier for terrorist networks and organized crime
actors to acquire them for nefarious uses. In this context, the Arms Trade Treaty
in particular sets forth specific regulations to prevent and eliminate the illicit
trafficking of conventional weapons and impede their diversion to the illicit market
or to unauthorized uses and end users.
That impact of markets in small arms and light weapons would be even
more devastating if illicit groups, mainly terrorists, were to have access to markets
in weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). Strict compliance with international
instruments that regulate the use of chemical, bacteriological and nuclear weapons
is therefore necessary, so that WMDs are kept out of the reach of extremist groups
seeking to disrupt international peace and security. Accordingly, our countries
additionally commit to ensuring the correct implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
and urging States to adopt and apply effective laws that proscribe the provision of
supplies or any other type of support to non-State agents. These measures will help to
monitor the development, acquisition, manufacture, possession, transport, transfer
or use of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their vector systems.
Next year States will have the opportunity to carry out a comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which will be necessary
to assess the progress made on these issues and meet the challenges that States still
face in this matter. In this context, we express our congratulations to Indonesia for
its hard work as the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004).
Finally, we urge the international community to renew efforts aimed at
cooperating and collectively combating transnational terrorism and organized
crime. We believe that the Security Council, in accordance with its responsibility
to maintain international peace and security, must consider the main links
between the two scourges, in such a way that the root causes are addressed in a
comprehensive manner.

54/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 29
Statement by the Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations
We thank Indonesia for organizing this most pertinent and useful debate on an
important topic that has been a great concern for all of us. We extend our gratitude to
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General, Office of Counter-Terrorism, and
Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), for their informative and insightful briefing.
Terrorism is one of the most serious threats that humankind faces today.
The scourge of terrorism does not distinguish between countries or regions. It is
the grossest affront to the enjoyment of the inalienable human right to life and to
living in peace and security. India strongly condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. There can be no justification of any form of terrorism. Looking for
root causes for terrorism is akin to trying to find a needle in a haystack.
Today it is a widely accepted fact that both terrorist organizations and
organized crime groups constitute transnational criminal groups. The adoption of
resolution 2482 (2019), on this important issue, has also demonstrated the Security
Council’s determination to address the threat emanating from this unholy nexus.
Several United Nations reports have documented incidents of transnational organized
criminals trafficking persons across borders to facilitate the recruitment of cadres to
terrorist organizations.
Organized criminal networks are involved in many different types of criminal
activities, spanning several countries. These activities may include trafficking in
people, drugs, illicit goods and weapons, armed robbery, counterfeiting and moneylaundering. With revenues estimated in the billons, these criminal enterprises closely
resemble those of legitimate international businesses. They have operating models,
long-term strategies, hierarchies and even strategic alliances.
Organized criminal networks also help terrorist groups funnel funds into
legitimate businesses. There is documented evidence where smuggling of narcotics,
natural resources and cultural artefacts are sustained by safe transit corridors
provided by terrorist entities. We have seen the destruction created by the narcotics
trade in our region, which has sustained and funded terrorist networks. It is a wellknown fact in common law that the accomplice is as culpable as the principal.
Therefore, by virtue of being in nexus with terrorist groups, transnational organized
crime groups become accessories to terrorist acts.
India has been a victim of terrorism sponsored from across our border. We have
experienced first-hand the cruel linkage between transnational organized crime and
terrorism. An organized crime syndicate, the D-Company, which used to smuggle
gold and counterfeit currencies, was transformed into a terrorist entity overnight
when it caused a series of bomb blasts in the city of Mumbai in 1993. The attack
resulted in the loss of more than 250 innocent lives and millions of dollars of damage
to property. The perpetrator of that incident also, unsurprisingly, continues to enjoy
patronage in a neighbouring country, a hub for arms trafficking and the narcotics
trade, along with other terrorists and terrorist entities that have been proscribed by
the United Nations.
Over the years, terrorist groups have developed a diversified funding portfolio
and raised funds through a range of criminal activities, including but not limited to
extortion, kidnapping for ransom, robbery and theft, drug smuggling and trafficking
in blood diamonds, humans and antiquities. Terrorist organizations have also begun
to exploit the anonymity afforded by blockchain technology for fundraising and

20-1064355/97

S/2020/791

finances. As data increasingly becomes the currency of the future, regulators will
have to come up with better solutions to fight terrorism.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has severely impacted the
movement of people and materials around the world. While nations are focused
on delivering health care to their people and on tackling the economic impact of
the pandemic, organized criminals have nevertheless been exploiting the crisis to
find new avenues for their crimes, including illicit trafficking in natural resources,
narcotics, firearms and explosives.
In its latest research brief, UNODC reported that an increase in online activity
has led to an expansion of phishing, credit-card fraud, pirated sites for fake donations,
and cyberattacks. There have been multiple reports of fake and cloned websites as
well as suspicious e-mail addresses. Many of these scams involve coronavirusrelated topics, such as the sale of face masks and disinfectants.
The Global Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime, a renowned
Geneva-based network of more than 500 organized crime experts, released a valuable
report in March 2020 entitled Crime and Contagion: The impact of a pandemic
on organized crime. The paper provides various examples from around the world
of how organized crime is coping with and ultimately exploiting the COVID-19
nightmare. At this stage, it is imperative for all of us to remain alert to the nature
of the symbiotic threat posed by the linkage between terrorism and transnational
organized crime and reinvigorate our efforts to counter it. In this regard, we have the
following five suggestions.
First, the success of collective action against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant serves as an example of how focused attention by the international
community yields results. A similar focus on addressing threats posed by such
proscribed individuals and entities as Dawood Ibrahim and his D-Company, the
Jaish-e-Mohammed and Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, will serve humankind well.
Secondly, it is important to hold States accountable for activities that support
or encourage terrorism in territories under their control. The resolutions of the
Security Council make it clear that Member States have the primary responsibility
in countering terrorist acts and preventing and suppressing the financing thereof.
Thirdly, Member States that suffer due to poor governance and inadequate
oversight of financial institutions are more vulnerable to exploitation by terrorist
entities and organized criminals. Implementation of the recommendations of
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) on strengthening the capabilities of the
governance structure of financial and economic assets should be one of the topmost
priorities to counter the menace.
Fourthly, the United Nations needs to enhance its coordination with bodies
such as the FATF that have been playing a significant role in setting global standards
for preventing and combating money laundering and terrorist financing.
Finally, with the rapid development of information and communications
technology, as well as other technologies concerning financial transactions,
encryption, mode of transportation and delivery, Member States should remain
vigilant in identifying new trends in linkages between terrorist groups/terrorist
individuals and organized criminals.
There is compelling evidence of a broad, geographically dispersed and
continuing connection between terrorism and organized crime. Going forward,
we need to work towards enhancing cooperation among law enforcement and
Governments around the world, which is needed in the battle against that growing
nexus. Meaningful progress will require increased political will, strong legislation,
56/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

consistent enforcement, intelligence-gathering and -sharing, deterrent measures and
innovative solutions.
We sincerely hope that today’s discussions will lead to an enhancement of our
collective efforts to stem the spread of the menace of terrorism and organized crime.
Perhaps that will be our greatest contribution to humanity.

20-1064357/97

S/2020/791

Annex 30
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Iran to the
United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
Terrorism and transnational organized crimes have affected almost all States.
The concerted efforts of affected States, under the auspices of the United Nations,
play a decisive role in preventing and prosecuting such crimes. In that regard, we
have an ongoing commitment to counter the scourges of terrorism and transnational
organized crimes, whether domestic or transnational, and any possible links that
may exist between them.
At the national level, Iran has made considerable efforts to update its domestic
legal frameworks to more effectively strengthen law enforcement authorities in
countering and keeping pace with the new modus operandi of organized criminal, as
well as terrorist, groups. For example, Iran’s Countering Money Laundering Act and
Countering Financing of Terrorism Act have both been recently updated, taking into
account the relevant international standards and practices. Moreover, the capacity of
judicial institutions to address those crimes has been strengthened.
At the international level, the Islamic Republic of Iran has fully demonstrated
its dedication and unwavering resolve in fighting those heinous crimes. Having
fallen victim to numerous international terrorist acts, Iran has undertaken
considerable measures to punish the perpetrators and prevent other acts of such a
nature. Concurrently, Iran has assisted neighbouring countries, at their request, in
combating terrorist groups designated by the Security Council. The sacrifices of the
Iranian nation, including the tireless efforts of the martyr General Soleimani, who
was assassinated in Iraq by the United States, to eradicate terrorism in the region,
are well documented.
Likewise, Iran has been at the forefront of fighting transnational organized
crime, including human trafficking, migrant smuggling and trafficking in cultural
property and illicit drugs, including their transit through our territory. According
to the annual United Nations World Drug Report, as a country located next to an
epicentre of the world drug problem, Iran has had the world’s largest quantities
of opiates seizures in several consecutive years. That and other achievements of
Iran have cost the country dearly, including the lives of almost 4,000 Iranian law
enforcement personnel over the past four decades.
Iran is determined to continue its efforts to combat terrorists and drug
traffickers. However, to ensure the continuity and effectiveness of our efforts,
the international community should provide assistance without preconditions,
discrimination or politicization. Furthermore, the excessive use of unlawful
unilateral economic and financial sanctions by some countries, particularly the
United States, should be confronted, as they generate hurdles to national efforts and
provide breeding grounds for criminal networks.
Understanding the underlying causes and the complex dynamics of terrorism
and organized crimes, and their possible interactions, is a necessary prerequisite
for evidence-based action by States. We share the view that the possible linkages
between those two heinous crimes need to be further studied in order to guide our
actions. In that regard, we agree with the Secretary-General that “States should
continue to proactively exchange information to support additional research and
collect empirical evidence” (S/2020/754, para. 108).
The two plagues correspond to different motivations and have separate legal
frameworks. On the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions, by virtue of its
purposes and nature, terrorism constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
58/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

But transnational organized crimes, with a different nature and scope, remain within
the realm of public security. At the same time, there is not enough data to support the
existence of a universal or direct linkage between such criminal activities.
Any possible links that may exist between terrorism and transnational
organized crimes should be understood in their specific contexts and conditions.
For instance, they may feed on each other when the conditions are right, as some
terrorist circles in our neighbourhood have been nourished from the proceeds
of drug trafficking. Even in such specific circumstances in which a relationship
between those crimes may arise, different spheres of liability are involved and
different sanctions and procedures should be applied. Such an argument proves a
fortiori applicable with respect to a possible link between domestic organized crimes
and terrorism as well.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that the Islamic Republic of Iran,
consistent with its international commitments, will continue its efforts to effectively
prevent and counter organized crime and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

20-1064359/97

S/2020/791

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ireland to the United Nations
Ireland congratulates Indonesia on its presidency of the Security Council and
would like to thank Minister Marsudi for presiding over today’s timely debate.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European
Union (annex 27) and wishes to thank Under-Secretary-General Ghada Fathi Waly,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and UnderSecretary-General Vladimir Voronkov, Head of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, for their contributions to today’s debate.
Clearly, we cannot yield in our efforts to tackle terrorism and organized
crime. Ireland has highlighted its concerns about the recent rise in malicious
cyberactivity and cybercrime. Terrorist and hate groups are engaged in the spread of
disinformation and propaganda, sowing distrust and division. At the same time, the
economic impacts of the pandemic are making more people susceptible to terrorist
narratives and criminal activity, while States struggle to maintain the resources
necessary to challenge crime and terrorism. Action is now required to prevent a
rise in terrorism post-coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Like the virus, terrorism
and criminality are global challenges that cannot be tackled by States acting alone.
Now more than ever, the global response to terrorism and organized crime requires
multilateral cooperation and vision, with the United Nations at its core.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy provides a strong
framework to facilitate cooperation between Member States and international/
regional organizations and to promote engagement with non-governmental
stakeholders. Economic and social inequalities can contribute to fuelling criminality
and terrorism; Ireland welcomes the ongoing engagement by the United Nations
to support sustainable development in communities worldwide. The socioeconomic
impact of the pandemic is being particularly felt by the young, and the United Nations
and its Member States must now work decisively to counter the lure of criminality,
violent extremism and terrorism. Partnerships with civil society can play a critical
role in that regard.
We know from our own national experience that an effective counter-terrorism
strategy is one that respects human rights, fundamental freedoms, international
humanitarian law and the rule of law, as highlighted in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and reaffirmed by the Security Council. Human rights
abuses contribute to and sustain terrorism and criminality. Ireland looks forward to
engaging in future high-level conferences on human rights and counter-terrorism as
soon as the current pandemic context allows.
Last year, Ireland was pleased to co-sponsor resolution 2482 (2019), which
calls upon Member States to enhance the coordination of efforts at all levels in
order to strengthen a global response to linkages between international terrorism
and organized crime. To that end, Ireland continues to work closely with partners to
counter terrorism and criminality, including through the recent adoption of European
Union (EU) Council conclusions on preventing and countering terrorism and violent
extremism, which will strengthen global intelligence-gathering and informationsharing networks and promote the EU’s dialogues and strategic engagement with
third countries.
Those who commit terrorist acts rely on funding sourced from whatever
avenues are open to them, including through criminal activity, and while this is
replicated across jurisdictions, the extent of the relationship and the factors which
influence it vary widely. Enhanced dialogue at the United Nations and more research
60/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

and information-sharing, including on evolving terrorist threats and trends, and how
criminal activity finances and sustains terrorism, are necessary. This includes a
continued concerted global approach to preventing money laundering and illicit
financing, which sustain terrorism. We must not take for granted the important role
played by civil society in this dialogue and rise to the challenge of ensuring that
COVID-19 does not limit civil society participation in the development of counterterrorism measures.
Ireland is playing its part. Our response brings together a range of Government
departments and agencies, including the Central Bank of Ireland, the Irish Police
and Defence Forces, our Criminal Assets Bureau and Revenue Commissioners. The
Security Council must also continue to address this issue. Resolution 2462 (2019) sets
out a comprehensive approach to combat the financing of terrorism. The challenge as
ever is moving from rhetoric to implementation.
Ireland remains committed to supporting the United Nations and to working
with partners to counter terrorism and organized crime and prevent the incalculable
damage inflicted on citizens, communities and States.

20-1064361/97

S/2020/791

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union and
wishes to add some additional remarks in its national capacity. Italy would also like
to take this opportunity to thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing this open
debate on the linkages between international terrorism and organized crime.
This debate is especially timely in the light of the current coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which has exacerbated the vulnerability of individuals and
groups to violent extremism while exposing economic and financial systems to
major risks of unlawful behaviours. The deteriorated socioeconomic environment
has increased the danger of speculation, fraud and corruption and created favourable
conditions for organized crime and terrorism, as well as the malicious nexus between
the two.
To respond effectively to these risks and challenges, it is crucial for the
international community to act in a coordinated manner and further promote the
exchange of information and best practices.
Italy has been steadfast in its commitment to the fight against terrorism and
organized crime, within a framework of respect for fundamental guarantees and the
protection of human rights. Our decades-long experience in the fight against these
phenomena has led us to develop a series of legislative, institutional and operational
tools that have proved to be quite effective.
Our legislation builds on the experience and the legal framework developed
in the 1970s to counter terrorism, and, in the 1980s and 1990s, to counter organized
crime. The National Anti-Mafia Directorate — a centralized judicial authority
to coordinate investigations into organized crime — was established in 2001. Its
mandate was later extended to cover terrorism, so it was renamed the National AntiMafia and Counter-Terrorism Directorate. Today, the Directorate plays the essential
role of coordinating the work of all of Italy’s main stakeholders, and has access
to all the files managed by the district prosecutors’ offices. This mechanism has
achieved great results in countering all forms of terrorism at both the domestic and
the international levels.
Innovative operational tools have been developed within this framework.
These include non-conviction-based confiscation measures, which have neutralized
or considerably reduced the economic power of the main criminal players. Electronic
surveillance and the so-called collaborators of justice have also been successfully
employed to collect evidence for trials on terrorism and organized crime.
A Financial Security Committee was established in 2001 within the Italian
Ministry of Economy and Finance. It has a key role in the implementation of the
Security Council’s sanctions against terrorist networks. It also promotes fruitful
synergies and information sharing between authorities engaged in the fight against
money laundering and the financing of terrorism.
Finally, the Committee on Anti-Terrorism Strategic Analysis, established
within the Ministry of the Interior, coordinates the work of the various law enforcement
agencies and intelligence services. The Committee draws on a network of security
experts in different sectors, including drug trafficking; national and international
databases; cultural heritage and natural resource protection; and trafficking in
cultural property. To better fight trafficking in cultural property, Italy established, at
the end of 2015, the Unite4Heritage Task Force of the Carabinieri Command for the
Protection of Cultural Heritage. The Task Force also works to counter interlinkages
between illegal trafficking in cultural property and the financing of terrorism.
62/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I would like to express Japan’s appreciation for the initiative of the Indonesian
presidency to discuss this topic of great importance in the Security Council.
Linkages between international terrorism and organized crime continue to pose
a serious challenge and threat not only to human security, but also to international
peace and security. The proceeds of organized crime, such as trafficking in person,
illicit trade in arms and drugs, and kidnapping, are often an important source of
funding for terrorists.
To fully implement relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution
2482 (2019), which calls upon Member States to redouble their efforts on this critical
issue, Japan has been making every effort to counter both terrorism and organized
crime and to synergize measures on both fronts. In addition to putting in place
stringent national measures, Japan contributes to capacity-building in other Member
States in collaboration with relevant United Nations bodies.
To take one notable example, Japan has been a long-standing partner of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in providing a series of
trainings to boost capacities for border control in the countries of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and for maritime law enforcement in the Indian
Ocean region.
Recognizing the issues related to the conditions of prisons and correctional
facilities as an exacerbating factor in violent extremism, Japan has supported the
efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to improve
strategies for the prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of terrorists in SouthEast Asia through a community-based approach.
Pivotal initiatives are being advanced, as exemplified by the United Nations
Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, led by the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism. Japan has been a donor to this project since its launch last year and hopes
that it will effectively assist Member States in enhancing their detection capabilities
against both terrorists and serious criminals.
The ongoing coronavirus disease crisis is negatively impacting our efforts to
counter terrorism and organized crime. There is a growing risk of terrorist attacks
against potential targets whose defensive measures had to be downgraded due to the
pandemic. Vigilance is needed even outside conflict areas, including in cyberspace,
which terrorists increasingly exploit for propaganda, recruitment and financing. In
the face of the pandemic, Japan has swiftly redesigned its assistance to UNODC
to enhance Member States’ capacities for border controls, prison management
and cybersecurity.
The United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its
Protocols remain among the most important foundations for international cooperation
in combating terrorism and organized crime. Undeterred by its postponement this
spring due to the pandemic, the fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice is envisaged to be held in Kyoto in March 2021.
Japan will work closely with UNODC and Member States to ensure success at the
Kyoto Congress.
To respond to the ever-evolving intrigue of terrorists and criminal
organizations, Member States and relevant international bodies need to coordinate
their measures and implement them effectively. Japan is determined to continue to
contribute to such endeavours in close cooperation with the United Nations.
20-1064363/97

S/2020/791

Annex 34
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of Kenya to the United Nations,
Susan Mwangi
Kenya commends Indonesia for convening us to exchange views on this
critical issue, including the informative briefings from the various briefers.
The threats of transnational terrorism and organized crime to international
peace and security are interlinked. Understanding this dynamic and complex
confluence is an important first step in designing appropriate measures to prevent,
detect, deter or deny the perpetrators their respective capabilities.
Today’s deliberations will afford Member States the opportunity to consider
the crime-terrorism nexus and derive insights on how to enhance existing policies
and legislative frameworks at the national, regional and international levels.
Kenya has taken several measures to address this two-fold threat. The
Government has prioritized this issue and intensified national efforts to counter
terrorism and combat organized crime. Terrorism tends to benefit from proceeds and
networks of organized crime. The Kenyan Government has therefore consolidated
and strengthened existing counter-terrorism and organized crime-related legislative
frameworks and enacted new ones, including the Proceeds of Crime and Anti-Money
Laundering Act, the Prevention of Organised Crime Act, the Prevention of Terrorism
Act and the Security Laws Amendment Act. These laws have collectively proved
successful in prosecuting terrorist and organized criminal actors.
We have also taken steps to strengthen and promote multiagency cooperation
through training and joint operations. Kenya has established the Border Management
Agency Control Unit to proactively enhance border security and management
operations to combat cross-border security threats throughout the 34 border-crossing
points while improving legitimate trade and travel with neighbouring countries.
International cooperation in countering the financing of terrorism is critical.
Kenya is a member of the Eastern and Southern Anti-Money Laundering Group, an
Associate Member of the global Financial Action Task Force (FATF) that is mandated
to set standards and promote the effective implementation of legal, regulatory and
operational measures to combat money-laundering, terrorist financing and other
related threats.
In line with the FATF recommendations, in March 2019 Kenya established
the Task Force on National Risk Assessment on Money Laundering and Terrorism
Financing in order to implement extensive measures to avert and diminish the
threats emanating from crime-terror linkages, which impact the integrity of the
international financial system.
Despite these measures, the evolving coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has presented new dynamics and challenges in combating terrorism
and organized crime. Regrettably while Governments are focused on combating
COVID-19, terrorist groups like the Islamic State, Al-Qaida and their affiliates,
including Al-Shabaab, have seized the opportunity to stage attacks. We are also
witnessing the phenomenon of so-called lone actors capitalizing on the pandemic
circumstances to recruit individuals among vulnerable groups in the society.
The Secretary-General has also noted that the pandemic presents opportunities
for cybercriminal networks to thrive when law enforcement agencies are stretched in
their monitoring capabilities.
In conclusion , my delegation recognizes the transboundary nature of the
crime-terror continuum and calls on Member States to deepen partnerships,
64/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

collaboration and the sharing of relevant information in order to effectively address
the problem, and to strengthen the Council and relevant United Nations entities to
ensure Member States implement the relevant resolutions.

20-1064365/97

S/2020/791

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations, Syed Mohamad Hasrin Aidid
I thank you, Sir, for organizing this important open debate. My delegation
wishes Indonesia every success in assuming the presidency of the Council for
this month.
The nexus between organized crime and terrorism has existed for a long time,
tied by a relationship of convenience and opportunity rather than a shared ideology.
Combating both would require us to unravel and sever their ties while addressing
their root causes. Hence, a coordinated response by the international community is
imperative if we ever hope to effectively address the drivers that perpetuate these
twin threats to international peace and security. In this regard, I wish to make three
points on the subject before us.
The first is that tackling terrorism demands a whole-of-nation approach.
National policies and legal frameworks that could lead to an effective enforcement
of law and prosecution of cases involving both criminal and terrorist groups must
be established and strengthened, in compliance with obligations under international
law. Barriers to information-sharing must be pulled down and targeted capacitybuilding should be encouraged and supported. In this regard, Malaysia has taken
the necessary steps to strengthen our national legal frameworks and mobilize the
relevant authorities to intensify enforcement efforts.
Second is the importance of regional and international cooperation. Terrorists
and criminals alike operate in the shadows, use violence to achieve their ends and
exploit the gaps in our criminal-justice systems as well as our borders. Effective
cooperation at the regional and international levels is therefore key to combatting
these threats. From 24 February to 20 March, the INTERPOL-led Operation
Maharlika III, which included the combined forces of Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia,
Malaysia and the Philippines, managed to arrest more than 180 individuals for various
offences, including one suspected member of the terrorist Abu Sayyaf Group. The
operation also seized firearms, illegally assembled explosives made of ammonium
nitrate, and other illicit goods and substances worth more than €1 million. The
arrest and seizure suggested that transborder criminal activities have been used to
fund terrorist activities. The successful operation was only made possible through
effective regional and international cooperation.
Third, and as I alluded to earlier, is to address the root causes that breed
terrorism and underpin organized crime. Malaysia fully believes that the root causes
must be identified and removed if we ever hope to triumph in our struggle against
these threats. Our position on the root causes of terrorism is clear. Prolonged and
grievous injustice, gross violations of human rights, foreign occupation, systematic
discrimination and oppression of peoples anywhere, regardless of their colour or
creed, provide fertile ground for terrorists to exploit and threaten international peace
and security. Meanwhile, poverty, insecurity, corruption, and underdevelopment are
some of the factors identified as drivers for organized crime to take root and flourish.
Terrorism and organized crime undermine the rule of law and human rights as
the foundation of peaceful, inclusive and prosperous societies. Malaysia strongly and
unequivocally condemns all acts, methods and practices of terrorism, in all its forms
and manifestations. We remain committed to enhancing cooperation and strategies
to prevent terrorists from benefiting from transnational organized crime.

66/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 36
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Mexico to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Mexico thanks Indonesia for having convened this debate on the links between
international terrorism and transnational organized crime. This is an excellent
opportunity to analyse two different phenomena, with different legal frameworks,
that manifest in different ways in national and regional contexts.
Terrorism always represents a threat to international peace and security. We
have seen how this phenomenon affects the stability of States, the development and
well-being of their societies and the security of their inhabitants. In recent years,
some terrorist organizations have used financing methods that are characteristic
of transnational organized crime, including money-laundering, arms trafficking
and human trafficking. However, an empirical analysis of the motives underlying
the links between terrorism and organized crime reveals particularities in each
national context.
It is important to avoid generalizations that do not benefit national actions
aimed at addressing both phenomena and international cooperation efforts in those
areas. The common denominator of States’ actions must be the application of the law
and full respect for international law and human rights. It is necessary to prevent and
combat these multidimensional phenomena in accordance with the law.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/754) mandated by resolution 2482
(2019) provides an account of this as well as of the need to strengthen a pragmatic
approach between the areas of security, financial intelligence and law enforcement.
Likewise, it shows that beyond the measures that some States have adopted and the
actions described by United Nations entities, the links that may exist between both
phenomena remain to be documented and better understood.
We must strengthen measures to prevent the financial flows derived from
the illegal activities of transnational organized crime from promoting the activities
of terrorist organizations. Sharing information among Government institutions will
translate into better-informed and coordinated responses for the prevention of and
an effective combat against illicit activities. It is vital at all times to fully respect the
applicable legal framework and to refrain from applying anti-terrorist measures to
other criminal acts in a generalized manner.
Mexico deems necessary a more in-depth understanding of specific cases
on the Council’s agenda in which there may be an intersection between terrorist
groups and transnational organized crime. For example, illicit financial flows and
easy access to high-calibre weapons can benefit both transnational organized-crime
groups and armed or terrorist groups.
We must continue to promote international cooperation, including the
universalization of existing mechanisms to prevent the diversion and illicit trafficking
of small arms and light weapons.
Mexico condemns the fact that some terrorist groups are taking advantage of
the pandemic to advance their agendas and reiterates the importance of respecting
human rights at all times when addressing the challenges posed by this health crisis.

20-1064367/97

S/2020/791

Annex 37
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the
United Nations
Allow me to congratulate the Republic of Indonesia on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council during the month of August and to thank it for
having organized this highly important and timely debate.
Increasing globalization has created countless opportunities for social,
economic and cultural development, but it has also brought with it multiple challenges
and cross-border threats such as terrorism and transnational organized crime.
Terrorism and transnational organized crime reinforce each other for financial
and/or material benefits through a nexus based on coexistence or convergence of
criminal interests. Criminal activities provide terrorist groups with substantial
financial resources from various sources such as illicit trafficking; the smuggling
of weapons, drugs, cigarettes, vehicles, cultural goods and artefacts, and human
beings; and extortion and kidnapping for ransom.
The nexus between terrorism and transnational organized crime undermines
the conditions necessary for sustainable economic development and the consolidation
of the rule of law in some already unstable regions. Many existing factors contribute
to reinforcing that threat, mainly porosity of borders, insufficient capacities of the
authorities, lack of technical resources on the part of the defence and security forces,
inadequate capacity of the criminal justice and penitentiary systems, and lack of
police and judicial cooperation at the national, regional and international levels.
For Morocco, responding to the nexus between terrorism and transnational
organized crime requires a realistic vision and the establishment of an approach
based primarily on inclusive cooperation, as well as coordinated action and shared
responsibilities.
Because of its geographical position at the crossroads of strategic maritime,
land and air routes, Morocco is directly confronted with multiple security and crossborder threats, including terrorism and transnational organized crime. Accordingly,
it has adopted a comprehensive multidimensional strategy to combat both threats.
That strategy is based on three main axes: synergy and coordination between the
security services and local authorities, with a view to devising an effective and ruleof-law-based response to the terrorist and criminal threats; strengthening the fight
against the exclusion and marginalization of the most disadvantaged social strata;
and strengthening cooperation with our bilateral and international partners.
In addition to its known and recognized measures to combat terrorism,
Morocco has also strengthened its institutional, operational and technical capacities
to combat transnational organized crime. Part of that effort involves ensuring that
training sessions for law-enforcement officers, prosecutors and judges focus on the
interconnection between illicit trafficking and terrorism.
In accordance with international, regional and interregional legal instruments,
Morocco contributes to the efforts of the international community by making
use of cooperation channels, including exploring opportunities for information
exchange at both the bilateral level, via liaison officers, and the multilateral level,
via INTERPOL, in order to achieve a fruitful exchange of information and ensure
effective access to data on persons and entities with suspected links to terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Morocco also has an extremely fruitful and
multidimensional cooperation with United Nations entities in charge of combating
the scourge of terrorism and transnational organized crime.
68/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Finally, as one of the co-Chairs of the Global Counterterrorism Forum,
Morocco supported the development of The Hague Good Practices on the Nexus
between Transnational Organized Crime and Terrorism and its policy toolkit, which
are aimed at providing practitioners, policymakers and governmental experts with
a practical tool to formulate effective responses and concrete actions to address the
challenge posed by that nexus.

20-1064369/97

S/2020/791

Annex 38
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of Nigeria to the United Nations,
Samson S. Itegboje
I would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s open debate on
addressing the linkages between terrorism and organized crime. We also thank
the other briefers for sharing their perspectives on this important subject. My
delegation would nonetheless like to make the following additional remarks in its
national capacity.
The nexus between terrorism and organized crime facing the international
community flourishes where governance and State presence are weak. Terrorist
and organized criminal networks use similar approaches to develop and run illicit
economies, and often develop and exploit territories beyond the reach of law
enforcement agencies, where they can safely recruit members and raise funds.
Terrorism and organized crime not only finance conflict but also promote
corruption and undermine institutions. There are growing concerns that terrorists
can benefit from organized crime, whether domestic or transnational, through
activities such as trafficking in arms, persons, drugs, artefacts and cultural property;
the illicit trade of natural resources and wildlife; the abuse of legitimate commercial
enterprise, non-profit organizations, donations and crowd-funding; and the proceeds
of criminal activity, including kidnapping for ransom, extortion, bank robbery, as
well as transnational organized crime at sea.
Through its various resolutions, the Security Council has addressed the
linkages between some type of organized crimes and terrorist activities, such as
kidnapping for ransom and illicit trafficking in persons, firearms, cultural property,
oil, charcoal and drugs. However, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has diverted the attention and resources of national authorities to address the new
challenges that have emerged. That includes the limited ability of law enforcement
to conduct operations, as well as implications to border security as transit patterns
shift towards irregular routes due to air travel restrictions.
The COVID-19 pandemic has indeed presented challenges for regional
cooperation, with many State institutions under considerable strain to respond to
the health, economic, political, social and security dimensions of the crisis within
their own borders. As countries take necessary emergency measures to provide
economic safety nets for their citizens and businesses, organized criminal networks
are exploiting gaps and opportunities and becoming increasingly complex in their
operations. Global border closures and transportation shutdowns are impacting
patterns of human and wildlife trafficking and migrant smuggling. Cybercrime is
also on the rise as many have turned to the Internet as their primary link to the world.
We acknowledge that the Security Council, through resolution 2482 (2019),
has provided much-needed leadership to give impetus to the fight against terrorism
and organized crime. In Africa, the African Union (AU) underscores the need
for collective approaches among member States to fight against terrorism and
transnational organized crime and urges its member States to sign and ratify all
existing AU and relevant international instruments on the prevention and combating
of terrorism, violent extremism and organized crime. The Committee of Intelligence
and Security Services of Africa, the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism and the African Police Cooperation Organization are part of the security
apparatus set up in order to build collective synergies to promote and enhance
coherence and complementarity — rather than duplicate efforts — through the
sharing of information and intelligence among the relevant security agencies of its
member States.
70/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

At the subregional level, the Economic Community of West African States
continues to emphasize the importance of investing more in promoting effective
border-control and surveillance technologies, including through introducing
biometric identity documents. It also stresses the importance of effective regulation
while bearing in mind the need to protect basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms, especially freedom of movement among its member States. Furthermore,
with the support of the international community, West African Governments have
concentrated efforts to enhance the capacity of national justice systems, cooperation
between and among border police and financial intelligence units, as well as the
involvement of civil society and local communities in efforts to prevent and combat
terrorism and organized crime.
Nigeria continues to take important steps in its efforts to fight terrorism in
the north-east of the country. We have endorsed an action plan for strengthening our
criminal justice response to terrorism and organized crime. The action plan identifies
concrete steps to strengthen our capacity to effectively screen and prosecute, as
necessary, persons associated with Boko Haram in accordance with international
standards and good practices. The implementation of the action plan is supported by
the technical and capacity-building assistance of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
as well as the help of several partners to implement mechanisms such as the National
Drug Control Master Plan for 2015 to 2019, a key strategy document on drugs that
promotes a balanced and evidence-based response to drug control in the country.
The UNODC is currently supporting the development of the next Master Plan for the
2020-2024 period, which stresses the importance of cooperation.
At this juncture, let me state that the issue of illicit financial flows and
organized crime is twofold. The first part is the immediate need to track bilateral
and multilateral aid disbursements and safeguard them from fraud and theft. That is
why it is critical during this period to enhance our focus on illicit financial flows at
the national, bilateral and multilateral levels. Nigeria commends the African Union
for its role in convening and coordinating continental police forces and actions, as
well as marshalling international solidarity and mobilizing resources.
In conclusion, with the support of UNODC, Nigeria is aligning its national
legislation with the provisions of international counter-terrorism conventions and
protocols, and is developing appropriate legal frameworks in line with the key
Council resolutions that address the linkages between terrorism and organized crime
and identify areas for further action.

20-1064371/97

S/2020/791

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations, Munir Akram
My delegation congratulates Indonesia on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and for convening today’s open debate on this important topic. I
also thank the briefers for their insightful presentations this morning.
The nexus between terrorism and organized crime is complex, and varies
across different contexts. We know that since 9/11, criminal and terrorist outfits
have cooperated to facilitate each other’s activities, and have been found to coexist,
cooperate and sometimes even converge. For example, the World Drug Report 2017 of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) underlines that terrorists
and non-State armed groups profit from the drug trade and opium poppy cultivation
in our neighbourhood, in Afghanistan.
Similarly, the 2016 European Union Terrorism Situation and Trend Report
highlights that investigations into the unfortunate Paris attacks of November 2015
found that some of the attackers may have actively participated in organized criminal
networks, instead of just being their clients. Moreover, the widespread use of
enslavement, rape and human trafficking by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
is well-known and has been met with widespread international condemnation.
These and many other instances clearly signal the existence of linkages
between terrorism and organized crime. In our view, there are four major areas of
confluence between organized crime and terrorism.
First, there is ever-growing cooperation for the acquisition of arms, ammunition
and explosive materials. Secondly, terrorist outfits are increasingly relying on
organized crime as a financing tool. Thirdly, terrorist groups recruit criminals,
in particular marginalized youth, to advance their agenda. Fourthly, organized
crime flourishes in areas outside Government control and under the patronage of
terrorist outfits.
As one of the principal victims of terrorism, Pakistan is clearly and
unwaveringly resolved to eliminating this scourge. Terrorist organizations such as
Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan and Jamaat-ul-Ahrar attack Pakistan using bases outside
our borders. These organizations do not have any ideological motivation. They
are mercenary terrorist organizations and work with the State patronage of third
countries in order to generate a profit. This nexus of mercenary terrorists and their
patrons generates finances through proceeds from the narcotics trade, kidnapping
for ransom, extortion and smuggling of such natural resources as timber.
An example of this patronage was proven by the arrest of Commander
Kulbhushan Jadhav, an Indian intelligence agent who was running a syndicate of
criminals and terrorists to foment terrorism in Pakistan. Similarly, we submitted
the names of four other terrorist facilitators to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). Such Indian terrorism facilitators,
hiding in our neighbourhood in plain sight, continue to fuel terrorism inside
Pakistan. The recent attack on the Pakistan Stock Exchange in Karachi, condemned
by the Security Council, was the work of India-sponsored mercenary terrorists such
as these. Pakistan will continue to make every effort to expose the ominous role
being played by India, the fountainhead of terrorism in our region.
Located next to the epicentre of the world drug problem, Pakistan also remains
one of the most affected transit States for illicit drug trafficking. With limited
resources, our law enforcement agencies continue to make record drug seizures year
after year, which is a tangible manifestation of our consistent and dedicated efforts
72/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

aimed at protecting not only our own country but also the rest of the world from
this scourge.
At the regional and global levels, Pakistan has remained constructively
engaged with various counter-narcotics-related forums and initiatives. Pakistan
is an active participant in the UNODC Regional Programme for Afghanistan and
Neighbouring Countries. We are cooperating with Iran and Afghanistan under the
UNODC-sponsored Triangular Initiative. Pursuant to the quartet initiative, we are
collaborating with Russia, Turkmenistan and Afghanistan to combat drug trafficking.
We have strengthened cooperation with the Central Asian Regional Information and
Coordination Centre, which is a useful forum for coordinating regional anti-drugs
efforts at the operational level.
My country believes that only through collective regional and international
efforts can we choke off the various sources that support terrorist outfits through
organized crime. We believe an effective strategy to achieve these goals must take
into account the following five points.
First, to ensure that our responses are evidence-based, the international
community should allocate proper resources to better understand the correlation
between the financing of terror and transnational organized crimes.
Secondly, there are instances, including in our region, where there is a nexus
between drug production, instability and lack of alternative economic opportunities.
It is important to re-establish Government control over territories used for drug
production and promote development to provide alternative livelihoods.
Thirdly, in dealing with the world drug problem, it is important to focus on
reducing both the supply and the demand of narcotic drugs through a well-integrated,
comprehensive and balanced approach.
Fourthly, effective border controls are a prerequisite to clamping down on
transnational organized crime and terrorism.
Finally, strategies must be tailored to specific challenges presented by
particular regional dynamics and conditions. It is vital to build the capacities and
capabilities of States facing these challenges. This is where the United Nations can
play an effective role.
Pakistan will continue to play its role to sever the vicious link between
terrorism and organized crime in our region. This is critical for our own people as
well as for our neighbourhood, and indeed the rest of the world.

20-1064373/97

S/2020/791

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
First of all, we wish to express Peru’s warm greetings to the Foreign Minister
of Indonesia and thank the presidency of the Security Council for convening today’s
debate. We would also like to thank the briefers for their enlightening briefings.
Based on its own experience, and with a view to addressing the links that can
occur between terrorism and organized crime more effectively, Peru recognizes the
need for a deeper understanding of those links. We are pleased to have promoted this
issue during our recent membership in the Security Council and from the platform
of our chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We are particularly proud
that these efforts led to the adoption of the pioneering resolution 2482 (2019) under
the Peruvian presidency of the Council.
We note with satisfaction that we are among a significant number of States that
have adopted concrete measures for the effective implementation of resolution 2482
(2019), as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/754). We hope
that these measures will contribute to making tangible progress in the identification,
prevention and dismantling of the links between terrorism and the various forms of
organized crime, including illicit trafficking in drugs, arms, natural and mineral
resources, persons and cultural goods.
Terrorism can benefit from forms of organized crime for nefarious purposes,
including for its financing, and undermining the rule of law and human rights as
the foundation of peaceful, inclusive and prosperous societies. In the light of this,
we emphasize the importance of recognizing the differentiated regimes established
for these crimes and adopting approaches that allow, inter alia, for the exchange
of information to support additional investigations and the gathering of empirical
evidence, the further development of police and prison intelligence, and mechanisms
or centres of intelligence and effective coordination.
At the domestic level, we consider it essential, among other aspects, to
strengthen financial intelligence units and control entities, with a view to preventing
and combating money-laundering for the purposes of financing terrorism. The
Government of Peru has been directing important efforts to this end within the
framework of its National Multisectoral Policy to Combat Terrorism 2019-2023, with
results that we hope to share soon. It should be noted that, in 2019, the National
Multisectoral Policy to Combat Organized Crime was also adopted, which allows
for the development of distinct actions and the strengthening of specialization in the
fight against these crimes.
The global crisis caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic requires States
to direct their greatest attention and efforts towards this fight. At the multilateral
level, it is also necessary to strengthen the institutions that will enable this challenge
to be tackled collectively. Therefore, in order to prevent terrorist and criminal
actions from taking advantage of the current situation, international cooperation is
required to strengthen the exchange of information and good practices in particularly
vulnerable areas. Accordingly, it is gratifying to share that, at the third Hemispheric
Ministerial Conference on the Fight against Terrorism, held in Bogotá in January,
Peru and 17 other countries undertook to strengthen cooperation in the physical and
digital spaces, with a view to combating transnational crime and terrorism in an
effective and coordinated manner.

74/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Finally, we highlight the valuable work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate, as well as of the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in assisting States Members of the United
Nations, and we urge these entities to redouble their efforts in capacity-building
and technical assistance in order to strengthen the response to these scourges and
their links.

20-1064375/97

S/2020/791

Annex 41
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Philippines to
the United Nations, Enrique Manalo
The terror-crime nexus is well established in the Philippines. The Abu Sayyaf
Group, the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, the Maute Group and Ansar
Al-Khalifa — which have all declared allegiance to the Islamic State — fund their
operations through criminal activities, mostly drug trafficking, kidnapping for
ransom, extortion, arms smuggling, and assassinations. They initially cooperated
with criminal organizations, but have since developed their own criminal networks
which operate under the false rubric of freedom struggles.
Organized criminal groups operate a robust shadow economy in the Philippines
and launder criminal proceeds from drug and human trafficking, tax crimes and
cybercrime. Groups affiliated with Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant also rely on
that economy.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has not deterred or slowed down the
activities of both terrorist and organized crime groups, and so we continue to be
vigilant. As a country with over 36,000 kilometres of coastline, maritime security
is of paramount importance to the Philippines. Its location makes it vulnerable to
activities of international crime syndicates, including piracy, drug trafficking and
human trafficking, activities whose profits have been known to finance terrorism.
The Marawi siege of 2017 illustrated the symbiotic relationship between
terrorism and the illegal drug trade. With drug money, terrorists gathered a motley
assortment of well-armed extremists, criminals, mercenaries and foreign terrorist
fighters to take control of Marawi. Narco-politicians supported the local terrorist
groups with personnel, funds and firearms, which helped to sustain the siege that
followed the Government’s counteroffensive. Intensive military and law enforcement
operations allowed us to recapture Marawi in six months.
The financing of terrorism through illicit drugs has been a persistent problem,
particularly with the Communist Party of the Philippines-New People’s Army,
collectively known as the Communist Terrorist Group. Drug trafficking offers
a profitable illicit revenue stream. The drug trade weakens social resistance and
corrupts a political response. Local terrorist group members are both narcotics
distributors or dealers and consumers. Shabu is frequently used for recruitment and
the shabu trade is primarily run by organized crime groups, including Hong Kong
triads. Therefore, our anti-drug operations target the trade.
Intelligence plays a crucial role in the campaign against drugs and promoting
good governance. Hence, President Rodrigo Roa Duterte ordered the expansion of the
National Intelligence Committee through Administrative Order 7 (2017) to include
the Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency, the Office of Transport Security and the
Philippine Coast Guard as members to ensure coverage of intelligence concerns. In
addition, the Dangerous Drugs Board also crafted the National Anti-Drug Plan of
Action on illegal drugs, which also helps to address the crime-terror nexus.
In response to the recommendations of the Office of Counter-Terrorism and
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, we have also strengthened
our legal and criminal justice framework with the enactment of the 2020 AntiTerrorism Act. This is in addition to already existing legislation that help address
the linkages between terrorism and organized crime, particularly Republic Act No.
9160 or the Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2001, as amended, and Republic Act No.
10168, or the Terrorism Financing Prevention and Suppression Act of 2012.

76/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Enhanced maritime cooperation and focus on border management and
security to combat transnational crimes at sea is also needed. At the subregional
level, we conduct joint maritime patrols with Malaysia and Indonesia. In April 2020,
we joined Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia and INTERPOL in Operation Maharlika III,
a series of simultaneous law enforcement and border control actions along known
terrorist transit routes in South-East Asia that resulted in the arrests of both criminals
and terrorists.
The Comprehensive Plan of Action on Counter Terrorism of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations provides for the establishment of shared databases on
terror-crime organizations to enable a joint risk and threat assessment.
We are also participating in the United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel
Programme, and have stressed the need for the Programme to focus as well on
maritime border security. Beyond these, a comprehensive approach that strengthens
community resilience is required. Our Bangsamoro Organic Law, which gives
autonomy to Muslim Mindanao, is intended to end the decades-long conflict that
has been used by Abu Sayyaf and local terrorist groups as a freedom struggle.
Equally important is focusing on the means that enable terrorist acts. Since
money is the main driver of these linkages, identifying and curtailing sources of
finance and tracking the flow are essential. Break the money flow and you break
the terror-crime nexus. Our financial intelligence units therefore work with law
enforcement and prosecution agencies and local government units.
Addressing the role of information and communications technology and social
media is another crucial aspect, as these facilitate the organization of operations and
money flows.
Finally, the Philippines calls for global solidarity and partnerships that
aim to build capacity-building, including in financial intelligence, to prevent and
counter trafficking in persons, drug trafficking and trafficking of artefacts and
cultural property.

20-1064377/97

S/2020/791

Annex 42
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
Allow us to congratulate you and your country, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. We commend you for choosing the issue of
the linkages between terrorism and organized crime as the topic of this meeting.
It is a topic of interest to Qatar, which sponsored resolution 2482 (2019), adopted
at the Council’s most recent meeting on the subject, held in July 2019. We thank
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General for the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for their briefings.
International terrorism in all its forms poses a significant threat, as does
organized crime in all its forms, including trafficking in persons, drug trafficking,
cybercrime and piracy. However, these threats are compounded by terrorist groups
being fuelled by crime and criminal gangs benefiting from the spread of terrorism.
For instance, terrorist groups exploit human trafficking by recruiting young people
to carry out terrorist operations and using sexual violence as a terrorist tactic.
Conversely, the causes of terrorism are factors in the spread of human trafficking.
The risk that information resources and technologies will be used to facilitate
suspicious financial transactions is a persistent one. It is therefore necessary to study
and address these challenges effectively. Qatar seeks to strengthen information
security and encourage international cooperation to combat cybercrime and provide
a safe and robust cyberenvironment, especially given that the country has been the
victim of a cybercrime that has served as a pretext to fabricate a regional crisis that
has done great harm to regional and international security and stability since 2017.
The threats of terrorism and organized crime take evolving forms and present
constantly changing challenges that must be addressed collectively, including the
current challenges in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic. These threats
are not confined to a particular country; bilateral and multilateral cooperation are
therefore essential to an effective response. In that connection, we note the important
role of United Nations bodies.
Qatar engages regularly with these bodies in the context of international
cooperation to identify the best practices that will ensure a coordinated and effective
response, through such initiatives as the international academic conference on
exploring and countering the linkages between organized crime and terrorism, held
in Doha on 25 April 2018 in a collaboration between UNODC and the College of
Law at Qatar University. Doha also hosted a workshop on disrupting the financing
of terrorism in May 2017, in collaboration with UNODC and the Middle East and
North Africa Financial Action Task Force. Qatar also co-sponsored the High-Level
Conference on International and Regional Cooperation on Countering Terrorism and
its Financing Through Illicit Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime, held jointly by
Tajikistan and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Office in Dushanbe on 16 and
17 May 2019.
Convinced of the need to adopt evidence-based policies and understand the
causes, forms and circumstances of the linkages between terrorism and crime, Qatar
co-sponsored the 2018 study entitled Identifying and Exploring the Nexus between
Human Trafficking, Terrorism and Terrorism Financing”, which highlighted this
important issue and helped to advance the discussion on how to help the United
78/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Nations and Member States fulfil their obligations under resolutions 2331 (2016) and
2388 (2017).
Aware of the importance of taking the necessary measures at the national level,
in particular, continuously updating laws and regulations on combating terrorism and
the financing thereof in order to address any emerging terrorist challenges, Qatar
has repeatedly updated the relevant national legislation and regulations to combat
cybercrime, terrorism and the proliferation of weapons. It has also established
national commissions to combat terrorism, organized crime and the proliferation
of weapons and to disrupt linkages among the three phenomena. In addition, Qatar
has taken financial and economic measures, such as investigating and exposing
networks that facilitate organized crime and instituting strict customs procedures to
combat the import of smuggled goods.
In conclusion, we affirm the commitment of Qatar to continue cooperating
with the United Nations and Member States to eradicate all forms of terrorism and
to deprive it of its sources of sustenance, which include all kinds of organized crime.

20-1064379/97

S/2020/791

Annex 43
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
My delegation commends you, Mr. President, for convening today’s timely
open debate of the Security Council on the linkage of counter-terrorism and
transnational organized crime and offers its deep appreciation to the briefers for
their enlightening and informative briefings.
Last year, the Security Council adopted resolution 2482 (2019) and expressed
its concern that terrorists can benefit from organized crime as a source of financing
through the illegal trafficking of arms and drugs, while emphasizing the importance
of strengthening international efforts to respond to this threat. As the resolution
highlights, the combined presence of terrorism and organized crime may undermine
security, stability, governance and the social and economic development of a region
and complicates conflict prevention and resolution efforts. Furthermore, while the
entire international community is focused on responding to the current pandemic,
terrorists and violent extremists are trying to capitalize on the socioeconomic
grievances exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) to advance their
propaganda. Against that backdrop, the Republic of Korea would like to emphasize
the following four points.
First, the strongest possible regional and international cooperation is of
foremost importance in countering terrorism and its financing. No country can
single-handedly respond to transnational organized crime and terrorist activities.
The enhanced coordination of cross-border investigations is essential and the timely
exchange of relevant operational information and financial intelligence is critical. It
is also important to foster capacity-building efforts aimed at strengthening Member
States’ responses to linkages between international terrorism and organized crime.
My delegation emphasizes the central role of the United Nations in pulling
together the counter-terrorism efforts of the international community. We need
to enhance coordination and collaboration among Member States and the various
United Nations agencies. In that regard, the Republic of Korea commends the role
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact and welcomes the launch
of its platform to strengthen cooperation among States and Compact entities. The
Republic of Korea has made a financial contribution to the project for enhancing
coordination and coherence across United Nations entities on counter-terrorism
and the prevention of violent extremism through the effective implementation of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact. The Council can count on our
continued support.
Secondly, we need to step up our efforts to prevent and counter the misuse
of new and emerging technologies for terrorist and criminal purposes. While such
technologies can be effective tools in countering terrorism and organized crime, we
should remain vigilant to the fact that those same tools can be exploited by terrorists
to incite, recruit for, fund or plan terrorist acts. The illicit trafficking of arms
through the dark web is one example of how organized crime methods are becoming
increasingly sophisticated. The efforts of the Republic of Korea in responding to
emerging terrorist threats include hosting three rounds of the Asia ICT and CounterTerrorism Dialogue between 2017 and 2018 and co-hosting the regional workshop
under the Initiative to Counter Unmanned Aerial System Threats in 2019.
Thirdly, my delegation wishes to highlight that youth are our most important
asset in the fight against terrorism. We must empower young people and strengthen
their resilience against violent extremism. It is particularly relevant considering that
extremist groups focus on spreading violent extremist ideas online, exploiting the
80/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

fact that young people are spending more time online, especially with schools closed.
Therefore, we must invest in creative education programmes, including e-learning
activities, which can be effective in reaching out to young people, particularly in the
time of the pandemic.
Sports can also be a powerful means to promote a culture of tolerance and
mutual understanding and to facilitate social inclusion and conflict prevention. The
Republic of Korea has been working closely with the Office of Counter-Terrorism
on the United Nations Global Programme on Security of Major Sporting Events
and Promotion of Sports and Its Values as a Tool to Prevent Violent Extremism.
We will continue to explore avenues for expanding our efforts in preventing
violent extremism.
Last but not least, my delegation would like to emphasize the importance
of a whole-of-society and holistic approach to preventing and countering terrorism
and violent extremism. Combating terrorism and preventing violent extremism must
encompass not only security-based measures but also preventive steps that address
the underlying conditions that drive individuals to terrorism and violent extremism.
According to its national plan of action for preventing violent extremism, adopted in
2018, the Republic of Korea’s response has encompassed a wide spectrum of efforts
to address the environments conducive to terrorism, such as promoting human rights,
creating an inclusive community that embrace marginalized groups, and enhancing
public-private partnership.
COVID-19 clearly demonstrates the importance of transnational cooperation
in tackling transborder threats. This lesson also applies to our counter-terrorism
efforts. Now is the time for the whole international community to unite against the
common challenge of terrorism and organized crime. The Republic of Korea will
continue to work closely with the United Nations for a world free from terrorist threats.

20-1064381/97

S/2020/791

Annex 44
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Slovakia to
the United Nations and Chargé dʼaffaires a.i., Róbert Chatrnúch
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on addressing
the issue of linkages between terrorism and organized crime. I also wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for their
insightful briefings.
My delegation associates itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the
European Union (annex 27). Allow me to make a few additional observations.
It is crucial that the Security Council, as the primary organ responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security, continue to attach the highest
importance to the issue of counter-terrorism in all its aspects, including the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime, whether transnational or domestic.
The Slovak Republic condemns all forms and manifestations of terrorism and
is engaged in counter-terrorism, both individually and as a part of the international
community. We reiterate the universal obligation to respond to the global threat of
terrorism. For that response to be effective, it needs to be based on the analysis of the
modus operandi of terrorists, which includes their cooperation with criminal groups
and networks with view to enabling, inter alia, the funding or the travel of terrorists.
Slovakia shares the concerns expressed in resolution 2482 (2019), whereby
“terrorists can benefit from organized crime, whether domestic or transnational, as a
source of financing or logistical support”. This fact has been systematically reflected
in Slovakia´s national approach to addressing security threats, including those
potentially stemming from the malicious nexus between terrorism and organized
crime. Slovakia has taken both programmatic and institutional measures.
In 2017, the Counter-Terrorism Unit was established directly within the
National Crime Agency (NAKA). This institutional set-up, facilitated through the
integrated structure of NAKA, allows for very close cooperation between various
specialized departments of the Slovak Police Force, namely, organized crime,
financial crime, corruption, drug-related crime, firearms trafficking, et cetera,
and for their necessary day-to-day interaction. The Counter-Terrorism Unit acts as
both a prevention and a response body when dealing with acts of terrorism. Among
other things, it focuses on collecting evidence and exposing criminal acts related to
terrorism, as well as assessing terrorist threats on the territory of Slovakia.
Another important institutional tool with direct relevance to disrupting
linkages between terrorism and crime is the Financial Intelligence Unit of Slovakia.
This body assumes the task of the central national bureau in the area of preventing
and detecting money laundering and terrorist financing.
Last but not least, an important part of the institutional framework is the
National Security Analytical Centre of Slovakia, whose daily operation provides
a broad participatory and information-exchange basis for more than half a dozen
selected national agencies principally responsible for countering serious security
threats to Slovakia and its citizens, including threats arising from terrorism.
As for the programmatic element of Slovakia´s national approach to linkages
between terrorism and organized crime, the following documents and their
periodical reviews are worth mentioning. The National Action Plan on the Fight
against Terrorism (2019-2022) constitutes a strategic document, which also seeks to
create conditions for the subsequent fulfilment of international obligations, including
82/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

bilateral and multilateral agreements, Security Council resolutions and decisions
of the European Union agencies related to countering terrorism. Further relevant
documents are the National Action Plan on the Fight against Money Laundering,
Terrorist Financing and Financing of Spread of Weapons of Mass Destruction
(2019-2022) and the Strategic Principles of the Fight against the Legalization of the
Proceeds of Crime, the Fight against Terrorism and Financing of the Proliferation of
Weapons of Mass Destruction (2019-2024).
To conclude, Slovakia believes that a robust framework, its rigorous
implementation and effective international cooperation can significantly contribute
to preventing and countering the scourge of terrorism.

20-1064383/97

S/2020/791

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Spain to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We are grateful to the Indonesian presidency for convening this debate on
an issue that deserves in-depth reflection. Spain aligns itself with the statement
submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex 27).
The linkage between terrorism and organized crime has long been discussed.
Recently, there have been a growing interlinkage and cooperation between both
phenomena due in particular to the increasing involvement of terrorist groups in
organized crime for two main purposes: to obtain funding and for logistical support.
There are several reasons for this interlinkage: on the one hand, the
transnational aspect, flexibility and adaptability of organized crime. On the other
hand, the evolution of terrorist organizations from highly centralized and closed
structures, completely separate from other kinds of crime, to decentralized networks
with multiple connections to organized crime or to everyday crime.
That trend began to be observed in Spain following the attacks of 11 September
2001 in New York and particularly of 11 March 2004 in Madrid, where the explosives
used were purchased from criminals involved in drug trafficking. The analysis of
terrorist activity since then has affirmed and intensified the trend and, in our case,
led to our intelligence and police services adaptation their responses with two main
objectives: on the one hand, to link investigations of both phenomena — terrorism
and organized crime — and, on the one hand, to share the intelligence related to
both phenomena.
Based on such premises, in 2014 the Centre for Intelligence against Terrorism
and Organized Crime was created from two pre-existing bodies: the Centre for
Intelligence against Organized Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Centre. That amalgamation, based on the structure of so-called mergers, breaks with
the traditional organizational separation of the fight against both phenomena. As
one of the more specific outcomes, the corresponding databases were also linked,
making it possible to detect overlaps in up to 14 per cent of investigations, mainly
among individuals linked to terrorist organizations involved in drug trafficking and
money laundering.
The next step was the adoption, in January 2019, of the new National Strategy
against Organized Crime and Serious Crime, which addresses the link between
organized crime and terrorism as one of its main areas of action. Among other
measures, it proposes establishing joint investigation teams, made up of police
units specialized in each of those criminal phenomena, improved databases to
enable the early detection of links and promoting the exchange of information at the
international level.
These measures clearly demonstrate the importance that Spain attaches to
strengthening the investigation of linkages between organized crime and terrorism.
A greater joint effort at the international level is essential to continuing progress
in that area. In that connection, we believe that in recent years significant steps
have been taken, such as the adoption last year by the Security Council of the two
resolutions 2482 (2019) and 2462 (2019), which further the discussion and analysis
of this issue and provide a series of important instruments for moving forward. From
now on, we will continue to discuss and analyse both phenomena and work towards
better implementation of the measures contained in those resolutions.

84/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

While significant progress has been made in that regard, the scale of the
problem and the increasing evidence of this interlinkage require us to continue
our efforts to strengthen our international cooperation and collaboration by using
all opportunities available to us. The upcoming United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy Review may therefore be a good occasion to continue addressing
the interlinkage between terrorism and organized crime, while maintaining the
ultimate goal shared by all, namely, to put an end to the scourge of terrorism.

20-1064385/97

S/2020/791

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Sri Lanka to the
United Nations
Sri Lanka warmly congratulates Indonesia on the assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August, which will undoubtedly be a successful
tenure considering the extensive diplomatic skills of the Indonesian delegation.
The growing complexities and evolving nature of the linkages between
terrorism and organized crime, particularly in this digital age, makes this discussion
timely and relevant. As observed in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/754) on
addressing this interlinked issue, it is clear that the ability of terrorists to draw on
organized crime, whether domestic or transnational, online or offline, can exacerbate
the threat posed by terrorism to international peace and security.
Although progress has been made in the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy since 2006, many challenges have been
encountered as a result of the changing face of terrorism and violent extremism, due
to the avenues created by globalization, in the facilitation of the increased movement
of persons and goods and the rapid advancement of technology, giving rise to faster
methods of communication and messaging, as well as the transfer of finances. While
the phenomena of foreign terrorist fighters and the financing of terrorism are not
new, their sharp and visible increase in recent times, with the more effective use of
web-based platforms by terrorist entities, challenge the capabilities of Governments
to mitigate such activities and successfully protect and secure all those within
their borders.
In tandem, there continues to be a symbiotic relationship between organized
crime and terrorism. Criminal enterprises have always been the source of funds
for terrorist activities. The rapid evolution of transnational criminal outfits and
international terrorist groups have resulted in the formation of hybrid organizations,
which has made them more sustainable and better equipped, posing unprecedented
challenges for law enforcement agencies.
As a country that suffered for nearly three decades under the brutality of
terrorism, we are only too aware of the devastation and destruction that it creates.
The terrorist organization Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), which existed
in Sri Lanka prior to its military defeat in 2009, had many international networks
and linkages to organized crime, which served as a critical, lucrative lifeline for its
ability to engage in suicide attacks against civilians, political leaders and opponents
and indiscriminate bombing of civilian spaces and critical infrastructure, as well
as wage war against the State through a well-developed ground guerrilla force,
complemented by sea capabilities and, although rudimentary, air capabilities. A
steady flow of funds was generated through a variety of local and transnational
criminal activities, which included the trafficking of humans, drugs, arms and
wildlife; human smuggling; forgeries; the extortion of funds from the diaspora and
protection money from those living in areas in which the group operated. This was
in addition to the funds generated through front businesses owned overseas.
The efforts taken by the Sri Lankan Government to curtail these avenues of
financing, with the collaboration of friendly countries, though challenging, had a
severe impact on the sustenance of the terrorist outfit towards the latter stages of the
conflict. Securing the proscription of the LTTE — across 32 countries — contributed
immensely to stifling its amassing of funds internationally for the creation of wanton
destruction back in Sri Lanka. The listing of a few LTTE front organizations that
operated under the guise of charities and development organizations also proved
effective in revealing the multifaceted faces of terrorist financing, through organized
86/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

crime and criminal activity, and challenges facing law enforcement agencies in
curtailing the same.
These international networks of the LTTE remain intact, even following the
military defeat in Sri Lanka, and morphed into other organizations espousing the
same violent ideology. Therefore, Sri Lanka strongly believes that legal prohibitions
must continue to be enacted in letter and spirit by the international community,
rather than by the dictates of their domestic political compulsions, which regrettably
have been apparent. This is fundamental to curbing terrorist activity and organized
crime, an abhorrent partnership.
From these experiences, Sri Lanka underscores the importance of recognizing
that transnational organized crime provides a strong support structure to terrorists
and directly relates to the financing of terrorism. As such, the country has made
significant progress in improving and strengthening the effectiveness of its
anti-money-laundering and countering the financing of terrorism regime through
the adoption of domestic legislation enabling the implementation of United Nations
and Security Council resolutions related to the financing of terrorism. These efforts
have resulted in the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) — the global policy setter
on anti-money-laundering and countering the financing of terrorism — delisting Sri
Lanka from the FATF’s compliance document.
More also needs to be done to address the roots of radicalization, including
real and perceived injustices and grievances among young people. We are seeing
increasing radicalization among youth who are most at risk of indoctrination towards
violent extremism by terrorist groups and of becoming their pawns. The terrorist
attacks of Easter Sunday in April 2019 in Sri Lanka revealed that radicalization
leading to violent extremism and devastating terrorist attacks can be perpetrated
not only by impressionable vulnerable youth but also by those who are educated and
empowered in society. The complexities presented in monitoring preparations for
terrorist activity in this new phase of terrorism, as well as tracing their financing,
as evidenced by these attacks, have revealed the necessity for law enforcement and
intelligence agencies to re-examine their protocols and strengthen capacity and
readiness, as well as regional and international cooperation.
In order to prevent linkages between prisoners held for terrorism offences and
other criminal offences, including that of engaging in the illegal narcotics trade and
other underworld activities, there is an urgent need to reform prison structures and
prevent their use as a hub for recruitment and platforms for knowledge sharing. In
this context, Sri Lanka is currently in the process of restructuring the prison system,
as well as training officers to curb this practice, an area where information sharing
on best practices could be deemed relevant for the multilateral system to collate
and assist.
As an island that serves as a maritime transit hub, Sri Lanka is vigilant
and committed to ensuring that the country’s territory is not used for illegitimate
and illegal transactions. In the national policy framework of the Government of
Sri Lanka, entitled Vistas of Prosperity and Splendour, dismantling all structures
supporting terrorism and extremism, preventing crime and developing a country
free from drugs have been placed as top national priorities.
Sri Lanka has been continuously associated with United Nations initiatives
on counter-terrorism and remains closely engaged with its counter-terrorism
architecture. We take this opportunity to thank the Office of Counter-Terrorism
for its work. We are confident that the Office will help strengthen the capability
of the United Nations system and enhance coordination and coherence to ensure
the balanced implementation of the four pillars of the United Nations Global
20-1064387/97

S/2020/791

Counter-Terrorism Strategy, with the cooperation of Member States in accordance
with their requirements. Sri Lanka will continue to collaborate with the Office
of Counter-Terrorism and welcomes the focus on capacity-building assistance to
Member States.
The work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in Sri
Lanka must be acknowledged, having engaged robustly with its Global Maritime
Crime Programme and assisted in the foundation of its Indian Ocean Forum on
Maritime Crime. Sri Lanka, leading the Indian Ocean Rim Association Working
Group of Maritime Safety and Security, has been working closely with UNODC on a
range of activities connected to mitigating maritime crimes. In this context, UNODC
has been cooperating closely with the Sri Lankan Navy since 2016, contributing to
activities with regard to strengthening the capacity-building of the Sri Lanka Navy
and Coast Guard. Since 2019, the Sri Lankan Navy, with the support of UNODC,
has conducted six training courses on visit, board, search and seizure in Sri Lanka
for the participants from Indian Ocean littoral States. In the past few years, drug
seizures by Sri Lanka and other littoral States in the Indian Ocean have increased,
in particular owing to international cooperation.
Terrorism and organized crime transcend boundaries and, in order to enhance
early detection, there is a vital need for enhanced international cooperation. We
call for greater sharing of information, technology, databases and intelligence
in combating this global menace. There should also be increased cooperation in
building counter-terrorism and anti-criminal response capacities and training for the
critical skills required in this area.
Sri Lanka notes that, despite broad support on the need to combat the scourge
of terrorism, the inability to reach an agreement on the definition of the term
“terrorism” has remained an obstacle to concluding a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. Sri Lanka underscores the need for such a legal framework
to strengthen our collective efforts to destroy terrrorists’ safe havens, financial flows
and support networks. As Chair of the Working Group on measures to eliminate
international terrorism, Sri Lanka looks forward to a constructive dialogue with
all States and calls for commitment and resolve to bring those negotiations to a
successful conclusion.
Sri Lanka condemns in the strongest possible terms all acts of terrorism,
irrespective of their motivation, as one of the most serious threats to peace and
security. It is imperative to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations by
all means. We also condemn in the strongest possible terms the incitement to commit
terrorist acts, and we repudiate attempts to justify or glorify such acts.
As a country that is party to 13 core terrorism and counter-terrorism conventions,
as well as the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
Sri Lanka remains an active participant in global efforts to counter the odious duo of
terrorism and organized crime and will continue to support the work of the General
Assembly and the Security Council in coordinating efforts and establishing legal
norms to that end.

88/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
Switzerland thanks Indonesia for organizing this open debate. We welcome
the first report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/754) on the linkages between
terrorism and organized crime.
Terrorist organizations and transnational criminal networks exploit and
benefit from a lack of good governance and the rule of law, porous borders, high
levels of corruption and weak and ineffective democratic institutions and law
enforcement. These conditions contribute to the exacerbation of armed conflict
and other situations of violence, with terrorism and transnational organized crime
flourishing and reinforcing each other.
While the linkages between terrorism and transnational organized crime are
widely recognized, they are undeniably complex and diverse. We welcome the fact
that this important issue is now on the agenda of the Security Council. However,
global efforts to understand and combat these phenomena and their connections need
to be strengthened. To that end, Switzerland would like to highlight three priorities.
First, all efforts to combat terrorism and transnational organized crime
must fully respect international law, including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. They must comply with the principles of legality,
necessity, proportionality and non-discrimination. Given the growing convergence
between terrorism and organized crime, criminal justice responses must take this
linkage into account and use operational methods and legal instruments that have
proven to be effective. Switzerland reiterates the Secretary-General’s appeal to
Member States to adopt human rights-based approaches to combat these crimes.
Secondly, the Global Counterterrorism Forum is an important platform on this
subject. Together with Nigeria, Switzerland co-chairs the Forum’s Criminal Justice
and the Rule of Law Working Group. It is also leading an initiative on the criminal
justice response to the linkages between terrorism, transnational organized crime
and international crime. An addendum to The Hague Good Practices on the Nexus
between Transnational Organized Crime and Terrorism is expected to be adopted by
the GCTF next September. It will provide guidance and recommendations on how to
strengthen criminal justice approaches and improve the capacity of law enforcement
officials and prosecutors to detect, investigate and prosecute crimes committed at the
nexus of terrorism and transnational organized crime, while respecting international
law and in particular human rights obligations.
Thirdly, corruption and terrorism must be addressed in a more coherent
manner. Resolution 2482 (2019) is explicit that counter-terrorism must include the
fight against corruption. We call on the Security Council to dedicate more attention
to this. More research is also needed on the linkage between the two phenomena
in order to properly address the risks. That is why Switzerland worked with the
Royal United Services Institute to analyse the nexus between corruption, terrorism
and the financing for terrorism. One of the conclusions of this work underlines the
importance of strengthening criminal justice and law enforcement approaches in this
area, as corruption facilitates the financing of terrorism by exploiting connections
with organized crime groups.
When terrorism and transnational organized crime intersect, armed conflict
and other situations of violence often escalate. That has a clear negative impact on
20-1064389/97

S/2020/791

international peace and security. Breaking this cycle requires the commitment of the
entire international community, and we call on all Member States and the United
Nations to intensify their efforts.

90/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tajikistan to the
United Nations, Mahmadamin Mahmadaminov
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Indonesia on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and express my appreciation for its convening of
today’s open debate on the very important topic of linkages between terrorism and
transnational organized crime.
International terrorism and transnational organized crime continue to pose
major threats to international peace and security. Moreover, they undermine regional
and international efforts to ensure stability, economic and social development and
fundamental human rights.
We believe that efforts should be focused eliminating the military infrastructure
of international terrorism, thereby depriving terrorists of political, military and,
most important, financial support.
Acknowledging the seriousness of those threats, the Government of the
Republic of Tajikistan has been taking decisive and comprehensive measures aimed
at preventing and combating these phenomena. Among such measures are the
approval of the National Concept on Countering Money-laundering, the Financing
of Terrorism and Weapons of Mass Destruction for the period 2018 to 2025.
Following the Financial Action Task Force guidance on national risk
assessments of money laundering and terrorist financing, Tajikistan implemented a
similar assessment at the national level. According to our assessment, it was revealed
that the funds generated through illegal activities have become more sophisticated
and the volume of terrorist financing has increased. In addition to monetary funds,
advanced technologies are being employed in the financing of terrorism.
Moreover, our assessment indicates that drug-related crimes have become a
significant source of illicit money that can considerably contribute to the financing
of terrorism. Drug trafficking, as one of the channels of financing terrorism and
violence, is yet another challenge causing deep concern in the region and across
the world. Combating illicit drug trafficking requires concerted and coordinated
actions at the regional and international levels. There is still a need for extensive
international cooperation to counter narcotics.
To address these challenges, last year the Government of the Republic
of Tajikistan, in cooperation with the United Nations, the European Union and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, hosted a High-Level
Conference on International and Regional Cooperation on Countering Terrorism and
its Financing through Illicit Drug-Trafficking and Organized Crime.
Following the results of the Conference, the Dushanbe Declaration was adopted,
in which the participants reiterated their intention to deepen the understanding of
the links and synergies between efforts to counter terrorist financing and those to
counter illicit drug-trafficking and organized crime, such as illicit trade in natural
resources, cultural artefacts and weapons, as well as trafficking in human beings.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Tajikistan stands ready for open
and constructive dialogue in this area.
Once again, Mr. President, please accept my sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency in the Security Council. I wish you and your team
every success in fulfilling your noble commitments.

20-1064391/97

S/2020/791

Annex 49
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Turkey to the United Nations
The nexus between terrorism and transnational organized crime is a crucial
yet long-neglected issue. Evidently, this subject matter has gained critical traction
thanks to the adoption of the landmark resolution 2482 (2019) in 2019. That resolution
provides a critical framework for international efforts to address this challenge.
In this respect, we welcome the Secretary-General’s report on actions taken
by Member States and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact entities to address the issue of linkages between terrorism and organized
crime (S/2020/754). Turkey is among the countries that provided substantial
contributions to this important work.
Turkey has for years been at the forefront of countering terrorist organizations
with a broad spectrum of ideologies, be it Da’esh, Al-Qaida, the Kurdish Workers’
Party/Kurdish People’s Protection Units or the Fethullah Gülen Terrorist
Organization. Regardless of their ideologies, what connects them all is that they
benefit from a wide range of criminal activities.
Clearly, transnational organized crimes are not bound by national borders.
As the world becomes more interconnected thanks advances in global trade and
e-commerce, the area where such criminal organizations find new windows of
opportunities expands as well.
These organizations no longer limit themselves to drug-, arms- or humantrafficking activities. They resort to more complex and subtler activities, such as
trafficking in artefacts, cultural property and wildlife. They widely benefit from
the use of cybertools and cyberplatforms, particularly for financing, propaganda
and recruitment activities. Due to the increased variety and complexity of these
activities, the international community should be more vigilant and agile than ever
to address them.
As we shared in detail during the process of the preparation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, Turkey has a variety of legal and administrative measures in place
in order to prevent, detect and counter the ties between terrorism and transnational
organized crime. Turkey is party to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols as well as to the Council of
Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of the Proceeds
from Crime.
The Prevention of Financing of Terrorism Act of 2013 introduced a
number of measures, including the freezing of assets, sanctions and penalties for
smuggling activities.
As a member of the Financial Action Task Force, Turkey regularly reviews,
and revises where necessary, its legislation and administrative practices in order to
fully comply with Task Force recommendations.
The MASAK Financial Crimes Investigation Board, Turkey’s national
financial intelligence unit (FIU), provides significant contributions to the work
of the Egmont Group, an international platform for exchange of information
among FIUs.
With its robust law enforcement and customs control capacity, Turkey makes
an essential contribution to international efforts to prevent, detect and disrupt
international drug-trafficking.

92/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Last but not least, in addition to our bilateral efforts, we have established
close operational and results-yielding partnerships with international actors, such as
INTERPOL and Europol. We provide support and contribute to the valuable work of
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to advance its work.
The disruption caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic has inevitably
affected terrorist and criminal groups. However, it has not deterred them from
seeking new ways to operate and continue their activities.
A number of United Nations reports point out that these groups have directed
their activities to online platforms. In that respect, there is no room for complacency
for the international community in its collective fight against terrorist and criminal
activities. On the contrary, we should be more responsive and innovative in the face
of the evolving way terrorist organizations and criminal organizations operate and
interact with each other.
As the Secretary-General’s report on the implementation on resolution 2482
(2019) indicates,
“[t]he ability of terrorists to draw on organized crime […] can exacerbate the
threat posed by terrorism to international peace and security.” (S/2020/754,
para. 105)
In concurrence with this understanding, Turkey is committed to countering terrorism
and criminal activities in an effective manner. To that end, we remain determined to
disrupt all efforts that help such organizations thrive. Security Council resolutions,
starting with resolution 2482 (2019), provide us the necessary framework and
guidance for preventing interactions between such groups. In this respect, Turkey is
deeply committed to continuing to fully implement those resolutions.
We will also continue to be a steadfast partner in overcoming the daunting
challenges arising from nexus between terrorism and criminal activities. To achieve
solid results in this common fight, we need genuine international cooperation more
than ever.

20-1064393/97

S/2020/791

Annex 50
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Ukraine to the
United Nations
Ukraine thanks Indonesia for organizing the present open debate on the
linkages between international terrorism and organized crime.
Terrorism, fuelled by the root causes of radicalization and violent extremism,
is ever-more interlinked with organized crime and the trafficking in persons, drugs
and arms, as well as with corruption. The common denominator between terrorist
and criminal groups alike is that their activities are not limited to a specific region
or State; rather, they have expansionary aspirations and a vast development agenda.
Up until now, the international community has been exposed to constantly evolving
threats from the so called “crime-terror nexus”, with more sophisticated methods
and tactics, including in the financing of transnational criminal acts. In this regard,
Ukraine takes note of the joint report submitted by the Secretary-General in
accordance with resolution 2482 (2019) on linkages between terrorism and organized
crime (S/2020/754). Ukraine is among the States having contributed to that report by
sharing their own experiences in countering this phenomenon at the domestic and
international levels.
Among the factors allowing terrorist and criminal groups to remain active and
ambitious are the following: the misuse of technological advances and communication
innovations; loosely controlled borders; the complex challenges with regard to
returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters from conflict zones; a lack of
effective strategies in countering hostile propaganda and recruiting; and insufficient
prosecution and punishment measures in place for those who provide funding or
other support to terrorist and criminal activities in any form and by any methods.
It therefore remains crucial to ensure the effective implementation of all
international instruments in force for combating terrorism and transnational
organized crime, namely the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing
of Terrorism, the United Nations Convention against Corruption as well as the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the Financial Action Task Force standards and recommendations.
Ukraine wishes to reaffirm the importance of the Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols in combating both existing and emerging forms
of transnational organized crime, including armed robbery, kidnapping for ransom,
money-laundering and corruption. Moreover, as Ukraine pays the utmost attention to
the issue of combating human trafficking, since such crimes are often transnational,
it can additionally address terrorists’ role in human trafficking, migrant smuggling
and illicit transfers of firearms. The fight against these crimes requires joint efforts
and coordination of respective activities among countries.
Ukraine therefore supports the establishment of an implementation review
mechanism for the Convention and its Protocols. We believe that any mechanism that
may be adopted should be transparent, efficient, non-intrusive and impartial, while
aiming in particular at assisting in the effective implementation of this instrument`s
provisions.
Moreover, there is an urgent need to find additional effective measures to
counter the evolving trends in both terrorism and organized crime. In particular,
having being unpunishably integrated into the policy of some States, terrorism
and criminal components lead to brutal violations of international law, including
to the commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity. Ukraine continues
94/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

to experience such consequences in countering hybrid Russian aggression, now
ongoing for more than six years.
The reports of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission and of the United Nations Human Rights Mission in
Ukraine confirm the continuous inflow of ammunition, weaponry and fighters
from the Russian Federation into the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine.
These military assets are delivered either openly or under the guise of the so-called
“humanitarian convoys”. With this and other Russian support, more than 13,000
people were killed in Donbas, while nearly 1.45 million people were forced to leave
their homes.
In temporarily occupied Crimea, the aggressor State is discrediting
international efforts — including those of the Security Council — to counter
terrorism by producing fake accusations of terrorist activities and by illegally
sentencing innocent people. The Russian occupying authorities just chose to fabricate
the so-called Hizb ut-Tahrir cases against Crimean activists and civilian journalists,
although no one is linked to any recognizable crime or even to planning to commit
such a crime. Since 2014, Russia has being using its “terrorism” legislation to put
systematic pressure on Crimean Tatars as well as exerting continuous repression on
religious, ethnic and political grounds.
Considering that Islamic extremism had never been part of the history of the
Crimean peninsula before the current Russian occupation, the frequency with which
the occupation authorities are using this accusation to justify their searches, detention
and robust punitive actions strongly suggests that it is a pretext for discrimination,
in blatant violation of the Convention on the Elimination on all Forms of Racial
Discrimination.
Those and other facts regarding violations of the international legal framework
prove, time and again, that combating the activities of individual terrorists and
terrorist groups will be insufficient if the problem of State-sponsored terrorism is
not effectively and comprehensively addressed. Shifting blame, manipulation and
propaganda, interference in the internal affairs of States, fuelling international
conflicts by supplying weapons and financing of terrorism, killing civilians,
including medical personnel — that is the modern political course of the Russian
Federation.
That is why the issue of holding to account not only individuals or organizations
but also those States responsible for organizing, financing or otherwise supporting
terrorist and criminal activities should be duly dealt with. The sanctions imposed
on the aggressor-State should be maintained and further strengthened. Therefore,
the only option for sanctions to be lifted is thorough complete halting of continuous
violations of international law, including armed aggression, occupation and human
rights abuses. Transnational criminal activity, including terrorism, must be not only
condemned but effectively countered and punished.

20-1064395/97

S/2020/791

Annex 51
Statement by the Chargée d’affaires of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations, Ameirah Obaid Mohamed Obaid Alhefeiti
The United Arab Emirates would like to thank Indonesia for organizing
today’s open debate. We also thank the briefers for highlighting several critical
points related to today’s discussion.
The United Arab Emirates remains concerned about the growing link between
organized crime and terrorism, especially in this difficult time. As highlighted in
the twenty-sixth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
terrorist groups are “using the outbreak to advance propaganda and fundraising”
(S/2020/717, summary). The report also mentions that some of these groups have been
using the lockdown during the pandemic to increase illegal excavations and thefts
from archaeological sites in conflict zones. In addition, terrorists continue to raise
funds through money-laundering and trafficking in persons, weapons, drugs and
natural resources, as well as through kidnapping and extortion.
Last year, the Security Council adopted resolution 2482 (2019), on the links
between organized crime and terrorism. The United Arab Emirates co-sponsored
that resolution because we strongly believe that our efforts to eliminate international
terrorism cannot succeed without cutting off all sources of funding, including
organized crime. To achieve this goal, the United Arab Emirates recommends the
international community enhance its efforts in the following four ways.
First, we must strengthen our legal frameworks and implement relevant United
Nations resolutions that address terrorism and transnational organized crime. Laws
work only if States enforce them through investigation and prosecution. For its part,
the United Arab Emirates continues to update its legal frameworks and enhance
the efforts of law enforcement bodies to combat and criminalize terror financing.
The United Arab Emirates has also implemented the latest recommendations by
the Financial Action Task Force to strengthen its anti-money-laundering/counterfinancing of terrorism system.
In addition, the United Arab Emirates reiterates that the United Nations
system must hold Member States accountable for their financing of terrorism when
it occurs, especially when such actions violate relevant Security Council resolutions
and their obligations under the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism.
Secondly, we need to enhance the capacity of Governments, the private sector
and relevant institutions to combat the threats of terrorism and organized crime.
This requires the provision of human, financial and logistical resources, especially
to affected regions and countries. Terrorist and criminal groups constantly adapt,
and we must do the same to disrupt and dismantle trafficking networks, in addition
to enhancing border-control capacities.
The financial intelligence units of the United Arab Emirates have the training
and equipment necessary to analyse and investigate suspicious transactions. The
United Arab Emirates Central Bank also provides anti-money-laundering training
at the national and regional levels, in addition to implementing specific measures
to address emerging challenges in terrorist financing. We have also launched the
“goAML” anti-money-laundering programme to collect and analyse financial
information to combat money-laundering and terrorist financing, in cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. These combined efforts have
successfully disrupted the financing of extremist groups through the United Arab
Emirates financial system and within its borders.
96/97

20-10643

S/2020/791

Thirdly, we encourage greater cooperation at the local, regional and
international levels. Transnational threats require collective efforts. For instance, the
United Arab Emirates ensures close cooperation with the private sector and not-forprofit and charitable institutions in the country. On a regional level, the United Arab
Emirates is one of the founding countries of the Financial Action Task Force for the
Middle East and North Africa, the Egmont Group associate member that plays an
important role in the exchange of information among financial intelligence units to
combat the financing of terrorism in the region. On a global level, the United Arab
Emirates worked with France and UNESCO to establish the International Alliance
for the Protection of Heritage in Conflict Areas to prevent the destruction and illegal
trafficking of cultural property by terrorist groups.
We emphasize that there is no one-size-fits-all solution. We encourage
strategies that take into account the unique context of each country or region to
effectively address the linkages between organized crime and terrorism. This
requires extensive research and the involvement of regional stakeholders.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates strongly supports continued efforts
to understand the nature and scope of the linkages between terrorism and organized
crime. We will continue to work with our partners to tackle these joint threats and
maintain international peace and security.

20-1064397/97
