United Nations

S/PV.6196

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6196th meeting
Monday, 5 October 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pham Gia Khiem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2009/465)
Letter dated 18 September 2009 from the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2009/490)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-54136 (E)

*0954136*

S/PV.6196

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Council in October 2009, I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute on behalf of the Council to
Her Excellency Ms. Susan Rice, Permanent
Representative of the United States, for her service as
President of the Security Council during the month of
September 2009. I am sure I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing my appreciation to
Ambassador Rice for the great diplomatic skill with
which she conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2009/465)
Letter dated 18 September 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2009/490)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt,
Finland, Germany, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
Ukraine and the United Republic of Tanzania, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Rachel N.
Mayanja, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Gender Issues and Advancement of Women.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Inés
Alberdi, Executive Director of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi Amin, representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
It is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 1 October 2009 from the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations, in which he requests
that the acting Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Tete
Antonio, be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item in accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio.
There being no objection, it so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Antonio
took the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council Chamber.

09-54136

S/PV.6196

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/465, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security. I
should also like to draw Council members’ attention to
document S/2009/490, which contains a letter dated
18 September 2009 from the Permanent Representative
of Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2009/500, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Austria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Finland, France, India,
Italy, Japan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Mexico, Norway, Philippines, Singapore, South Africa,
Turkey, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Viet
Nam. This draft resolution is a continuation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and is designed to respond to
the needs of women and girls in post-conflict
situations. It provides for concrete action and for
promoting their participation in all aspects of the peace
process with a view to ensuring sustainable peace and
security.
In accordance with the understanding reached
earlier among members, the Security Council will take
action on the draft resolution before it prior to hearing
statements from the participants in today’s meeting.
Accordingly, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam.
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1889 (2009).
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers

09-54136

to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro.
Ms. Migiro: Mr. President, Excellencies, I am
delighted to join you at this open debate of the Security
Council on resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security. I will now read a statement of the
Secretary-General.
“I welcome this open debate on a subject
that is a top priority for the United Nations.
“Resolution 1325 (2000) provides a global
framework for mainstreaming gender in all peace
processes, including peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and post-conflict reconstruction, as well as in the
general maintenance of peace and security. The
text was a milestone in the Security Council’s
approach to the question, and I am pleased to say
that the Council has consistently reviewed the
progress being made to implement it.
“This year’s open debate on the needs of
women and girls in post-conflict situations
highlights the importance of seizing the
opportunity created by the cessation of hostilities.
Addressing those needs is critical for long-term
peace. So too is empowering women and girls in
order that they can play their rightful role in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.
“As we approach next year’s tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
review of its implementation, it is appropriate
that today we take stock. In nine years, only 16
countries have adopted national action plans for
the implementation of the resolution. I encourage
all Member States to take action before the tenth
anniversary.
“Much has been said about the importance
of a monitoring mechanism. I have repeatedly
called upon this Council to demonstrate
leadership in this regard. Attention must also be
given to safeguarding the newly acquired roles
that women are playing during conflict, including
in decision-making.

3

S/PV.6196

“A cessation of conflict should not result in
the marginalization of women and girls nor their
relegation to stereotypical roles. Nor should we
allow any exclusion of women in peace negotiations
and mediation to become the template for what
happens in implementing a peace settlement.
Indeed, a growing body of evidence suggests that
bringing women to the peace table improves the
quality of agreements reached and increases the
chances of successful implementation.
“Women are likely to put gender issues on
the agenda, set different priorities and possibly
bridge the political divide more effectively.
Experience also suggests that
women’s
contributions in post-conflict situations can make
a critical difference to community survival and
reconstruction.
“As we heard from many speakers last
Wednesday in this Chamber (see S/PV.6195),
women face appalling violence, especially sexual
violence, in the anarchy generated by conflict and
its aftermath. Yet post-conflict gender-based
violence often remains below the radar screen
since a cessation of conflict is often mistaken for
the full return of peace.
“Resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009)
focus directly on these challenges. However, the
implementation of those resolutions must be done
in tandem with resolution 1325 (2000).
“The strengthening of women’s participation
in decision-making is critical to overcoming the
scourge of sexual violence. I am committed to the
full implementation of these landmark texts on
women and peace and security and I will continue
to do my part, including by appointing more
women to positions of leadership.
“I thank the Council for its attention to this
issue and look forward to working with it to
achieve our shared objectives.”
The foregoing is what the Secretary-General
would have said had he been here.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for her statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Rachel N. Mayanja,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Gender
Issues and Advancement of Women.

4

Ms. Mayanja: It is an honour for me to introduce
the report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2009/465). May I begin by
expressing gratitude to you, Mr. President, for giving
me this opportunity to address the Council on the
progress made in implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
over the past year. I would also like to express my
appreciation for the leadership and commitment of Viet
Nam in preparing for this open debate.
The report before the Council (S/2009/465)
highlights ways in which armed conflict continues to
affect women and girls in situations with which the
Council has been seized. It identifies progress made in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and outlines
challenges and some recommendations for addressing
them.
Nine years since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), women and girls continue to be victims of genderbased violence, especially sexual violence, in many of the
situations with which the Council was seized over the
past year. Armed conflict and its aftermath continue to
account for untold hardship for civilians, especially
women and girls. These violations — especially sexual
violence against women and girls — are pronounced
during open hostilities, but they exist even where open
hostilities have subsided. As noted in the statement
delivered by the Deputy Secretary-General, unfortunately
post-conflict atrocities often stay below the radar, seldom
reaching the attention of the international community and
leaving victims with little recourse to justice.
For his part, the Secretary-General has repeatedly
indicated in this Chamber his commitment to ending
violence against women and girls in conflict situations.
He did so on 7 August, 30 September, and in the
statement which has just been delivered by the Deputy
Secretary-General.
Member States, United Nations entities and civil
society have continued to make progress in ensuring
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Progress
is particularly evident in the areas of training and
capacity development. As a result, in some situations
women’s participation in mediating and negotiating
peace, in searching for justice, in fostering reconciliation,
in supporting disarmament and demobilization, and in
rebuilding national institutions, is evident.
Much attention is being paid to protecting women
from the threat of mines, which remains a pressing
issue in post-conflict situations. In the reporting period,

09-54136

S/PV.6196

there was a decrease in the number of casualties due to
mines, reflecting intensified activities in this area. Of
even greater significance is the recognition by women
themselves of the importance of their participation in
mine-action activities.
Among the most significant signs of progress is
the adoption by many Member States, including some
that have recently emerged from conflict, of national
action plans to guide the implementation of the
resolution. The process of developing many of these
plans has been collaborative, leading to the sharing of
experiences and expertise among Member States,
United Nations entities and civil society organizations.
This is a welcome development, which should be
emulated.
However, the adoption of national action plans is
only a first step. We must not lose sight of the fact that
these plans must be implemented if they are to achieve
their goals, and that they must be backed by resources.
Greater efforts by the United Nations system and by
Member States will be required beyond developing
capacity. Concrete actions must be taken to ensure that
services are provided and programmes implemented at
the country level.
It is critical that the Council continue to play a
strong advocacy role to root out sexual violence in
conflict and end to its use as a tactic and weapon of
war. I commend the Council for the adoption of
resolution 1888 (2009) as a reaffirmation of its
commitment to eliminating gender-based violence in
conflict situations. Equally important is the Council’s
unequivocal commitment to women’s engagement in
the entirety of peace and security processes. The
Council must be relentless in its insistence on women
as peacekeepers, peacebuilders and decision makers.
As we approach the tenth anniversary, the
Council must rededicate itself to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In this
regard, I am pleased to inform the Council that
preparations are already under way for the
commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). In June of this
year, the Government of Iceland co-organized with the
University of Iceland an international conference on
the tenth anniversary. Last month, the Deputy
Secretary-General, the African Union and the European
Commission jointly organized a ministerial breakfast
focusing on resolution 1325 (2000). Likewise, civil

09-54136

society organizations are also engaged in the
preparations. What has consistently emerged is the
expectation that the Security Council will convene a
ministerial-level meeting next year to review progress to
date and to take concrete action to reinvigorate efforts
towards the full implementation of the resolution.
In spite of the demonstrated commitment at the
highest levels, the persistent obstacles to implementation
noted in the report before the Council will require even
greater resolve from all of us. Countries in and
emerging from conflict will require support to
strengthen their judiciary and security institutions to
enable them to hold perpetrators of crime accountable.
Despite progress, still few women are included in
peace negotiations in countries affected by conflict and
war. The reporting on the impact of armed conflict on
women and girls, and indeed of the gender dimensions
of armed conflict, is yet to become universal in
country-specific reports to the Council. This
information is essential to effective monitoring and
reporting to the Council. It should become a standard
feature of all country reports.
Finally, I wish to draw the attention of the
Council to the persistent blatant disregard of
international law, international humanitarian law and
resolution 1325 (2000) by parties to armed conflict.
This is a major and fundamental challenge to the
implementation of the resolution. Although the
resolution requires them to take action, to date no
mechanism has been designed to hold warring factions
accountable. Thus, they violate women and girls with
impunity. This aspect of the resolution requires the
Council’s attention. Warring parties must be held
accountable. Without this, the protection of civilians as
a whole, and of women and girls in particular, will
remain elusive and the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) out of reach.
The President: I thank Ms. Mayanja for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Inés Alberdi,
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women.
Ms. Alberdi: I thank the Government of Viet
Nam and Mr. Pham Gia Khiem, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs, for the honour to
address the Security Council. I congratulate Viet Nam
on its initiative of introducing resolution 1889 (2009). I

5

S/PV.6196

note with thanks the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/465) on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), and I thank Ms. Mayanja for her dedication to
this issue.

World Bank to develop guidance on gender as a crosscutting issue in post-conflict needs assessments. This
guidance will be tested in the current needs-assessment
process in Pakistan.

The resolution adopted today asserts that
women’s leadership is an integral part of early
recovery and peacebuilding. Failure to address
women’s needs in transitional governance, livelihood
support, public services and judicial systems can slow
recovery and undermine peace.

A priority for donors, the United Nations and the
World Bank is to track funding targeted to women’s
needs. In post-conflict planning, women must
participate in needs assessments, setting priorities and
monitoring public expenditure. Civil society groups
representing women’s interests must be invited to
donor conferences.

In other words, women are a powerful positive
force for long-term peacebuilding. There is no more
important time to act on this insight than now, as we
look forward to the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000). I would like to highlight four priorities
for action on early recovery and peacebuilding.
The first is women’s leadership in peacemaking.
Last year, I shared with the Council research by the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) showing that women average under 10 per
cent of the members in official negotiating teams at
peace talks. The striking absence of women at that
stage means that they lack a voice in everything that
follows. The institutions that implement peace deals
may fail to address women’s needs for justice, for
removal of perpetrators of sexual violence from security
forces or for properly designed and targeted public
services. Increasing women’s participation in formal
and informal institutions involved in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is a major priority.
We need to invest in strengthening the capacity of
women’s groups even before a conflict ends. UNIFEM
does that by supporting women’s peace coalitions
across the lines of conflict. We are facilitating dialogue
between Israeli and Palestinian women through the
International Women’s Commission. We are building
regional women’s peace advocacy in the Balkans and
the Caucasus and are supporting women in Somalia,
Uganda and Darfur, to help them engage in peace
processes.
The second priority is funding for women’s
empowerment in recovery and peacebuilding. Postconflict planners should always investigate women’s
specific needs and allocate sufficient resources to meet
them. UNIFEM has developed an analytical tool for
determining women’s specific needs and has worked
with the United Nations Development Group Working
Group on Crisis Prevention and Recovery and with the

6

The third priority for action is women’s safety. The
risk of sexual violence after a conflict keeps women from
resuming market activities and girls from going to
school, and it discourages women from engaging in
politics. The trauma, stigma and social ostracism
endured by survivors of sexual violence lead to family
and community breakdown, eroding the social fabric
and creating long-term obstacles to peacebuilding.
Above all, failure to prosecute crimes of sexual
violence sends the message that perpetrators can act
with impunity. This makes a mockery of efforts to
reassert the rule of law. I also note with great concern
that increased numbers of women defenders of human
rights were threatened or murdered in the last year,
particularly in Afghanistan and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. UNIFEM welcomes resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) and, as a founder member of the
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict,
is
committed
to
supporting
their
implementation. Women’s safety must be made a priority
in the reform of national security and justice sectors.
The fourth priority is women’s livelihood
recovery. A central part of peacebuilding is economic
recovery. That usually translates into job creation for
young men, often at the expense of adequate
investment in women’s employment and livelihood
needs. In particular, women need land rights and
control of productive assets. Women’s agricultural and
market activities sustain food security, as well as large
numbers of family members. Providing women with
credit and protecting their property rights would have a
significant multiplier effect on peacebuilding. Securing
women’s land and property rights must be a major
focus of recovery efforts and should be addressed in
peace negotiations.
UNIFEM notes with appreciation the recent
Security Council resolutions 1820 (2008), 1882 (2009),

09-54136

S/PV.6196

1888 (2009) and, today, 1889 (2009). They represent
building blocks of a potentially powerful system for
equalizing women’s participation in conflict resolution
and peacebuilding, strengthening the protection of
women during and after conflict and ensuring longterm prevention of conflict. Resolutions 1820 (2008)
and 1888 (2009) address key elements of the protection
pillar. The other two pillars require a response that is
just as creative and determined. The tenth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000) gives us the opportunity to
build this determined response together.
I conclude with two priorities needed to make the
tenth anniversary a time for strengthening accountability
in the agenda of women and peace and security.
First, we need consistent reporting mechanisms
and indicators against which to report. The new
resolution today calls for the development of indicators
on resolution 1325 (2000) — a call that UNIFEM is
committed to answering. The difficulty of obtaining
data must not be a reason for not trying to get it. It is
time for us all to count the numbers of women at the
peace table, the numbers of women raped in war, the
numbers of internally displaced women who never
recover their property, the numbers of women
defenders of human rights killed for speaking out. All
of this counts, and we are counting.
We should also set targets to report against next
year. For one, we can aim for at least a 50 per cent
increase in the number of female uniformed
peacekeeping personnel. A 50 per cent increase in a
low number is not difficult. We should set a higher
target for increasing the number of women mediators
and special representatives of the Secretary-General. A
third target could be earmarking at least 15 per cent of
post-conflict funding for women’s empowerment and
recovery needs.
The second priority is a leadership and
accountability system for resolution 1325 (2000).
UNIFEM welcomes the suggestion in the new
resolution that the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture should review the issue of strengthening
women’s contributions to recovery and sustained
peace. Beyond the Peacebuilding Commission, we
must prepare for next year by planning for a stronger
system-wide architecture for leadership, expertise,
funding, monitoring and accountability with regard to
the agenda of women and peace and security. This must
be an important part of the new gender entity.

09-54136

The President: I thank Ms. Alberdi for her
statement. I now give the floor to Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi
Amin, representative of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security.
Ms. Amin: I would like to thank the Security
Council for the invitation to speak here today. I am
speaking on behalf of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security, a coalition of international
civil society organizations that advocates for the equal
and full participation of women in all efforts to
maintain international peace and security.
I am here today in my capacity as an advocate for
the political, economic and social rights of women in
Somalia. In 2000, my colleagues and I formed the
Sixth Clan, a Somali women’s clan, to carve out a
space for women in the male-dominated political
world. Through this Sixth Clan identity, for the first
time in Somali history, women participated as equal
partners and decision-makers in the peace process, and
we ensured quotas for women in parliament. This was
the first time that women had been represented in a
peace process in Somalia. After numerous previous
attempts, the peace and reconciliation process in which
we participated was the first to be successful.
This open debate comes at a time of increased
international focus on women in conflict situations.
Last week, the Security Council adopted resolution
1888 (2009), and today the Council adopted resolution
1889 (2009), which lays out important next steps
regarding international obligations to ensure women’s
rights in conflict. We welcome the advances heralded
by those resolutions, such as the new support structure
to combat the use of sexual violence in conflict
situations and to ensure justice for survivors of such
violence. We also welcome the continued recognition
that women in conflict situations are not only victims
but also powerful agents for peace and security in their
communities.
However, without accountability with regard to
these resolutions, persistent impediments to their
implementation will remain. The support of Council
members is needed to ensure the strong high-level
leadership, the coherent and systematic approach
towards implementation and the concrete monitoring
mechanism to address gaps in the system that those
resolutions necessitate.
As the Security Council rightly noted nine years ago
in resolution 1325 (2000), the meaningful participation of

7

S/PV.6196

women in all levels of decision-making is integral to
conflict transformation, post-conflict stability and postconflict rebuilding. The Council has reinforced that
sentiment in its subsequent resolutions on women and
peace and security, as well as in many country-specific
resolutions, but without providing an accountability
structure for implementation. As a result, women
remain on the margins of peace talks, to the detriment
of society as a whole.
As I know from my experience in Somalia,
women have the potential to add immense value to
peace processes and negotiations. The women with
whom I worked demonstrated tolerance, compassion
and forgiveness and came up with practical solutions,
all of which are the basic tenets of reconciliation. In
the Somali process, women often represented and
spoke for the silent majority: unarmed civilians, who
are mainly women and children. That silent majority
needs the voice that these women brought to the table.
We know that the contributions of women to the
peace process are vital and worthy. Women speak not
only about so-called women’s issues; as we can see
from the practical lessons learned in Somalia, women
can speak at the highest level about key political,
social and economic issues relevant to sustainable
peace, such as clean water, health and education.
Women’s participation in peace processes is not
optional; it is a requirement. However, it is not only the
job of women to bring these voices and issues into
conflict resolution and rebuilding efforts; men also
must ensure that women’s rights and interests are
meaningfully addressed in all peace processes and
included in peace agreements and conflict
transformation planning, such as that involving
security sector and judicial reform and the provision of
services; in addressing impunity; and in the truth and
reconciliation process.
Twelve months from now, the international
community will again turn its focus to resolution 1325
(2000), to commemorate the tenth anniversary of its
adoption by the Security Council. We now look to you,
the members of the international community, to live up
to your obligations to women in conflict by ensuring
that women are engaged in all levels of decisionmaking in conflict resolution processes and that the
rights and interests of women are addressed in such
processes, and by achieving a marked increase in the

8

number of women in any peacebuilding and civilian
peacekeeping support provided by your Governments.
Your concrete support for accountability, leadership,
and resourcing is essential. Over the next 12 months, we
urge each of you to support key developments within the
United Nations system by ensuring that the new
consolidated United Nations gender entity for women and
its Under-Secretary-General are well resourced; by
supporting the Secretary-General’s appointment of a
special representative on women and peace and
security; and by ensuring that gender expertise is
further mainstreamed in United Nations entities such as
the Department of Political Affairs.
Finally, I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Council today. We women
are not only victims in conflict, but also agents for
positive change. Women have shown courage,
commitment and determination in such situations. We
have been positive contributors to peace processes. We
often risk our lives to take such actions.
What women still lack is coherent and practical
support from the international community. Women need
such support to secure their places in decision-making
positions and to help end conflicts and rebuild countries
emerging from them in order to ensure sustainable
peace after they have devastated our communities.
We look forward to all of you here in this room
today and in the broader international community
providing that concrete support. Without your support
for women in conflict, our dreams of a safer world and
of ensuring true international peace and security will
be put at risk.
The President: I thank Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi
Amin for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin, Sir, by congratulating you and your delegation on
Viet Nam’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would like also, through
Ambassador DiCarlo, to thank Ambassador Rice and the
United States delegation for a very productive and
distinguished presidency of the Council last month.
Ambassador Le Luong Minh has our best wishes for
the often delicate task of presiding over the Council
and discerning the balance of views among its
members.

09-54136

S/PV.6196

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
personally chairing this debate on a very important
issue. We are delighted to welcome you to lead us in
this effort. We are also very grateful to the Deputy
Secretary-General, to the Secretary-General’s Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, to the Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women and to the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security for their insights and their advice
and encouragement to us this morning.
We have a saying in the United Kingdom that
sometimes you can stand for ages and ages at a bus
stop waiting for a bus to come, and then suddenly two
or three come at the same time. And it feels a little bit
like that on this issue in the Council at the moment.
But nine years on from the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000) we are glad to see the issue of
women and peace and security receiving renewed
attention in this Chamber with debates on different
aspects two weeks in a row. We have come a long way
since 2000. The resolution we have adopted today is an
indication that these issues are acknowledged as central
to many areas of the Council’s work.
But our consideration of these issues has also
been prompted by the lack of implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). During last week’s debate on
sexual violence in armed conflict (see S/PV.6195), we
again heard heartbreaking and harrowing stories. At an
Arria Formula meeting which I chaired in June, we
were reminded of the fact that women and women’s
civil society groups are all but excluded from peace
processes and mediation. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2009/465) provides a depressing analysis of
the many obstacles and challenges to women’s
participation.
But we are heartened by the excellent effort led
by the Secretary-General to address the lack of women
in senior United Nations positions. He himself has
appointed three of the nine women who have ever held
the post of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and he, of course, also appointed the Deputy
Secretary-General, who is with us today. The numbers
of women are growing steadily amongst key United
Nations leadership functions in the field. But there has
still never been a female special envoy.
Today’s debate, however, is about the particular
contribution of women to peacebuilding. It is about

09-54136

seizing what has been called the golden-hour window
of opportunity at the point of emergence from conflict:
the point in time when it is all too easy for a fragile
peace to break; the point in time when we must ensure
that all actors in society are empowered to contribute
fully to the search for sustainable peace; the point in
time when women could make such a huge and lasting
difference if enabled to do so.
The Security Council has agreed that we need to
focus more attention on the linkages between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Ensuring the
engagement of the local female population is one
obvious such link: empowered women both make
peace and build it. And incidentally, this is not a new
insight — very far from it. The playwright
Aristophanes dramatized it for war-weary Athenians in
his comic play Lysistrata nearly 2,500 years ago.
Women have a pivotal role to play. Although
often survivors of some of the worst effects of conflict,
women are usually relied upon to form the foundation
of a post-conflict society. They frequently perform this
role with neither say over the peace process nor voice
in any post-conflict planning.
In resolution 1888 (2009), the Council took
further steps to end impunity for the barbarous
perpetrators of sexual violence against women and
children in conflict. We now need to identify practical
ways to assure women a central role in peacekeeping
and post-conflict peacebuilding. That is, we need to
improve our record in implementing resolution 1325
(2000).
We have one year remaining before the tenth
anniversary of that resolution. That will be an
important moment for the Council. We will want then
to take stock of progress and set an ambitious forward
agenda. To ensure that there will be real progress to
take stock of, in the year ahead we will need to, first,
generate imaginative solutions to the many obstacles to
implementation, making use of the whole United
Nations system. The steering committee to be
established under the chairmanship of the Deputy
Secretary-General, which we have welcomed in
resolution 1889 (2009) this morning, will play a vital
part in this.
We must see linkages across the system and fit
responses to the gaps which are identified. The
composite United Nations gender entity will also help
achieve that goal. In its resolution 63/311, adopted last

9

S/PV.6196

month, the General Assembly gave strong support to
the establishment of the entity. We hope that that will
now be taken forward expeditiously.
Secondly, we must increase the number and
standard of national-level implementation strategies,
drawing upon peer experience and the excellent
examples set recently by Liberia, Uganda and Chile.
And thirdly, we must finalize and agree indicators
to measure progress. We need data on success or
failure in implementing specific provisions. We need to
know what works and what does not. Today’s
resolution should help kick-start those efforts.
For our part, the United Kingdom is currently
reviewing our national action plan for implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), one of only 16 of such
national plans as the Deputy Secretary-General noted
earlier. Our review is designed to ensure that our
policies not only remain consistent with that resolution
but also promote its implementation around the globe.
We urge other Member States to do the same.
We all have a role to play in ensuring that a full
and effective contribution can be made by women
during peace processes, that their needs are met as
survivors of conflict, that their voices are heard in local
civil society and that greater numbers of talented
women are appointed to senior peacekeeping and
peacebuilding positions.
As a Council, we need to ensure that we are
doing whatever we can to enhance women’s vital role
in conflict resolution and peacebuilding, a role without
which real and lasting peace will often be
unachievable.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Let me begin by extending
my congratulations to you, Sir, and to your delegation
on your assumption of the presidency for the month of
October and assuring you of the full cooperation and
support of my delegation. At the same time, I extend
our thanks to the delegation of the United States for
their able leadership during the very difficult month of
September. I express our appreciation to you, Sir, and
to the Vietnamese presidency for initiating this meeting
and for your leadership role in the adoption of today’s
resolution 1889 (2009). I also welcome your personal
contribution, Sir, reflected in your presence and your
chairing of the meeting today.
Our thanks also go to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General

10

on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and the representative of
the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security for their presence, their contribution and their
dedicated work.
Croatia welcomes the focus on the need of
women and girls in post-conflict situations for
sustainable peace and security. Croatia also welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) (S/2009/456)
and its recommendations.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union. Here, I shall make
additional remarks in my national capacity.
Almost a decade has passed since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). We have witnessed much
progress in the area of the empowerment of women.
Women have been trained in leadership, and there has
been an increase in the number of female peacekeeping
personnel. The Security Council has, for its part,
contributed to significant advancements on the issues
of women and children that are on its agenda. It has
adopted resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) on
sexual violence in armed conflict, under the umbrella
issue of women and peace and security, as well as
resolution 1882 (2009) that addresses, among other
matters, the problem of sexual violence against girls.
These commitments are commendable, but we are
of the belief that putting words into action is the only
way that we can approach the resolution of remaining
issues. And those issues are many. As many situations
on the agenda of the Security Council have shown,
women still have a long way to go in order to fulfil the
empowerment goals as well as to fully realize their
human rights, not only in armed conflict but in times of
peace as well. Women still do not enjoy equal
participation or full involvement in mediation and
negotiation processes. Nor have they participated
equally in post-conflict reconstruction processes.
Notwithstanding these shortfalls, what concerns us
most is the telling failure that women and girls are still
not guaranteed safety even in camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons.
As reported by UNIFEM, there is a substantial
gap in financing women’s needs in post-conflict
situations. How did that happen? The answer is clear:

09-54136

S/PV.6196

women have not been included from the very
beginning of peace processes, especially in
peace
negotiations. It is essential that we reach the goal of
having at least 30 per cent of the members of the
official negotiating delegations whom we appoint be
women, so that the needs of women in post-conflict
peacebuilding are recognized and are addressed from
the very beginning.

relevant United Nations organs and organizations
should engage in cooperation while at the same time
carrying out their respective mandates, so as to make
use of the synergy to achieve the best results. In that
connection, I would like to underscore the two
following points.

Croatia has included elements of resolution 1325
(2000) in its national strategy on gender equality, but
we are aware that gaps in the implementation of that
resolution need to be continuously monitored. In that
regard, my Government extends its support to the
leadership of the composite gender entity that is to be
established within the United Nations. We see it as an
important tool in advancing the issue of women and
peace and security.

First, responding to the needs of women in postconflict reconstruction and enabling them to play their
full role form an important link in the comprehensive
and full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Respect for and protection of women and girls are
manifestations of social progress and civilization and
are an indispensable element of a mature social system.
Respect for and protection of women’s rights and
interests should be incorporated in the entire peace
process. The special needs and concerns of women and
girls should be accommodated.

Allow me also to use this opportunity to extend
my appreciation to the women of the region of SouthEast Europe, who have experienced the burden of the
destruction and violence of armed conflict but have
found ways to reach across borders to connect with
each other and to serve as peacebuilders in the region.
The Council may rest assured that Croatia, under the
leadership of its first female Prime Minister, will
continue to give its full support to all areas of the
women and peace and security agenda.

Women should have greater access to
participation and decision-making, and their right in
that regard should be institutionalized. Peace in postconflict countries is often fragile. Without the effective
participation of women, there cannot be lasting peace
and long-term social stability. Women should fully
enjoy the right of decision-making and participation in
the post-conflict peacebuilding and development of
their countries. They can provide staunch support for
hard-earned peace.

Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I wish to thank the Vietnamese Government
for initiating this open debate of the Security Council
and Your Excellency, Mr. President, for presiding over
this meeting in person.

Secondly, the countries concerned should
shoulder the primary responsibility for addressing the
needs of women and girls in post-conflict situations
and comprehensively implement resolution 1325
(2000). Armed conflicts in different parts of the world
vary in cause and nature. The Governments and people
of the countries concerned have the best understanding
of the needs of local women and girls.

Nine years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), a milestone document that has
laid the groundwork for international cooperation in
the area of women and peace and security. Since then,
the Council has taken a number of follow-up actions
under the resolution, and relevant Member States have
also taken vigorous measures in that regard.
Women are shouldering an increasing share of the
responsibility to maintain world peace and are playing
a significant role in peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding throughout the world. As the Chinese
saying goes, women can hold up half of the sky.
Nevertheless, owing to the changed nature of conflicts
and a combination of complex factors, the international
community still has a long way to go in fully and
effectively implementing resolution 1325 (2000). The

09-54136

Post-conflict countries are often faced with
numerous tasks and difficulties. The international
community should provide them with generous
financial and technical support and should help them to
enhance capacity-building. While providing external
support, the international community and donors
should respect the will of recipient countries, rely on
local governments, fully put to use the enthusiasm of
local women and girls and encourage them to engage in
the peacebuilding process as owners of their countries.
The Security Council has just adopted resolution
1889 (2009). I appreciate the efforts made by the
Vietnamese delegation in drafting the resolution and

11

S/PV.6196

during the consultations on it. Resolution 1889 (2009)
requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Security Council two reports in 2010, one on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the other
on the needs of women and girls in post-conflict
situations.
A few days ago, the Council adopted resolution
1888 (2009), which requests the Secretary-General to
continue to submit annual reports on combating sexual
violence in armed conflict. We hope that the Secretariat
will strengthen internal coordination, heed the requests
of the two resolutions, avoid duplication of work and
waste of resources and make full use of the relevant
information, in particular to provide high-quality
reports to the Council.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States): My delegation
would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Council today. You can be assured of our full support
during this busy month. We would also like to express
the gratitude of the United States for the cooperation
that we received from fellow Council members during
our presidency.
The United States believes that the Council’s
continued focus on woman and peace and security is
critical, and we are very appreciative that the
delegation of Viet Nam has organized this important
debate today. We thank Deputy Secretary-General
Migiro for her presence and welcome the message of
the Secretary-General that she has conveyed to us. We
were also pleased to hear the comments of
Ms. Mayanja, Ms. Alberdi and Ms. Amin, and thank
them and Deputy Secretary-General Migiro for their
commitment and all their efforts to improve conditions
for women in conflict situations.
In his recent report (S/2009/465), the SecretaryGeneral notes that while much has been done in
response to resolution 1325 (2000) in the nine years
since its adoption, armed conflict continues to have a
devastating impact on women and girls, all too often
leaving them wounded, traumatized, sexually
assaulted, socially and economically marginalized or
without political power. The United States is in
complete agreement with the Secretary-General on the
key points. Member States must renew their
commitment to resolution 1325 (2000) and intensify
their efforts to implement its provisions. We strongly
support the Secretary-General’s proposals for action
and resolution 1889 (2009), which we adopted today.

12

We have heard many times in this Chamber that
more women should be included in peace processes
and post-conflict deliberations. If a sustainable peace is
to be achieved in any post-conflict situation, a peace
agreement must take into account the concerns of those
most harmed by conflicts, but more often than not
women are excluded from peace negotiations and
peacebuilding efforts. In fact, the United Nations
Development Fund for Women points out that since
1992, only 2.4 per cent of signatories to peace
agreements have been women and women’s
participation in negotiating delegations has averaged
about 7 per cent.
Women have often led the call for peace in
conflict-torn societies. Let us recall the example of
Liberia, whose grass-roots women’s organizations had
a direct and visible impact on peace negotiations and
post-conflict reconstruction efforts. The activism of
those groups on behalf of the welfare of the average
citizen helped to break the impasse produced by
leaders of warring factions in the struggle for political
dominance. However, to do that, those Liberian women
had to travel to Accra, Ghana, and demonstrate outside
the seat of negotiations. Women should not have to go
to such great lengths to be heard.
The Secretary-General rightly notes that Member
States should ensure that women participate in
decision-making. He adds that the international
community should pursue a strategy to ensure women’s
participation in all peace processes, including by
providing appropriate training and capacity-building
programmes towards that end.
Resolution 1325 (2000) emphasizes the
responsibility that all States have to put an end to
impunity and prosecute those responsible for crimes
against humanity and war crimes, including those
relating to sexual violence and other assaults against
women and girls. Resolution 1820 (2008) established a
clear link between maintaining international peace and
security and preventing and responding to the use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war.
Last week this Council took decisive action in
addressing the sexual violence that all too often
follows in conflict’s wake, by adopting resolution 1888
(2009). The resolution sends an unequivocal message:
violence against women and children will not be
tolerated and must be stopped. The Council made it
clear that ending impunity is essential, if a society

09-54136

S/PV.6196

wracked by conflict or recovering from it is to come to
terms with abuses committed against civilians in the past
and to prevent such outrages from occurring in the future.
The United States looks forward to the complete
and rapid implementation of resolution 1888 (2009).
That includes the resolution’s call to appoint a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to lead,
coordinate and advocate for efforts to end conflictrelated sexual violence. As Secretary of State Clinton
said in this Chamber when the resolution was adopted:
“It is time for all of us to assume our
responsibility to go beyond condemning this
behaviour and take concrete steps to end it, to
make it socially unacceptable, to recognize it is
not cultural; it is criminal.” (S/PV.6195)
The Secretary-General emphasizes that we need
to increase the number of women who serve as
mediators, special representatives, special envoys and
peacekeepers around the world. My Government
commends the Secretary-General for his leadership and
his efforts to increase the number of women in senior
United Nations positions. We hope that these
appointments will continue to increase. We also
commend Member States such as Jamaica and India for
ensuring that women figure prominently in their
peacekeeping contingents.
We join others in the call for more systematic
United Nations reporting on women’s participation and
inclusion in peacebuilding and planning, and we
request the Secretary-General to continue to appoint
gender advisers to United Nations missions and to
develop a set of indicators to track implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1889 (2009).
The United Nations must do all it can to keep the
issue of women and peace and security in the spotlight,
especially as we look to the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the creation of a composite
gender entity, an entity that the United States strongly
supports. We must all work together to ensure that half
of the world’s population is accorded fully equal rights
and fully equal opportunities, and we must work to end
violence against women, which destroys the very fabric
of societies and hinders stability and lasting peace.
Thank you again, Sir, for providing this occasion
to address this important issue.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): May I
begin by congratulating Viet Nam on its assumption of

09-54136

the presidency of the Security Council and wish them
every success for the month of October. I would like to
thank, of course, the American delegation for having
exercised the presidency last month.
We welcome the initiative taken by Viet Nam in
organizing this public debate on women and peace and
security, which is dedicated to responding to the needs
of women in post-conflict situations. Much has been
done, particularly by the United Nations, to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), but these efforts must be
continued.
First and foremost, the Council has endeavoured
to systematically introduce the approach recommended
by resolution 1325 (2000) into the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and to persuade the parties to
conflicts to themselves incorporate this approach in the
peace process.
Subsequently, the Secretariat and the agencies,
funds and programmes have stepped up activities to
protect women, including in post-conflict situations. I
would in this connection like to warmly congratulate
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, Special Adviser on Gender Issues
and Advancement of Women, Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Ms. Inés Alberdi, Executive Director of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM). I
also thank Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi Amin for her testimony
to us.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/465)
reflects the proliferation of initiatives aimed at training
peacekeeping operations personnel, assist women who
are the victims of violence and combat impunity. These
initiatives include the one carried out by France, in
partnership with UNICEF, aimed at reintegrating child
soldiers into civil society.
But the United Nations is not alone in acting. The
European Union has also demonstrated the importance
it attaches to the protection of women by adopting
guidelines on violence against women. It has also, at
France’s instigation, adopted a comprehensive policy
regarding the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and an updated operational document on the
European policy for security and defence in this regard.
The majority of this task, however, remains to be
carried out. A long list remains of dramatic situations
that the international community must tackle, including
abuses committed in the Democratic Republic of the

13

S/PV.6196

Congo, Nepal, Burma, the Central African Republic
and Burundi. These examples serve as reminders to us.
Less than a week after the important adoption of
resolution 1888 (2009), aimed at bolstering the efforts
of the international community to combat sexual
violence in armed conflict, the new resolution that the
Council has just adopted incorporates major advances
to improve implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The definition of indicators by the Secretariat over the
coming months to allow all interested parties to follow
more closely the progress that has been made in
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is a first step
that is both practical and useful.
I also welcome the fact that the Council has taken
to heart the observation made before it on 30
September by the French Minister of State for
Cooperation and la Francophonie, who stated that
transparency, cooperation and coordination of efforts
between the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and a new
special representative of the Secretary-General for
sexual violence and armed conflict will be essential. In
addition, the Council has for the first time adopted
forceful language regarding the medical needs of
women who have been the victims of rape or other
sexual violence, particularly sexual and reproductive
health.
France believes that certain organizational steps
to be taken by the Secretariat, particularly within the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs, will make it possible to
better take into account the role of women in crisis
planning and in preparation for emerging from crisis,
thus ensuring a better implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).
The path to follow is therefore clear, and it is up
to us to embark on that path. In order take stock of the
progress that has been made and will be made in this
regard, France supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to organize a ministerial meeting at
United Nations Headquarters on the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in October
2010.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to welcome you,
Mr. President, among us and express our appreciation
to you for conducting our work in this important
meeting. We thank the delegation of Viet Nam for

14

organizing this important meeting. I would also like to
thank the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) and the representative of the non
governmental organizations for their valuable statements.
Almost nine years have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000), during which
it also adopted several resolutions and presidential
statements on the protection of women during and after
armed conflict, their participation in the prevention of
conflict and post-conflict decision-making and their
role in the economic and social spheres. However, we
are still far from reaching the desired goals. Every field
report and all the data indicate that women and
children are increasingly the main victims of conflict,
often being the main targets of combatants and armed
groups who deliberately subject them to various forms
of aggression, human rights violations and forced
displacement. Unfortunately, those practices often
continue after the end of conflict.
In addressing the empowerment of women and
their special needs, especially in post-conflict
situations, we would be remiss if we failed to condemn
the physical and psychological suffering of Palestinian
women as a result of the Zionist occupying authority’s
continuous violations of their human rights, its
violations of international law and its recent crimes in
Gaza.
We strongly condemn the plethora of ongoing
rampant acts of violence and aggression against women
and girls during and after armed conflict, including
those taking place in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Somalia and other regions. Libya would also
like to underscore the importance of promoting the role
of women in the political, social and economic spheres
during peacetime, as women are the main guarantors in
preventing the outbreak of conflict, anarchy and
insecurity and the ensuing crimes and human rights
violations.
Libya has therefore launched several initiatives to
empower women and enhance their role in African
countries. In cooperation with Nigeria and Cuba, we
have established a South-South health-care programme.
In 2006, we launched the Al-Qadhafi programme for
African youth, women and children, which places
particular emphasis on health care, education, vocational
training and human rights. Based on our belief in the

09-54136

S/PV.6196

important role of women in civic peace and development,
our laws provide for full equality between men and
women. Women in Libya face no obstacle to being
legally employed, and Libyan women serve in senior
posts in the army, police and judicial system.
On the continental level, we would like to
reaffirm the commitment of all African States to gender
equality and the empowerment of women, in
implementation of the African Union’s Constitutive
Act. In that regard, the African Union will soon launch
its African Women’s Decade for the period 2010 to
2020. In addition, I am pleased to inform the Council
that the African Union’s Department of Peace and
Security has issued a framework document on postconflict development and reconstruction that includes
guidelines on needs assessment. Both documents
contain strategies and procedures for the employment
of women and the reinvigoration of the employment
sector. The Economic Commission for Africa’s
department for women’s development and gender
equality will be the focal point responsible for
women’s issues and their participation in African
Union activities, including the promotion of gender
equality and equal access by men and women to senior
positions and public office.
In 2004, the African Union adopted an action
plan at Ouagadougou that gave special priority to the
empowerment of women, their access to the workplace,
their effective participation in the adoption of povertyreduction strategies, the mainstreaming of gender issues
in all poverty-reduction programmes and policies and the
promotion of employment and equal opportunities for
men and women in the area of employment. That plan
included the following proposals for implementation.
First, women should be encouraged to participate
in free enterprise activities through the provision of
primary skills training and by increasing their access to
credit and capital. Secondly, a culture of free enterprise
should be supported by providing assistance to women
entrepreneurs. Thirdly, support should be mobilized for
the implementation of legislation that provides for
equal rights between men and women with respect to
land ownership, including guarantees for women’s
rights to credit, inheritance and ownership, counselling
and services.
There is no doubt that the numerous resolutions
and presidential statements that have been adopted by
the Security Council constitute a major step towards

09-54136

protecting women and promoting their rights.
However, it is not enough merely to adopt resolutions
and statements; they must be implemented. That
requires coordination and cooperation between the
relevant bodies of the United Nations, civil society
institutions, task forces of specialized agencies.
Regional organizations and relevant governmental and
non-governmental organizations to empower women in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, humanitarian and
development processes. That will make an effective
contribution to States and to their implementation of
legislation and activities to prevent gender-based
violence and create an environment conducive to
accountability and reporting on women’s status.
It is a source of concern that the promotion of the
rights of women and gender equality is often not
considered a priority in the aftermath of conflict. It is
for that reason that we have emphasized the importance
of women’s development and empowerment on the
national level and in all areas of life.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
extend my congratulations to the delegation of Viet
Nam on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. I also wish
to express our appreciation to the United States for its
excellent leadership during the month of September.
We are also very grateful to you, Mr. President, for
personally presiding over this important discussion. I
would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Migiro for her presence here today and for delivering
the message from the Secretary-General. Obviously,
our gratitude goes also to the representatives of United
Nations entities and the NGO Working Group for their
useful briefings, because their dedication to promoting
the role of women in peace and security is greatly
appreciated.
Even nine years after the adoption of the very
important landmark resolution 1325 (2000), we cannot
fail to see that many innocent women and children live
under fear and want in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Clearly, much remains to be done. Japan
therefore welcomes today’s debate and the decision of
the Council to adopt resolution 1889 (2009).
Today I would like to address three issues: the
role of women, the protection of women and
empowering women.
First, it is vitally important to ensure that
women’s perspectives and the particular needs of

15

S/PV.6196

women and girls are reflected at every stage of the
peace process. We need to promote the full and equal
engagement of women from the earliest stages of the
process of peace negotiations and peacebuilding,
because that is the most effective way to prevent the
recurrence of conflict.
We welcome the fact that three women are now
serving as heads of missions. Women are playing
indispensable roles in some peacekeeping operations.
One example is the Indian women’s formed police unit in
Liberia, which is very impressive. The Peacebuilding
Commission, for its part, has incorporated a gender
perspective in its country-specific peacebuilding
strategies.
We are also encouraged by the commitment of the
Secretary-General to increase the number of women in
decision-making positions, as confirmed by the Deputy
Secretary-General this morning. We urge other heads of
international organizations and regional organizations to
do the same and appoint more women as high-level
mediators and members of negotiating teams.
Secondly, we must extend support to women
suffering from the consequences of conflict by working
to provide them with greater physical security. The
Security Council has mandated many United Nations
peacekeeping operations to respond to violence against
civilians, but the Council has not fully succeeded in
meeting the high expectations.
The Council should continue to explore how
United Nations missions can better protect women and
children in conflict, with adequate resources, training
and logistical support. We would like the importance of
protection of women to be fully incorporated into
training
programmes
for
peacekeepers
and
peacebuilding experts on the ground, before they are
deployed. It is important to attach higher priority to the
protection of women in mission planning and to
strengthen gender units through the placement of
gender advisers.
It is totally unacceptable that perpetrators of
sexual and other serious violence against women and
girls are shielded by a culture of impunity. The culture
of impunity is a direct threat to women’s security, and
it also hinders women in playing the vital role they
might otherwise play in post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts. We need to redouble our efforts to end
impunity by assisting countries in strengthening

16

political leadership and the rule of law. Targeted
sanction measures should be effectively utilized.
We hope that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to be appointed soon in accordance
with resolution 1888 (2009) will take a strong lead in
addressing this serious issue.
Thirdly, we need to focus not only on protection
but also on the empowerment of women, who could be
strong promoters of the peacebuilding process. We must
find a way to ensure the empowerment of women in postconflict situations, by improving their socio-economic
conditions. This can be achieved b promoting access to
health services, education, vocational training, income
generation activities and land and property rights.
Unless we succeed in creating such conditions, I
am afraid that it difficult to consolidate peace and
prevent the recurrence of another conflict.
This is a major challenge the Council must
address. We are therefore pleased that resolution 1889
(2009), just adopted, stressed this aspect: the importance
of empowering women and girls in responding to their
particular needs in post-conflict situations.
In that regard, I would like to emphasize that the
human security approach that Japan has been
advocating for more than 10 years provides valuable
guidelines both to protect people’s lives and dignity
from serious threats and to empower them to realize
their full potential.
One good example is cited in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report: the project is funded through
the United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security to
deliver health care, education and counselling to
women and girls in Nepal who have been left
vulnerable by conflict in that country.
In closing, I would like to recall the suggestion I
made on a prior occasion when we discussed this issue:
to compile a handbook with a list of good practices on
women’s participation in the process of reconciliation
and peacebuilding. I very much hope that appropriate
follow-up can be made by the Secretariat.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
begin, Mr. President, by welcoming you to this meeting
of the Security Council. It is an honour to have you
among us. We also recognize your delegation’s
leadership in forging this initiative in follow-up to
resolution 1325 (2000).

09-54136

S/PV.6196

Our thanks go to the Secretary-General for his
report on women and peace and security (S/2009/465),
as well as to Deputy Secretary-General Migiro for her
statement. My thanks go also to Ms. Rachel N. Mayanja,
Ms. Inés Alberdi and Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi Amin.
We congratulate the delegation of the United States
for its successful presidency of the Security Council in
September, and we wish the Vietnamese delegation every
success during its presidency this month.
Almost 10 years have passed since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), and, while some progress
has been made, the realities faced by women in conflict
and post-conflict situations continue to be a matter of
concern. Armed conflict continues to have a
disproportionate impact on women and girls, and
sexual violence continues to destroy the lives of
thousands of them. We reiterate our appeal that in any
conflict situation the parties recognize that it is essential
under all circumstances to respect and ensure respect for
the provisions of international humanitarian law.
Mexico is of the view that resolutions 1882
(2009) and 1888 (2009), which address sexual violence
in armed conflict, constitute a positive step in
strengthening applicable international law with respect
to the protection of civilian populations in armed conflict,
in particular the most vulnerable groups affected by
sexual violence, including women and children.
The challenge now is to ensure full
implementation on the ground, and resolution 1889
(2009), which we adopted this morning, is a very
valuable contribution in that regard. We hope that the
special representative of the Secretary-General on
sexual violence in armed conflict and the team of
experts — both called for in last week’s resolution
1888 (2009) — will contribute to progress in this area.
We recognize the efforts being made by the
United Nations Development Programme, the
International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, the World Food Programme, the
United Nations Development Fund for Women and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in promoting
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We hope
that the outcome of negotiations on the new gender
entity will expedite progress, which has been slow thus
far, on the implementation of that resolution.
Mexico reaffirms how important it is that the
mandates of peacekeeping missions include measures

09-54136

to support Governments in formulating national action
plans for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We can wait no longer for the international
community to give due priority to the role of women as
active protagonists, not solely as victims, in order to
remedy their marginal participation in peace processes
and mediation. We fully support the Secretary-General
appeal for a strategy to increase the number of women
in senior United Nations positions, in particular as
special representatives, special envoys, high-level
mediators and officials in peacekeeping and political
missions.
We also view it as especially important to request
of the Secretary-General a series of indicators in order
to better and more effectively assess the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We consider
that this would be a valuable tool that will enable us to
make progress next year, when we mark the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
The lack of follow-up mechanisms for resolution
1325 (2000) has hampered the gathering of information
about implementation on the ground. Mexico considers
of particular importance the Secretary-General’s call
for assessment indicators to measure progress and
shortcomings in the implementation of that resolution,
and on that basis to take action to fill the gaps that
have been identified. We also consider it appropriate to
request the Secretary-General to include in all reports
on conflict situations information on the impact on
women and girls and their particular needs, as well as
to identify the obstacles that stand in the way of
meeting these needs.
Lastly, we would like to reiterate that our
delegation truly believes that resolution 1889 (2009),
adopted this morning, represents a significant step
towards ensuring full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). We have now ensured that, by 2010, we
will have the necessary tools to allow us to better
understand the challenges and obstacles to be
overcome and, above all, the measures we must take to
guarantee the full participation of women in conflict
prevention and in the building of lasting peace.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Mr. President, at the outset, allow me to
welcome you as the President of the Security Council
and to extend my gratitude to the delegation of Viet
Nam for today’s initiative of convening an open debate
of the Council to discuss the status of implementation

17

S/PV.6196

of resolution 1325 (2000). We would like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her presentation of the
thematic report on this topic (S/2009/465).
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we
have been able to accomplish a great deal to improve
the situation of women in armed conflicts. We note
with satisfaction that the range of issues discussed
today enjoys the growing attention not only of the
Security Council, but also of other competent United
Nations entities, including the General Assembly, the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Human Rights
Council, the Economic and Social Council and its
functional commissions, including the Commission on
the Status of Women. That having been said, the
successes achieved are insufficient to improve the
struggle on the ground against violations of women’s
rights.
Resolution 1325 (2000) remains the effective
reference for enhancing women’s roles in preventing
and settling armed conflicts, in post-conflict
reconstruction and in the protection of women’s rights
in conflict situations. There is a need in practice to
exploit the resolution’s provisions in the process of
creating equal opportunities for the participation of
women in all peacebuilding and security efforts, as
well as in bolstering their role in decision-making.
The basis for this approach is to ensure genuine
gender equality. Women can stand to make a more
substantial contribution to all aspects of preventing and
settling conflict. Moreover, there is a need to devote
greater attention to mainstreaming the gender
component into the poverty reduction and equality
work of the United Nations, poverty and inequality
being the main sources of conflict. In particular, we
can refer here to the expanded participation by women
in decision-making on socio-economic issues and the
elaboration of national frameworks to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals.
We welcome resolution 1888 (2009), adopted on
30 September, on sexual violence during armed conflicts.
However, sexual violence is far from being the only
problem with respect to violations of women’s rights. We
must bear in mind that women and children continue to
fall victim to premeditated attacks, including terrorist
acts, indiscriminate or excessive use of force, as well
as other violations of international humanitarian law.
The varied nature of violence should lead us to
devote due attention to all its categories. In that

18

connection, we view resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888
(2009) as complementing resolution 1325 (2000),
which sets out the general parameters for the protection
of women in armed conflicts.
Next year, we will commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
In that regard, the Russian Federation welcomes the
idea of organizing a set of events in 2009 and 2010 at
the national, regional and global levels in order to
spread awareness of that document. We cherish the
hope that such events will be used not only to report
successes achieved in implementing the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000), but also to consider and gain
an understanding of outstanding problems and of
further steps to bolster the regime for the protection of
women in armed conflicts.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): Mr. President, I would like, on behalf of the
delegation of Burkina Faso, to congratulate you
warmly on assuming the presidency of the Council and
to assure your delegation of our full support. We also
take this opportunity to congratulate the delegation of
the United States of America on its very fruitful
presidency in September.
We are most grateful to you, Sir, for having
convened today’s debate and thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for her presentation of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/465), as well as all
the briefers for their important contributions and their
commitment to women.
Nine years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) and one year after the adoption of 1820 (2008),
and despite the Security Council’s repeated
recommendations and appeals, post-conflict situations
regrettably remain marked by the ongoing devastating
impact of armed conflict on women and children.
Sexual violence and recurrent violations of
women’s rights are genuine sources of concern, given
their deep physical, psychological and economic
impact on victims and their respective communities.
The emergence of extremist groups in a number of
areas and the adoption of legislation legitimizing
discriminatory practices restrict women’s full
enjoyment of their rights. Refugee camps and camps
for internally displaced persons, where they exist,
sometimes become zones of insecurity for women,
instead of serving as the islands of relative tranquility
they are supposed to be. We cannot deny that women’s

09-54136

S/PV.6196

and girls’ access to access health services and
education is weak, or ignore the difficulties they
experience in seeking to benefit from judicial
mechanisms, all of which favour the entrenchment of
impunity. Furthermore, women’s participation in the
negotiation of peace agreements remains weak, thus
preventing their specific needs from being taken
adequately into account.
Peacebuilding is first and foremost a
responsibility and a challenge that fall to States. In
countries emerging from conflict situations, priorities
are numerous and all are urgent. In such a context, the
situation of women and girls must be an absolute
priority. We must first ensure the establishment of an
adequate legislative, regulatory and judicial framework
for addressing the violation of women’s rights and the
fight against impunity, while restoring and making
accessible health services and psychological care.
Awareness-raising and the training of parties regarding
their obligations, as well as the creation of special
community programmes, will help to overcome sociocultural inertia and other obstacles to the empowerment
of women. The systematic inclusion of the gender issue
in security sector and justice reform is also a necessity.
Thus, ceasefire and peace agreements, as well as
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reinsertion
programmes, must fully incorporate the specific needs
of women and girls. Who better than women
themselves to plead this cause? We must therefore
guarantee their effective participation in all stages of
the peace process. To that end and to enable them,
where appropriate, to have the necessary tools at hand,
peacetime national policies must incorporate the
training of women in negotiation and mediation
techniques and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
In the long term and given the reality of the
growing feminization of poverty and social and
economic inequality, there is a need to provide greater
opportunities in the education of girls, livelihood
training and job creation for women, including former
combatants. Overall, States must take ownership of the
concept of women and peace and security. The
adoption of action plans towards the improved
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national level is crucial in that respect.
Most important, however, is the fact that
Governments will have to do their utmost to strengthen
the rule of law and establish institutions conducive to

09-54136

creating a climate of trust between leaders, all actors,
victims and the population as a whole, with the
ultimate objective of eliminating the deep-rooted
causes of conflict.
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is
a collective endeavour. Along with States, the
international community, including the United Nations,
has an important and unique role to play in that regard.
Every agency of the system should play its part in the
context of a common and consistent approach. The
United Nations must continue to work to strengthen
cooperation with regional, subregional and national
organizations, including civil society and other local
actors. The Security Council must continue to ensure
that the specific needs of women and girls are taken
into account in its peacekeeping mandates and in the
effective implementation of its relevant resolutions and
statements.
As to the specific issue of sexual violence, my
delegation welcomes the recent adoptions of
resolutions 1882 (2009) and 1888 (2009), which
provide for the strengthened implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008). The Council
should continue to call for increased female
participation in contingents, for the appointment of
more women as mediators, special envoys and special
representatives, and for the inclusion in reports of more
information on the particular needs of women and girls
in post-conflict situations. We cherish the hope that the
establishment of the composite gender entity by the
General Assembly will add momentum to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). None these
actions, however, will be viable if they are not backed
by human capacity-building and adequate financing.
The commemoration of the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) should offer us
all an opportunity to reiterate our firm commitment and
genuine political will to contribute to the emancipation
of women in general and the effective liberation
of those who, often the innocent victims of conflict,
must also endure the harsh conditions of personal
rehabilitation and national reconciliation.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Let me congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of October and assure you of my delegation’s
full cooperation. I thank you for convening this
important debate, over which you are personally
presiding.

19

S/PV.6196

I would also like to thank Ambassador Susan
Rice and the United States delegation for their
excellent leadership during a very eventful and fruitful
month of September.
I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Asha-Rose Migiro for her statement, as well as to
welcome the statements made by the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Adviser on Gender Issues,
Ms. Rachel Mayanja; the Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), Ms. Inés Alberdi, and Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi
Amin, representing the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security.
Uganda is committed to strengthening women’s
participation in the promotion of peace and security
within the context of conflict prevention and
resolution, eradicating sexual violence and ending
impunity in conflict-prone situations. As Uganda is a
country that has experienced an extended period of
instability, the Government has set one of its priority
goals as tracking progress on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Women’s participation in
Uganda’s political life goes beyond elective office and
has been extended to other spheres, including
peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts, as stipulated
by resolution 1325 (2000).
Uganda has an advanced, articulate and organized
women’s peace movement. Even before the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), the Uganda Government had
previously supported the efforts of women leaders,
such as Ms. Betty Bigombe, who initially led the peace
talks with the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) to end
the conflict in northern Uganda. The Uganda
Government also made provision for women’s
participation in the 2006-2008 peace talks with the
Lord’s Resistance Army in Juba, in the southern Sudan.
In addition to the two women directly on the peace
team, Uganda facilitated women’s attendance at
various meetings that were held during that process.
In addition, during the talks a gender adviser was
seconded to the Office of the Special Envoy to LRAAffected Areas. This was the result of collaboration
between UNIFEM and the United Nations Department
of Political Affairs. Uganda also ensured that close
reference was made to resolution 1325 (2000) in the
Implementation Protocols on reconciliation and
accountability; comprehensive solutions; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; and the Cessation of

20

Hostilities Agreement that were signed by both parties,
as well as the Uganda Government’s eventual peace
recovery development plan for northern Uganda, which
was launched in July 2009 to ensure that women
equally enjoy the opportunities and benefits of the
planned interventions.
Uganda is the first and only country in the world
to adopt a three-in-one national action plan on
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and the Goma
Declaration. Uganda is also one of five countries to
develop a national action plan with concrete indicators
to monitor implementation, as well as planning for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, so as to
take into consideration the needs of female and male
ex-combatants, as well as their dependants.
Uganda’s action plan focuses on the relevant
legal and policy framework, improved access to health
facilities and medical treatment for victims of sexual
and gender-based violence, women in leadership and
decision-making, the elimination of gender-based
violence in society and, finally, budget allocations for
the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) and the Goma Declaration. As we do this,
our experience has taught us that the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and, indeed,
of all other resolutions complementary to it, must begin
at the earliest stages of post-conflict peacebuilding;
otherwise, it will not yield optimum results.
It is for this reason that Uganda remains
concerned that the contribution of women to
peacebuilding is far from satisfactory, which can be
attributed to their being excluded from the decisionmaking process on the one hand and, on the other, to
inadequate financing of their requirements. This, in the
long run, compromises efforts to attain sustainable
peace and security.
Uganda is aware that the adoption of a resolution
does not automatically translate into its implementation.
This year marks the ninth since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security. In those nine years, several bottlenecks have
been identified, particularly in post-conflict situations,
ranging from the availability of funding and political
will to a lack of coordination, appropriate capacities
for implementation, as well as institutional monitoring
and evaluation.
Experience has also taught us that a simple
increase in the number of women in talks is not

09-54136

S/PV.6196

sufficient and that in-depth consultations are still
required to ensure that nothing is left out with regard to
the legitimate concerns of women.
In this regard, Uganda, in partnership with the
United Nations Population Fund, UNIFEM and the
Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on Gender Issues, held its first workshop from 14 to
16 September this year to agree on what these
indicators will be for Uganda’s action plan. The
workshop, which brought together 35 participants from
Government ministries, civil society organizations and
the international community, identified 16 indicators
out of the total 547 that were originally earmarked for
the implementation of Uganda’s action plan.
In conclusion, Uganda welcomes the adoption of
resolution 1889 (2009), as it highlights this deficit and
calls for a response to the needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations for sustainable peace and
security. We also encourage affected Member States to
establish indicators to ensure that their national action
plans for women’s participation in post-conflict
reconstruction and peacebuilding are implemented not
only in a practical, effective and coherent fashion, but
also in a way that allows for accountability.
We look forward to the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) in 2010 as a significant
milestone for Uganda’s women and, indeed, for all
women everywhere.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Mr. President, I
would first like to congratulate you and the delegation
of Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. My country and I are
also particularly grateful for your initiative to convene
this open debate on such an important issue.
We would also like to congratulate Ambassador
Susan Rice and the United States delegation on their
presidency last month — a truly remarkable month in
the history of the Security Council.
Today’s meeting will allow us to continue the
review of the implementation of landmark resolution
1325 (2000). We would like to thank the delegation of
Viet Nam for its efforts, which resulted in the adoption
of resolution 1889 (2009) today. Furthermore, I would
like to express my gratitude to Deputy SecretaryGeneral Asha-Rose Migiro for her continued leadership
and commitment to gender equality and women’s
participation. We are grateful for her statement today.

09-54136

We are equally grateful for the valuable input of
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General,
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), Ms. Inés Alberdi. We were also very happy
to listen to the presentation by Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi
Amin from the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security.
Let me say at the outset that Austria fully aligns
itself with the statement to be made by the
representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union, as well as with the statement that Costa Rica is
planning to make on behalf of the Human Security
Network.
We welcome the considerable progress that has
been made in strengthening the protection pillar of
resolution 1325 (2000) with the adoption of resolutions
1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) on sexual violence, as
well as resolution 1882 (2009) on children and armed
conflict. Let me express our hope for a quick
appointment of the special representative requested in
resolution 1888 (2009). It is our understanding that this
new special representative to address sexual violence
in armed conflict will fully take into account the
important aspects of prevention on the one hand, and
women’s participation, on the other, when carrying out
his or her mandate.
With the expansion of the monitoring and
reporting mechanisms in resolution 1882 (2009) to
situations where parties to armed conflict engage in
rape and other sexual violence against children, a
coherent and coordinated implementation of the
mandates of both the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the special representative to address sexual
violence in armed conflict will be crucial.
Progress is, however, also urgently needed on
other pillars of resolution 1325 (2000). Austria sees
great value in focusing this debate on responding to the
needs of women and girls in post-conflict situations for
sustainable peace and security. Investing in women
means investing into the future, and ensuring women’s
and girls access to education is one of the cornerstones
of their empowerment.
No society can afford not to make full use of
women’s potential contribution to peacebuilding and
post-conflict recovery. Resolution 1325 (2000) rightly
places women at the heart of consideration of the issue,

21

S/PV.6196

and not merely as victims, but as agents of change and
partners on an equal footing in peace negotiations.
Nevertheless, women continue to be largely
excluded from decision-making processes. We thank
UNIFEM for presenting us with a study that clearly
demonstrates, among others things, how the complete
absence of women from peace negotiations and postconflict planning processes results in serious neglect of
the needs of women and girls in the phase of early
recovery. As a consequence, this negligence imposes
serious costs on recovery, undermining efforts to reassert
the rule of law and restart the economy. We need to
commit ourselves to addressing women’s priorities in a
more consistent manner in the daily work of the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Austria will continue to advocate for an increase
in the number of women appointed to senior United
Nations positions both at Headquarters and, in
particular, in field missions. We highly welcome the
efforts of the Secretary-General in this regard. Having
three female special representatives and six deputy
special representatives serving in missions in various
conflict areas is already a major step ahead. We hope to
see this positive trend continue and urge all special
representatives and envoys to make full use of the
potential of women in peace processes, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding.
We further request the Secretary-General to take
concrete steps to enhance the efficiency of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs (DPA) to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), in particular by creating the
posts of full-time senior gender advisers in DPA and
within DPA’s Mediation Support Unit.
Austria is committed to the objectives of
resolution 1325 (2000). Our activities are firmly based
on a national action plan adopted in August 2007. A
working group made up of representatives of all
ministries involved and the Austrian Development
Agency reports annually to the Council of Ministers on
measures undertaken under this action plan. Gender
and human rights training have been included more
systematically in the predeployment training of police
and military personnel participating in peacekeeping
operations. Additionally, Austria, together with
UNIFEM, supports women’s networks in the western
Balkans and preparatory work for national action plans
in the region.

22

Next year will mark the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). This opportunity
should be used to define future priorities and to
identify how to address the remaining and new
challenges in fully implementing resolution 1325
(2000). A set of global indicators, as called for in the
resolution adopted today, will complement this
important work.
Austria is planning to continue its financial
contributions to UNIFEM for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). We also plan to host an experts
meeting in Vienna in the first half of 2010.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s positive
reply to a letter sent in August 2008 by women leaders,
including Austria’s then-Foreign Minister Ursula
Plassnik. We are satisfied with and grateful for his
support in organizing a ministerial-level meeting in
2010 to review the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). My country stands ready to work with the
Secretary-General and all interested countries and
stakeholders to use this tenth anniversary to identify
gaps and challenges and to reinforce the commitment
of all States, the entire United Nations system and
regional organizations to effectively implementing the
undertakings of resolution 1325 (2000).
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
May I begin by congratulating your delegation,
Mr. President, on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I reiterate that we
are eager to contribute to your success in the conduct
of our work. Costa Rica welcomes your presence in
this debate and we thank you for organizing it. We also
express our gratitude for the presence of the Deputy
Secretary-General and of Ms. Mayanja, Ms. Alberdi
and Ms. Amin.
During the past year much thought has been
given in the Security Council to the issue of women
and peace and security. We responded to gender
concerns through resolution 1820 (2008) last year. The
recently adopted resolution 1888 (2009) and resolution
1889 (2009), adopted today, all contribute to
strengthening a process that began with the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000). That resolution pioneered the
recognition of the needs of women as victims of
conflict and of the role they can play as protagonists in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
Despite these efforts, women’s participation
remains marginal, as pointed out by the Secretary-

09-54136

S/PV.6196

General in his report (S/2009/465). Resolution 1325
(2000) paved the way for future developments. Its
broad scope is one of its main strengths, but it has also
made it more difficult to address some key challenges
effectively. Its weak implementation framework and
the absence of adequate follow-up mechanisms has
limited progress and made it slow and uneven.
In order to re-energize its implementation, we
still need to consolidate a global strategy with clear
targets and adequate benchmarks for measuring
progress. In this regard, resolution 1889 (2009),
adopted today, calls for greater empowerment of
women in the evaluation of needs and in planning in
post-conflict situations. That is certainly a step in the
right direction.
As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report,
and as reflected in the text of this new resolution, we
need to promote a multisectoral and, above all,
inclusive approach. In addition to enhancing the gender
perspective in conflict resolution and peacebuilding,
women’s participation in the international community’s
efforts should be strengthened, especially in the areas
of prevention and protection. In this regard, my
delegation supports the appeal to the Secretary-General
to design a strategy that includes a more equitable
representation of women in decision-making posts as
special representatives, special envoys and heads of
mission, among other positions. My delegation also
supports the concept of complementing the Security
Council’s response with measures to increase women’s
access to justice, health, education and social
protection, especially for survivors of abuse and
exploitation.
Costa Rica co-sponsored the text of resolution
1889 (2009), but we would like to make clear that our
country rejects any interpretation that seeks to include
abortion in the reference made in operative paragraph
10 to reproductive rights. We believe that lasting peace
cannot be built on the basis of a status quo that in many
cases has been characterized by discrimination,
inequity and an imbalance of power. Frequently these
structures are among the root causes of conflict.
Lastly, on behalf of the Human Security
Network — made up of Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway,
Switzerland, Slovenia and Thailand, and South Africa
as an observer member — we would like to welcome
the conclusion of the process leading to the adoption of

09-54136

this new resolution. The members of the Network are
committed to supporting significant progress to
promote and strengthen the role of women in
peacebuilding processes. This commitment compelled
us to dedicate our eleventh Ministerial Meeting, held in
Dublin last May, to analysing the topic of how to
promote the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). The members of the Network
continue to consider possible joint actions in the future,
and we hope that the consideration of this important
topic by our interregional group, with a human-security
perspective, will contribute to the debate on women
and peace and security in the run-up to the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in October of
next year.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Mr. President, may I begin
with welcoming you to the Council and congratulating
Viet Nam on its assumption of the presidency of the
Council for October. We wish you every success. I also
wish to express our sincere appreciation to Ambassador
Rice and the United States delegation for their
stewardship of the Council during the month of
September.
Given the adoption of resolution 1888 (2009)
only a week ago, this meeting has particular
significance in demonstrating to the world at large the
continued commitment of the Council to the
empowerment of women in all its aspects. In this
respect, I would like to commend Viet Nam’s leading
role in organizing this debate, as well as its efforts in
preparing the resolution we have just adopted. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/465) and the Deputy Secretary-General for her
briefing; both of these include valuable assessments
and recommendations on how to improve the United
Nations system as it pertains to the security of women.
Finally, I wish to commend the efforts of the various
United Nations entities, as well as those of the
non-governmental and women’s organizations working
selflessly to achieve the goals of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008). I particularly thank Ms. Mayanja,
Ms. Alberdi and Ms. Amin for their briefings and their
contributions to our debate.
Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) in 2000, there has been progress across a
broad range of issues related to the protection and
promotion of women’s and girls’ rights in conflictaffected situations, particularly in terms of raising
awareness of the challenges that they face. Thanks to

23

S/PV.6196

the efforts of the international community, a strong
understanding of the need for gender equality and
women’s
empowerment
as
prerequisites
for
international peace and security is slowly taking hold.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s reports,
there are many ongoing projects and programmes
aimed at protecting women and girls against genderbased violence and other kinds of risks and challenges.
However, despite the progress made so far, we cannot
fail to note that much remains to be done, particularly
in the area of implementation. As today’s debate and
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/465) have
shown us, there remain many structural and
institutional impediments that we should overcome in
order to meet the challenges before us.
We believe that more effective actions must be
taken to protect and empower women. Addressing the
particular needs of women and girls in post-conflict
situations, with a particular emphasis on issues related
to their physical security, mental and reproductive
health, employment, education and access to social
services and justice, is a matter of priority that we
should tackle from the very beginning of the
peacebuilding process.
Likewise, equally strong measures are needed to
increase the participation of women in post-conflict
recovery efforts and peace processes, since that would
increase the effectiveness of such efforts. Indeed, we
should not forget that women in post-conflict countries
are not merely victims of war, but also agents of
change towards modernization and transformation,
making immense contributions to sustainable peace
and prosperity.
That is why Turkey has given its strong support
to projects aimed at ensuring increased participation by
women in all areas of social and political life. In other
words, we believe that the empowerment of women in
its entirety should be at the core of all our efforts.
In that respect, let me cite our approach in
Afghanistan. We continue to support various
programmes devoted to empowering women in politics
and governance, while undertaking many other projects
aimed at providing equal and modern education
opportunities to girls.
We believe that, while tackling the issue of
women’s security, which is inextricable from
international peace and security, we should move away

24

from ad hoc approaches and towards a systematic one.
To that end, the appeals set out in resolutions 1325
(2000), 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) and in resolution
1889 (2009), adopted today, should all become a
regular part of the work of the Council in guiding the
activities of the United Nations and Member States.
We also believe that the establishment of a set of
indicators, as foreseen in resolution 1889 (2009), might
serve as a useful means by which we can monitor and
track the implementation of measures at the global
level. Thus, the new gender entity recently agreed upon
by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/311 will
also strengthen our work towards women’s
empowerment by helping the United Nations pursue its
efforts in a more systemized and coordinated manner in
the area of women and peace and security.
Furthermore, like my Russian colleague Ambassador
Churkin, we believe that the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) relating to the status of women are
important. The implementation of those MDGs will no
doubt reinforce the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
The months ahead of us in the run-up to the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) next year will
provide ample opportunities to translate these words
into deeds in order to ensure the basic rights and the
human rights of women all around the world. We in
Turkey are committed to that goal and thus will
continue our support for the implementation of all
resolutions on women and peace and security.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam.
This debate is of great significance in preparing
for the review of 10 years of the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, adopted by the Security Council in 2000. That
resolution has the profoundly humane objective of
protecting women and children, including girls, who
are the most vulnerable and most heavily affected in
conflicts and wars. It is also aimed at promoting more
effective implementation of the Council’s primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Viet Nam values the support of Council members
for its proposal that this debate be convened on the
need to protect the rights of women and girls and to
promote the role of women in post-conflict situations.

09-54136

S/PV.6196

With this debate, United Nations Members,
international organizations and other stakeholders will
jointly take stock of and set out measures to enhance
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In
preparing for this undertaking, Viet Nam and
Switzerland jointly organized a seminar on women,
peace, security and development, held in Hanoi in July
2009, with the participation of United Nations
representatives and Vietnamese and international
non-governmental organizations.
The enormous international efforts, including
those of the United Nations, to promote the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) and of the relevant presidential statements of
the Security Council have produced positive results. Of
primary significance is the greater recognition that the
maintenance of peace and security requires measures to
meet the needs of women. It is also necessary to ensure
their full and equal participation in reconciliation and
negotiation processes, in all stages of peacekeeping, in
the management of humanitarian aid and in postconflict reconstruction.
Activities carried out by the United Nations and
by many countries have brought about noticeable
changes in a number of specific areas. However, there
are problems and challenges, especially in the postconflict period. This includes women’s limited
contributions to peacebuilding owing to the lack of
opportunities for their participation in policymaking
and to the shortage of financial resources required for
an effective response to their pressing needs.
In order to achieve tangible results, resolution
1325 (2000), resolution 1820 (2008) and resolution
1888 (2009), which was just adopted on 30 September,
should be implemented in a coherent and comprehensive
manner. Viet Nam supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendations included in his report to the Council
dated 16 September 2009 (S/2009/465) and shares
many of the views expressed during this debate.
From our own experience in dealing with the
multifaceted consequences of war and in promoting
national development and the rights of women and
children, Viet Nam underlines the following points.
First, we need to fully recognize the primacy of
eliminating the causes of conflicts and preventing and
peacefully resolving international disputes. Measures
to protect the rights of women and girls must be
combined with promotion of their role in ending

09-54136

conflicts and in post-conflict reconstruction. The early
integration of their priorities into the reconstruction
efforts will create favourable preconditions for the
coherent and long-term implementation of the
necessary measures.
Secondly, the reconstruction process requires
comprehensive efforts to meet people’s basic needs in
food, housing, health care, education, dealing with
psychological shocks, restoration of infrastructure and
consolidation of social institutions, including the
important role of the family. The State and society need
to pay full attention to both civilian women and those
who served in armed forces or were otherwise involved
in military activities.
Thirdly, the United Nations system has a special
role to play in conflict settlement and post-conflict
reconstruction, as mandated by the Member States. It
has gained experience and knowledge in various fields.
It is essential to promote local governments and
people’s ownership. Assistance may take different
forms depending on the specific conditions of each
country. It is necessary to have close coordination
among United Nations bodies and between the United
Nations and other partners.
In 1977, shortly after the end of the war and
national reunification, the United Nations General
Assembly adopted resolution 32/3 to call on countries
and international organizations to help Viet Nam in its
reconstruction efforts. In the past 30 years, the United
Nations and other international organizations and
countries have effectively carried out many
development projects to assist Viet Nam, including
those aimed at meeting the basic needs of women and
ensuring their equal participation in all aspects of
socio-political life in Viet Nam. On behalf of the
Government and people of Viet Nam, I take this
opportunity to express our deep gratitude to the United
Nations and countries and development partners for
their valuable support in the processes of healing the
war wounds and of reform and development.
As a nation having experienced untold losses
caused by wars, Viet Nam always supports the common
efforts of the international community to prevent wars
and protect peace. This is also the consistent guiding
principle of Viet Nam in its participation in the work of
the Security Council. With that spirit, we are ready to
share experience and play an active role in the
undertaking that we are discussing today.

25

S/PV.6196

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I give the
Liechtenstein.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you, Sir,
for presiding over the meeting today and your
delegation for organizing this open debate with a focus
on post-conflict situations. As a strong supporter of
resolutions
1325
(2000)
and
1820
(2008),
Liechtenstein agrees with the assessment reflected in
the concept paper prepared by your delegation
(S/2009/490) that much has been achieved but that
enormous challenges remain. Nine years after the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the participation of
women in conflict resolution, in particular in formal
peace processes, is still little more than rhetoric and
their protection from violent crimes is still elusive.
We have witnessed an alarming increase in sexual
violence in various conflicts around the world. The
victims are often women and children. Cessation of
hostilities does not guarantee an end to sexual violence —
sometimes quite the opposite. The influx of returning
refugees and displaced persons, the presence of large
numbers of demobilized ex-combatants, the widespread
lack of economic opportunity and the general
breakdown in social norms all contribute to increased
levels of sexual violence in post-conflict settings.
Such gender-based violence is often exacerbated
by the absence of effective judicial institutions and
impunity as a result thereof. Both resolution 1325
(2000) and resolution 1820 (2008) emphasize the
responsibility of all States to put an end to such
impunity and to prosecute those responsible for war
crimes, including acts of gender violence.
However, formal justice systems often lack the
required resources. Traditional conflict resolution
mechanisms are frequently applied in a manner that is
discriminatory and leaves women with limited access
to justice, thereby exacerbating a climate of impunity.
We therefore welcome the call on the SecretaryGeneral, in resolution 1888 (2009), to offer upon
request expertise that can be deployed rapidly to assist
national authorities to strengthen the rule of law. That
is a very important step and is fully in keeping with the
principle of complementarity, one of the main pillars of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), whose jurisdiction kicks in only when States are
unable or unwilling to prosecute at the national level.

26

Today, the ICC is addressing sexual violence in several
situations with which it is seized and thus is
contributing to the fight against impunity.
Resolution 1325 (2000) calls for an increase in
the participation of women at decision-making levels
in conflict resolution and peace processes. According
to data made available to the Council by the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, only 2.4 per
cent of signatories to peace agreements are women and
no woman has ever been appointed as a chief mediator.
Thus our efforts to guarantee the full and equal
participation of women — as well-intentioned as they
may have been — have clearly been insufficient. We
hope that the input given during this debate today will
lead, nine years after the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), to significant improvements.
Some years ago, the Liechtenstein delegation
headed a group of like-minded ambassadors aimed at
increasing the presence of women in positions such as
special envoys and special representatives in particular.
The success of this cooperation with the then
Secretary-General was very modest, despite regular
expressions of good intentions.
Member States and the relevant intergovernmental
bodies must pursue strategies to ensure an increase in
women’s participation in peace negotiations and
mediation, as well as in post-conflict reconstruction.
That would strengthen the perception that women are
stakeholders — as opposed to mere victims or aid
recipients. e welcome the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to appoint more women to senior positions in
general, in particular in field missions, and we see
those efforts as a personal commitment on his part.
In preparation for the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we need concrete
action. Hence, we welcome the establishment of a United
Nations steering committee to enhance the visibility of
and to strengthen coordination within the United Nations
system regarding the preparations for the anniversary.
Liechtenstein, for its part, will support the project of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
launched by Switzerland and to be supported, it is hoped,
by other Member States, which will produce in time for
the anniversary a report that provides a substantive
overview of the work of the Council. That report will
demonstrate both the achievements and the remaining
gaps and challenges, and we hope that it can also serve
as a model for implementation in other areas.

09-54136

S/PV.6196

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Montenegro, Serbia, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves with
this statement.
I would like to begin by commending the
Vietnamese presidency on the initiative to convene this
thematic debate on women and peace and security. The
debate presents yet another important opportunity to
promote the effective, coherent and systematic
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
European Union welcomes the important steps taken
today by the Security Council through the adoption of
resolution 1889 (2009) on women and peace and
security, which sets the agenda for our work next year.
The Security Council’s adoption of resolutions
1325 (2000), 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) bears
testimony to the progress made during the last decade
in the area of women and peace and security. Those
resolutions have brought much-needed and welcome
visibility to the question of women’s empowerment,
which is a priority for the European Union. The issues
at stake concern basic human interests and human
rights. While all the resolutions on women and peace
and security are equally important, resolution 1325
(2000) serves as an umbrella resolution in addressing
women’s empowerment, their role as peacebuilders and
their vulnerable position as victims of war.
The European Union welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/465) on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), and we support its
recommendations. We further echo the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General at the lack of
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Why, after
almost 10 years, is there still a need for us to reaffirm
our commitments? Why do we not see trends of
decreasing sexual violence? It is disappointing that we
must still be asked to strengthen our efforts to fully
implement resolution 1325 (2000). Clearly, the status
quo is unacceptable. Women must be empowered,
accountability
established
and
commitments
transformed into actions.
The empowerment of women is important for the
realization of their human rights, as well as for economic
and political development. The empowerment of women

09-54136

is equally important to durable peace, security, early
recovery and reconciliation. If the marginalization of
women and impunity continue, whole peace processes
may be undermined. Women’s empowerment and their
enjoyment of human rights must be an integral part of
post-conflict needs assessments. Needless to say, this is
of equally importance in carrying out humanitarian
needs assessments in situations of complex
humanitarian emergencies.
We urgently need to focus more on the capacity
to implement effective institutional reforms for gender
equality. The immediate aftermath of conflict provides
an opportunity to address women’s issues and to use
women’s potential. More resources must be
accompanied by increased donor coordination to
ensure financing efficiency, as well as coherent and
predictable international support. Women’s equal
participation in decision-making at all levels is key to
better advancing human rights, to addressing the
specific needs and concerns of women, and to making
use of all human resources.
The European Union supports the idea that the
Security Council should vigorously pursue a strategy to
ensure an increase in women’s participation in all
peace processes. We therefore support the idea of a
United Nations strategy to set concrete and specific
targets for women’s participation in such processes. By
this time next year, we expect there to be at least one
female chief, or lead, peace mediator, several female
special representatives of the Secretary-General and a
full-time gender adviser in the Secretariat for political
affairs. A better gender balance in international
operations would signal to parties in conflict that
women have an important role to play. If international
and national leaderships are not interested in progress
on gender equality issues, we will not be able to move
beyond the rhetorical stage.
In accordance with resolution 1889 (2009), the
European Union underlines the need to improve and
strengthen the way in which the Security Council
receives, analyses and takes action on information
related to resolution 1325 (2000). The European Union
welcomes the decision of the General Assembly to
establish a United Nations composite gender entity. We
hope that the entity will bring about the much-needed
improvements in the work of the United Nations on
gender equality, including in the area of international
peace and security. We look forward to the proposal of
the Secretary-General on the details of the gender

27

S/PV.6196

entity, as well as the early appointment of the new
Under-Secretary-General. We must not lose momentum
on that matter.
The European Union stands fully committed to
the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009). However, there must be a
coherent strategy for the whole area of the protection
of women and women’s rights. Women’s participation
is needed in all processes at all levels. We need an allembracing approach on how to bring the system
together.
For the process of implementing resolution 1325
(2000), it is important to develop adequate tools of
accountability, including national action plans. In line
with the 2008 EU comprehensive approach to
implementing resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), the EU is committed to stepping up efforts in
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and to
translating those efforts into real impact on the ground.

28

Our ambition is to be well prepared for October 2010,
when the international community will celebrate the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) at a ministerial review conference.
At the same time, the European Union is
interested in continuing discussions with partner
countries and partner regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, on women and peace and
security, and on cooperation on and the improved
effectiveness of resolution 1325 (2000). We encourage
all Member States to swiftly adopt accountability
instruments, including national action plans.
The President: There are a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

09-54136
