NO COVER
(1)

NO COVER
(2)

UNITED NATIONS

RESOLUTIONS
adopted by the General Assembly
at its
SEVENTH SESSION
during the period from 24 February to 23 April 1953

GENERAL ASSEMBLY
OFFICIAL RECORDS: SEVENTH SESSlON
SUPPLEMENT No. 20 A (A/236I / Add. I)

New York

NOTE I
The present volume covers action taken by the General Assembly from the
resumption of the meetings of the seventh session on 24 February to 23 April 1953
when the session was recessed in accordance with resolution 705 (VII).
For action taken by the General Assembly during the period from 14 October
to 21 December 1952, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Scucnt}: Session, Supplement No. 20.

NOTE II
The text of resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Trusteeship Council to which reference is made in the present
volume, can be found in the printed volumes of resolutions published separately
for each session or part of a session of each of these organs.
The arabic and roman numerals identifying each resolution indicate, respectively, the chronological position of the resolution in its series and the number of
the session at which it was adopted.

*

*

*

All United Nations documents are designated by symbols, i.e., capital letters
combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
?\ ations document.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

Paqe

Appointment of the Secretary-General

1

Allocation of agenda hems
Resolution adopted on the report of the Credentials Committee;
700 (VII). Credentials of representatives to the
seventh session of the General Assembly
(item 3)
Resolution of 8 April ] 953
Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First
Committee:
701 (VII). Korea: reports uf the United Nations Agent General [or Korean Reconstruction (item 16)
Resolution of 11 March 1953
702 (VII). Complaint of non-compliance of
States still detaining members of the Greek
armed forces with the provisions of resolution 382 A (V), adopted by the General
Assembly on ] December 1950, recommending "the repatriation of all those among
them who express the wish to be repatriated" (item 70)
Resolution of 17 March 1953

2

2

2

703 (VII). Methods which might be used to
maintain and strengthen international peace
and securi ty in accordance with the Purposes and Principles "f Iht' Charter: re-

ill

port of the Collective Measures Committee
(item 18)
Resolution of 17 March 1953

2

704 (VII). Regulation, limitation and balanced
reduction of all armed forces and all armaments: report of the Disarmament Commission (item 17)
Resolution of 8 April 1953

3

705 (VII). The Korean question (item 72)
Resolution of 18 April 1953

3

706 (VII). Question of impartial investigation
of charges of use by United Nations Forces
of bacteriological warfare (item 73)
Resolution of 2;3 April 1953

4

707 (VII). Complaint by the Union of Burma
regarding aggression against it by the
Government of the Republic of China
(item 77)
Resolution of 23 April 1953

4

Resolutions adopted without reference to a
Committee:
708 (VII). Report of the Secretary-General
on personnel policy (item 75)
Resolution of 1 April 1953

5

709 (VII). Terms of appointment of the second
Secretary-General of the LTnited Nations
(item 74)
Resolution of 7 April 1953

5

-----------_.__ .-._

••.•......

...

__ .__ _------...

APPOINTMENf OF TIlE SECRETARY.GENERAL
On the recommendation! of the Security Council, the General Assembly
appointed as Secretary-General of the United Nations:
His Excellency Mr. Dag Hammarskjold.

423rd plenary meeting,
7 April 1953.
1 See document

A/2380.

ALLOCATION OF AGENDA ITEMS 1
cordance with the Purposes and Principles of the
Charter; report of the Collective Measures Committee (item 18).
4. Complaint of non-compliance of States still detaining members of the Greek armed forces with
provisions of resolution 382 A (V), adopted by the
General Assembly on 1 December 1950, recommending "the repatriation of all those among them
who express the wish to be repatriated" (item
70).5

Plenary Meeting8
1. Appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations (item 74).2
2.
Report of the Secretary-General on personnel
policy (item 75).8

Fir8t Committee
POLITICAL AND SECURITY

5. Interference of the United States of America in
the internal affairs of other States as manifested
by the organization on the part of the Government of the United States of America of subversive and espionage activities against the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, the People's Republic of China, the Czechoslovak Republic and other
People's Democracies (item 71).6

(INCLUDING THE REGULATION OF ARMAMENTS)

1. Korea (item 16) :
(a) Reports of the United Nations Commission for
the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea;
(b) Reports of the Agent General for Korean
Reconstruction.'
2. Regulation, limitation and balanced reduction of all
armed forces and all armaments: report of the
Disarmament Commission (item 17).
3. Methods which might be used to maintain and
strengthen international peace and security in ac-

6. Measures to avert the threat of a new world war
and measures to strengthen peace and friendship
among the nations (item 72).7
7. Question of impartial investigation of charges of
use by United Nations Forces of bacteriological
warfare (item 73).7

1 All the above items were dealt with during the resumed
meetings of the seventh session from 24 February to 23 April
1953 and, unless otherwise indicated, formed part of the agenda
approved by the General Assembly at its 380th and 381st plenary
meetings on 16 and 17 October 1952. The General Assembly
decided at its 382nd plenary meeting on 17 October 1952 to
deal with certain of the items in plenary meetings while allocating the remainder to the relevant committees. For the fun
agenda see Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh
Session, Plenary Meetings, prefatory fascicule.
2 Included in the agenda at the 396th plenary meeting on
13 November 1952.
8 Included in the agenda at the 406th plenary meeting on
18 December 1952. At the 413th plenary meeting on 10 March
1953, the General Assembly decided to deal with this item in
plenary meetings.
4 Allocated to the Second Committee at the 382nd .plenary
meeting on 17 October 1952 and reallocated to the First Committee at the 406th plenary meeting on 18 December 1952.

8. Complaint by the Union of Burma regarding aggression against it by the Government of the Republic of China (item 77).8
11 Allocated to the Third Committee at the 382nd plenary
meeting on 17 October 1952 and reallocated to the First Committee at the 406th plenary meeting on 18 December 1952.
'6 At the 425th plenary meeting, on 8 April 1953, the General
Assembly considered the report of the First Committee
(A/2377) which did not recommend any resolution for adoption.
7 Included in the agenda and allocated to the First Committee at the 386th plenary meeting on 21 October 1952.
8 Included in the agenda and allocated to the First Committee at the 4ZOth plenary meeting on 31 March 1953.

1

---------------_ _ _ _._._ _-_ _ _ _------_._-_.__ __._._.__ _._-----------..

2

..

General Assembly-Seventh Session

RESOLUTION ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE
700 (VII). Credentials of repreBentative8 to the seventh session of the
General Assembly
The General Assembly
Approves the third report! of the Credentials Commitee.
425th plenary meeting,
8 April 1953.
1 See document A/2374.

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE l"IRST COMMITTEE
701 (VII). Korea: reports of the United Nations
Agent General for Korean Reconstruction
The General Assembly
1. Reaffirms the objective of the United Nations,
adopted in General Assembly resolution 410 (V) of
1 December 1950, to provide relief and rehabilitation in
assisting the Korean people to relieve their sufferings
and to repair the great devastation and destruction in
their country;
2. Recognizes that the need of such relief and rehabilitation continues to be most urgent;
3. Takes note of the reports! of the Agent General
on the work of the United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency for the period February 1951 to 15 February 1953;
4. Notes 'With approval that the Agent General
has now undertaken, in co-operation with the Government of the Republic of Korea and the United Nations
Command, and in consultation with the United Nations
Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
Korea, a programme of relief and rehabilitation projects
for the period ending June 1953, which has received the
approval of the United Nations Advisory Committee to
the Agent General, and looks forward to its successful
execution ;
5. Expresses its appreciation of the contributions
which have been made by governments, specialized
agencies and non-governmental organizations;
6. Requests those governments which have made
pledges to the United Nations Korean Reconstruction
Agency to make prompt payment of such pledges;
7. Further requests all governments, specialized
agencies and non-governmental organizations to assist,
within the limits of their financial possibilities and in
accordance with the provisions of their constitutions and
statutes, in meeting the great and continuing need of
the Korean people for relief and rehabilitation assistance.

414th plenary meeting,
11 March 1953.
1 See Official Records of tlu GeMf'cU Assembly, S~",th SIS-

siMS, SuP/JlemeKts Nos. 19 GM 19 A.

702 (VII). Complaint of non-compliance of States
still detaining members of the Greek armed
forces with the provisions of resolution 382 A
(V), adopted by the General Assembly on
1 December 1950, recommending "the repa·
triation of all those among them who express
the wish to be repatriated"
The General Assembly,
Confirming its resolution 382 A (V) of 1 December
l~50 recommending the repatriation of all those mew.'
bers of the Greek armed forces detained outside Greece
who express the wish to be repatriated,
Noting with deep appreciation the continued efforts
of the International Committee of the Red Cross with
a view to implementing the afore-mentioned resolution,
Recalling the latest communication- of the International Committee of the Red Cross to the national Red
Cross societies of the governments concerned,
1. Addresses an earnest appeal to these governments
to conform their attitude in this question with General
Assembly resolution 382 A (V) ;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to consult to this end with the governments in question and to report back to the General Assembly before
the close of its current session;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to keep this humanitarian issue under constant review and to notify the
Member States of important developments as appropriate.
415th plenary meeting,
17 March 1953.

703 (VII). Methods which might be used to main.
tain and strengthen international peace and
security in accordance with the Purposes and
Principles of the Charter: report of the Col.
lective Measures Committee
The General Assembly,
Having received the second report" of the Collective
Measures Committee,
2 See document A/236S.
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh Ses-

sion, Supplement No. 17.

-_.. _.._._._--.....

_"._..._._--,--,-,,,,,._.. __...._---,,,-,.- ..

_._---_ --------

__

Resolutions adopted on reports of the First Committee
._------------._-- -_._-._..---- ----- -_. ._---

-~~-~._------

Affirming the need for strengthening furth~r the system of collective secunty under the authority of the
United Nations,
Finding that to this end further steps could be ta~en
by States and by the United Nations in accordance with
the Charter and in conformity with the "Uniting for
peace" resolution (377 A (V») and with resolution 503
(VI),
1. Takes note of the second report of the Collective
Measures Committee and expresses appreciation of the
constructive work done by the Committee during the
past year, particularly in the economic, field, including
the preparation of lists of arms, ,ammumtlOl1 and lmI:lements of war and of strategic items for consideration
by the Security Council or the General Assembly in
the application of a selective embargo;
2. Requests the Collective Measures Committee to
continue its work until the ninth session of. the General
Assembly, as directed in paragraph 4 be~ow, for, the
maintenance and strengthening of the United Nations
collective security system;
3. Recommends to States Members, and invites
States not Members of the United Nations:
(a) To give careful consideration to the reports of
the Collective Measures Committee;
(b) To continue and intensify their efforts to carry
out the recommendations of the "Uniting for peace"
resolution and of resolution 503 (VI) ;
(c) To keep the Collective Measures Com~itte,e Cll~­
rently informed of the progress they are making m this
respect;
4. Directs the Collective Measures Committee:
(a) To pursue such studies as it may deem desirable
to strengthen the capability of the United Nations to
maintain peace, taking account of the "Uniting for
peace" resolution, resolution 503 (V I) and the present
resolution;
(b) To continue the examination of information received from States pursuant to the "Uniting for peace"
resolution, resolution 503 (VI) and the present resolution;
(c) In the light of its studies, to suggest to the
Security Council and to the General Assembly such
specific ways and means as it may deem appropriate to
encourage further preparatory action by States;
(d) To report to the Security Council and to the
General Assembly not later than the ninth session of
the Assembly.
415th plenary meeting,
17 March 1953.

704 (VII). Regulation, limitation and balanced
reduction of all armed forces and all armaments: report of the Disarmament Commission
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that:
Under the Charter of the United Nations all States
are bound to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace
and security, and justice, are not endangered, and to

-......

..

3_

refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in an~ other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations,
The aim ot a system of world-wide disarmament is
to prevent war and release the world's human and economic resources for the purposes of peace,
1. Takes note of the report" of the Disarmament
Commission,
.2. Reaffirms General Assembly resolution 502 (VI)
of 11 January lY52 and requests the Disarmament Cornmission to continue its work ior the development by
the United Nations of comprehensive and co-ordinated
plans providing for:
(a) The regulation" limitation and balanced reduction of all armed forces and armaments;
t b) The elimination and prohibition of all major
weapons, including bacteriological, adaptable to mass
destruction;
(c) The effective international control of atomic
energy to ensure the prohibition of atomic weapons and
the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes only;
The whole programme to be carried out under effective
international control in such a way that no State
would have cause to fear that its security was endangered ;

3. Requests the Commission to report to the General
Assembly and to the Security Council 110 later than 1
September 1953, and hopes that all the members of the
Commission will co-operate in efforts to produce constructive proposals likely to facilitate its task.

424th plenar_y meeting,
8 April1Y'53.

705 (VII). The Korean question
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its unswerving determination to spare no
efforts likely to create conditions favourable to the attainment of the purposes of peace and conciliation embodied in th-: Charter of the United Nations,
Noting, following the United Nations Command
initiative for the exchange of sick and wounded prisoners
of war, the communication" by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China dated 31 March 1953 to
the President of the General Assembly, and the exchange of communications" between the United Nations
Command and the Commanders of the Chinese People's
V olunteers and the Korean People's Army in regard
thereto,
Confident that a just and honourable armistice in
Korea will powerfully contribute to alleviate the present
international tension,
1. Notes with deep satisfaction that an agreement
has been signed in Korea on the exchange of sick and
wounded prisoners of war;
, See Official Records of the Disarmament Commission, 1952,
Special Supplement No, 1.
S See document A/2378,
l\ See document A/2390.

General Assembly·-Seventh Session
2. Expresses the hope that the exchange of sick and
wounded prisoners of war will be speedily completed
and that the further negotiations at Panmunjom will
result in achieving an early armistice in Korea, consistent with the United Nations principles and objectives;
3. Decides to recess the present session upon COITlpletion of the current agenda items, and requests the
President of the General Assembly to reconvene the
present session to resume consideration of the Korean
question (a) upon notification by the Unified Command
to the Security Council of the signing of an armistice
agreement in Korea; or (b) when, in the view of a
majority of Members, other developments in Korea require consideration of this question.
427th plenary meeting,
18 April 1953.

706 (VII). Question of impartial investigation of
charges of use by United Nations Forces of
bacteriological warfare
The General Assembly,
Noting that accusations have been made by certain
governments and authorities charging the use of bacteriological warfare by United Nations Forces, and that
the Unified Command has repeatedly denied such
charges,
Recalling that when the charges were first made the
Unified Command had requested that an impartial investigation be made of them,
Noting that the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China and the North Korean
authorities have so far refused to accept an offer by
the International Committee of the Red Cross to carry
out an investigation,
Noting that the draft resolution? submitted if' the
Security Council by the Government of the United
States of America proposing an investigation of these
charges by the International Committee of the Red
Cross failed to carry because of the negative vote of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Desiring to serve the interests of truth,
1. Resolves that, after the President of the General'
Assembly has received an indication from all the governments and authorities concerned of their acceptance
of the investigation proposed in the present resolution,
a Commission, composed of Brazil, Egypt, Pakistan,
Sweden and Uruguay, shall be set up and shall carry
out immediately an investigation of the charges that
have been made;
2. Calls upon the governments and authorities concerned to enable the Commission to travel freely
throughout such areas of North and South Korea, the
Chinese mainland and Japan as the Commission may
deem necessary in the performance of its task and to
allow the Commission freedom of access to such persons, places and relevant documents as it considers
necessarv for the fulfilment of its task and to allow it
to examme any witness, including prisoners of war,
under such safeguards and conditions as the Commis7 See document S/2671.

sion shall determine; all prisoners of war who are
alleged to have made confessions regarding the use
of bacteriological warfare shall, prior to examination
by the Commission, be taken to a neutral area and remain under the responsibility and custody of the Commission until the end of the Korean hostilities;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to transmit the present resolution immediately to the
governments and authorities concerned, requesting them
to indicate their acceptance of the investigation proposed in the present resolution;
4. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to report to the General Assembly at the earliest practicable date on the results of his efforts;
5. Directs the Commission, when set up, to enlist the
aid of such scientists of international reputation, especially epidemiologists, and such other experts as it may
select;
6. Directs the Commission, after acceptance of the
investigation proposed in the present resolution by all
the governments and autho, 'ties concerned, to report
to the Members of the General Assembly through the
Secretary-General as soon possible and no later than
I September 1953;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish the
Commission with the necessary staff and facilities.
428th plenary meeting,
23 April 1953.

707 (VII). Complaint by the Union of Burma regarding aggression against it by the Government of the Republic of China
The General Assembly,
Having examined the complaint" by the delegation
of the Union of Burma regarding the presence, hostile
activities and depredations of foreign forces in the territory of the Union of Burma,
Considersnq that these facts constitute a violation of
the territory and sovereignty of the Union of Burma,
Ajjirming that any assistance given to these forces
which enables them to remain in the territory of the
Union of Burma or to continue their hostile acts against
a Member State is contrary to the Charter of the
United Nations,
Considering that the refusal of these forces to submit
to disarmament or interment is contrary to international
law and usage,
1. Deplores this situation and condemns the presence
of these forces in Burma and their hostile acts against
that country;
2. Declares that these foreign forces must be disarmed and either agree to internment or leave the territory of the Union of Burma forthwith;
3. Requests all States to respect the territorial integrity and political independence of the Union of
Burma in accordance with the principles of the Charter;
4. Recommends that the negotiations now in progress
through the good offices of certain Member States
B See document A/2375.

5

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Committee
should be pursued, in order to put an end to this serious
situation by means of the immediate disarmament and
withdrawal of the said forces from the territory of the
Union of Burma or by means of their disarmament and
internment;
5. Urges all States:
(a) To afford the Government of the Union of
Burma on its request all the assistance in their power
to facilitate by peaceful means the evacuation of these
forces from Burma; and

(b) To refrain from furnishing any assistance to these
forces which may enable them to remain in the territory of the Union of Burma or to continue their hostile
acts against that country;

6. Invites the Government of the Union of Burma
to report on the situation to the General Assembly at
its eighth session.
428th plenary meeting,
23 April 1953.

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITTEE
708 (VII). Report of the Secretary-General on
personnel policy
The General Assembly,
Recalling the following provisions of Articles 100 and
101 of the Charter:
"Article 100
"1. In the performance of their duties the Secretary-General and the staff shall not seek or receive
instructions from any government or from any other
authority external to the Organization. They shall
refrain from any action which might reflect on their
position as international officials responsible only to
the Organization.
"2. Each Member of the United Nations undertakes to respect the exclusively international character of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General
and the staff and not to seek to influence them in
the discharge of their responsibilities.
"Article 101
"1. The staff shall be appointed by the SecretaryGeneral under regulations established by the General Assembly.

"
"3. The paramount consideration in the employment of the staff and in the determination of the
conditions of service shall be the necessity of securing the hig-hest standards of efficiency, competence

and integrity. Due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible.",
and
11aving reoieuied and considered the report! of the
Secretary-General on personnel policy,
1. Expresses its confidence that the SecretaryGeneral will conduct personnel policy with -these considerations in mind;
.~. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its eighth session a report on the
progress made in the conduct and development of personnel policy, together with the comments of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions thereon;
3. Inoites the Secretary-General and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
to submit, after appropriate consultations with the administrative heads of the specialized agencies. their
recommendations as to any further action that may be
required of the General Assembly;
4. Calls upon all Members of the United Nations
to assist the Secretarv-General in the discharge of his
responsibilities as chief administrative officer of the
United Nations.
422nd plenary muting,
1 April 1953.
1 See document

A/2364.

709 (VII). Terms of appointment of the second Secretary-General of the
United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 11 (I) of 24 January 1946 and paragraph 32 of General Assembly resolution 13 (I) of 13 February 1946,
Decides that the terms of appointment of the second Secretary-General shall
be the same as those of the first Secretary-General.
423rd plenary meeting,
7 April 1953.
