S/PV.8229

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8229th meeting

Wednesday, 11 April 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2018/273)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-10258 (E)
*1810258*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.8229

The meeting was called to order at 10.10am.

Maïga. This period was also characterized by the
strengthening of trust between the signatory parties of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
of which the Prime Minister’s high-profile visit to
the northern regions is a perfect illustration in that it
concretized the gradual return of the authority of the
State to those regions, particularly in Kidal.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2018/273)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I warmly welcome His
Excellency Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/273, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Annadif and by Ambassador Olof
Skoog, Permanent Representative of Sweden, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017)
concerning Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Annadif.
Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): I would first like
to thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to introduce the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
(S/2018/273), covering the first quarter of 2018.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
the presence of Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of Mali.
As noted in the report, the first three months of
2018 were marked by the appointment on 30 December
2017 of a new Prime Minister, Mr. Soumeylou Boubèye
2/25

11/04/2018

Likewise, a degree of progress in the peace process
deserves to be welcomed. This includes, among other
things, the adoption by the Government on February
28 of laws establishing territorial communities in the
regions of Ménaka and Taoudenni, and the signing on
22 March of a road map to operationalize the timeline
of priority actions that was endorsed by the Agreement
Monitoring Committee at its twenty-fourth session, held
on January 15 and 16 in Bamako. I am convinced that
the concretization of these various actions recorded in
the road map, in particular the full operationalization of
the Operational Coordination Mechanism in Kidal and
Timbuktu, as well as ensuring the effective functioning
of the interim authorities by endowing them with
material and financial means confidence-building
measures that could further support the Malian people
in the implementation of the Agreement.
Workshops on the preregistration of combatants
eligible for integration or the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, held
successively in Kidal, Timbuktu, Ménaka and Gao
during the last week of February, constitute real
progress, including the convening of the high-level
workshop on security sector reform, which allowed for
a shared vision as an important lever for the security
component of the Agreement.
In parallel with these initiatives, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and its partners continue
to strengthen the capacities of regional authorities in
the north and the centre of the country at the logistical,
technical and political levels, as the interim authorities
represent an important link in meeting the needs of
the population, in particular in terms of basic social
services, the return of refugees and displaced persons,
and support for the electoral process, pending their
replacement by elected authorities.
This positive dynamic in the implementation of
the Agreement should not, however, make us forget
that this is an election year in which the presidential
elections are scheduled for 29 July for the first round
18-10258

11/04/2018

The situation in Mali

and 12 August for the second, while the legislative
elections are scheduled for November and December.
In that perspective, and in accordance with its mandate
of good offices and support for the electoral process,
MINUSMA undertook inclusive contacts with the entire
Malian political class and the signatory movements in
order to call on them to engage in a consensual process,
leading to peaceful and credible elections.
In that regard, on 1 and 2 March MINUSMA
facilitated the holding of a workshop on the revision
of the electoral law of 17 October 2016 with several
innovations, taking into account most of the demands
of the opposition and civil society and many of the
recommendations from the 2013 election observation
missions of the European Union, the African Union, the
International Organization of la Francophonie and the
Economic Community of West African States. These
include the introduction of a biometric electoral voting
card, replacing the national identity card, and the
assignment by the State of one monitor of the opposition
and one of the majority to every polling station. At the
same workshop, the Government agreed to conduct
an independent audit of the electoral register, which
should take place in April.
MINUSMA continues to undertake a further series
of activities aimed at preventing post-election tensions
and at supporting the revision of electoral lists so as to
ensure that the entire process, as I have said, will be as
consensual, inclusive and credible as possible.
The period covered by the report saw a deterioration
of the security situation, particularly in the centre of
the country, with sometimes quite serious human rights
abuses, as pointed out by MINUSMA in its communiqué
of 30 March. The same concerns were noted recently in
the report of the Independent Expert on the situation of
human rights in Mali, Mr. Suliman Baldo, during his
visit from 12 to 16 March, and unfortunately remind us
of the extent of the challenges in this domain.
The establishment of the International Commission
of Inquiry on Mali and the Government’s endorsement
of the Safe Schools Declaration on 1 February are
commendable positive steps. We also welcome the
Government’s adoption, on 7 March, of a new national
policy on Mali’s borders.
A draft law of national understanding is being
considered. It will probably be submitted to the National
Assembly at its April session. Despite reservations on
this particular issue, it should be noted that it would

S/PV. 8229

be a significant step towards national reconciliation.
The transfer of Mr. Al Hassan Ag Abdoul Aziz Ag
Mohamed Ag Mahmoud to the International Criminal
Court on 31 March also proves that reconciliation does
not necessarily mean impunity.
In order to support the Government plan intended to
make the centre of the country more secure, MINUSMA
and the United Nations country team have launched
several initiatives to promote social cohesion and the
restoration of State authority, economic recovery and
the provision of basic social services, including quickimpact projects. It is important to note that a purely
security-oriented approach is not and will not be
sufficient and could even have the opposite effect.
In that connection, MINUSMA continues to
provide constant support to the Specialized Judicial
Unit against Terrorism and Transnational Organized
Crime. That collaboration has led, for the first time, to
those accused as a result of investigations of the Unit
being brought before the Court of Appeal in Bamako.
The same cooperation has allowed the national policy
and action plan on preventing and combating violent
extremism and terrorism for 2018-2020 to be adopted.
In accordance with resolutions 2295 (2016)
and 2364 (2017) and drawing on lessons from
the recommendations of the Santos Cruz report,
MINUSMA is undertaking an increasing number of
major patrols, particularly in the centre of the region,
to reassure the population, assess the human rights
situation and interact with community leaders in some
remote and hard-to-reach areas. That was the case for
Operation Furaji from 15 to 27 January and Operation
Foronto from 4 to 15 March.
Nonetheless, these achievements by MINUSMA
have been tarnished by the number of victims, which
has steadily increased in recent months, mainly as a
result of landmines and improvised explosive devices,
but also because of indirect targeting of shells and
rockets, as was the case last week at the Aguelhok
camp, which claimed the lives of two peacekeepers
from Chad. We place great hope in the arrival of the
recently deployed combat convoy companies, although
they are not yet fully operational.
We recall the importance of giving priority to
training and equipment for troops, including armoured
vehicles. We currently lack approximately 100
armoured vehicles, which leaves us vulnerable. Troopand police-contributing countries, whose efforts we

18-102583/25

S/PV.8229

The situation in Mali

commend, are asked to do what they can to fill those
gaps. We must also not forget the important shortfall
in both combat and utility helicopters. There too, we
place a great deal of hope in Canada’s pledge to deploy
six helicopters in the coming months, but that offer,
as welcome as it is, still falls short of the number of
helicopters we need.
During the period under review, we also had
the pleasure of hosting, from 14 to 25 March, the
independent MINUSMA strategic review team led by
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, who engaged in several very
constructive exchanges about the challenges being
faced by the Mission.
We await with great interest the recommendations to
be submitted shortly to the Secretary-General. We dare to
hope that the recommendations will guide the Council’s
deliberations in the framework of the discussions on
the renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate and enable a
better alignment between the mandate entrusted by
the Security Council with the realities and constraints
on the ground, as well as with the expectations of the
people of Mali. These recommendations will also guide
the ongoing considerations in drafting MINUSMA’s
strategic plan, as requested by resolution 2364 (2017).
In the meantime however, the Mission continues
to work in close cooperation with the country team, in
particular to respond to the needs of the Malian people,
especially women and young people, through the
tools available to us and their practical priorities. The
task force on elections, the working group to support
the interim authorities, as well as the coordination of
activities in the Mopti region level are examples of this
close cooperation. We also welcome the start of the work
of the Panel of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali
on the sanctions regime. The Panel, which is another
important tool in supporting the peace process, has
already carried out two missions in Mali.
The Office of the Independent Observer is now
almost operational. We also hope that its first report
will help to attribute responsibilities and thereby
accelerate the peace process.
The effective establishment of the International
Commission of Inquiry on Mali is also eagerly awaited
by the Malian people, in addition to the outstanding work
that the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission
continues to carry out. Those mechanisms complement
4/25

11/04/2018

the Agreement’s monitoring architecture and provide
new tools, in particular through the sanctions regime,
which can strengthen the accountability and adherence
of parties to the Agreement, while reminding them of
their obligations.
In a context as complex as that of Mali, cooperation
with other partners, first and foremost the Government
of Mali, remains a priority for the United Nations.
While continuing to support the Malian armed forces
in accordance with the memorandum of understanding
signed in November 2017, MINUSMA is working closely
with the National Council for Security Sector Reform
on the concept of establishing reconstituted security
and defence forces, which is one of prerequisites for
sustainable security in Mali. The high-level workshop
that was held in Bamako from 27 to 28 March is a
perfect example of this. The workshop not only brought
together all the key actors of the Agreement, but also
allowed frank and open exchanges among Malians in
order to arrive a shared vision on the future of their
defence and security forces.
Furthermore, in accordance with resolution 2391
(2017) and thanks to the signing of the technical
arrangement on 23 February in Brussels among the
United Nations, the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the European Union,
MINUSMA has already sketched out the framework of
its support to the joint G-5 Sahel Joint Force. With the
deployment of a team to the headquarters of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force in Sévaré, the mechanisms for medical
evacuations, engineering and logistical support are
already operational. Of course, all this has been done
while ensuring compliance with the human rights due
diligence policy.
In the context of regional cooperation, we
welcome the important work being undertaken by the
Peacebuilding Fund through the disbursement initiative
of $3 million to promote the security of local populations
and social cohesion in Liptako-Gourma, which is a
region straddling the borders of Mali, Burkina Faso and
the Niger, where a large number of terrorist elements
are operating.
As the report before members underscores, 2018
is an election year. However, Malian actors should not
lose sight of the fact that the implementation of the
Agreement must remain a priority; it must not become
a political football. We must endeavour to bring to
completion both undertakings in a complementary
18-10258

11/04/2018

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8229

manner by relying on the fresh momentum provided
by the new Prime Minister, which is necessary but not
sufficient given the delays that have been noted. The
international community must provide support and
encouragement in this respect.

2374 (2017) concerning Mali. The report covers the
period from 5 September 2017 to 4 April 2018, during
which time the Committee met twice in informal
consultations and conducted additional work via the
written silence procedure.

The Peace Agreement process is a complex one,
and the Council must therefore call on the signatory
parties to ensure that the road map signed on 22 March
does not become a dead letter. It is time to move from
pledges to action by respecting the deadlines that have
been set.

After the establishment of the Committee,
preparatory work was undertaken by the Secretariat
in terms of creating the Committee’s website in all
languages; preparing the budget of the Panel of Experts;
screening candidates for the Panel; and preparing the
Committee’s guidelines.

Regarding the electoral process, all Malian political
actors are unanimous in their belief that the elections
need to be held on the dates set, with full transparency
and credibility. The international community shares
these same concerns. Just as the 2013 elections
re-established constitutional order in Mali, those of
2018 must irreversibly anchor democracy in the country.

On 29 January, the Committee adopted the
guidelines for the conduct of its work, and on 1 February,
the Panel of Experts started its work.

In terms of preparations, an agreement has been
reached to review the current electoral law, which has
led to a consensus-based draft that is currently before
the National Assembly. An order for 8 million ballot
cards is currently also being prepared. In line with
its mandate, MINUSMA has begun to lend technical
and logistical support where it is deployed and within
resource constraints, including by transporting election
materials and dispatching staff.
We have also begun to work to ensure secure
elections and that any electoral disputes are properly
handled. However, given the tight electoral schedule,
concerns remain, including ensuring that the 8 million
ballot cards are available and distributed in a timely
manner, and that the voter list audit is carried out within
the set deadline, thereby strengthening confidence.
The Council must call on all Malian politicians to
respect the timeline and encourage them to approach the
elections in a spirit of consensus, peace and credibility.
Failing to do so would exacerbate the crisis, with the
enemies of peace emerging as the winners. They are
undeserving of such a gift.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Annadif for his very informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Skoog.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the honour to report
to the Security Council on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution

On 5 February, the Committee convened its
first informal consultations, during which the four
members of the Panel of Experts were introduced to the
Committee and presented their work plan.
During the informal consultations held on
28 February, the Committee considered the first
interim update of its Panel of Experts, submitted
to the Committee in accordance with paragraph 11
of resolution 2374 (2017). The Committee heard a
presentation by the Coordinator of the Panel, followed
by an interactive discussion between the Committee
members and the Coordinator.
Together with other members of the Committee, I
conducted a visit to Bamako on 26 and 27 March. I wish
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and his team, as well as the Security Council
Affairs Division, for having facilitated that mission.
The visit provided us with an opportunity to obtain
first-hand information from key counterparts in Mali
and engage with all Malian parties on how the sanctions
regime put in place by the resolution can support peace
and stability, including through the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
In accordance with the Committee guidelines, I will
report, orally and in writing, to the Committee on the
observations and the findings of the trip.
In conclusion, I would like to thank all Member
States for their continued willingness to cooperate
constructively with the Committee and its Panel
of Experts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Skoog for his very informative briefing.

18-102585/25

S/PV.8229

The situation in Mali

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Annadif, for his most informative briefing
and his exemplary commitment. On behalf of France, I
wish to reiterate our full support to him and all his team.
I wish also to thank the Permanent Representative of
Sweden, Olof Skoog, for his briefing and for his work
at the helm of the sanctions Committee. I wish also to
warmly welcome the presence here of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly,
and to thank him for having travelled to New York to
take part in our work.
I wish to begin my statement by hailing the memory
of the three Blue Helmets who perished last week during
attacks against the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
France pays tribute to the memory of these warriors
for peace. Their sacrifice serves as a reminder of how
MINUSMA is evolving in a difficult environment and
of the key role it plays in promoting the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
and in protecting the Malian people from those who
oppose it and in so doing resort to actions that include
terrorist attacks and criminal acts. France, engaged
alongside the United Nations peacekeeping Mission, is
aware of this threat and itself has suffered therefrom, as
two French soldiers perished on 21 February last.
Today’s meeting is of particular importance with
respect to follow-up to the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation. The members
of the Security Council made a collective commitment,
in their statement to the press of 24 January last, to seize
the opportunity to take stock of the implementation by
the parties of the commitments made in the framework
of the priority actions timeline adopted in January. At
that point, a decision was also taken that additional
measures would be considered under the sanctions
regime if the commitments taken were not met by the
set deadlines.
We welcome the efforts made by the Government,
since the most recent meeting of the Council on Mali
(see S/PV.8163), to foster the necessary consensus on
the electoral process and restore the Administration’s
presence in central Mali. The Prime Minister’s visit
to Kidal in particular marked a restoration of highlevel political leadership and cooperation as concerns
6/25

11/04/2018

the implementation of the Peace Agreement, nearly
four years after the last visit by a comparable level of
authority to the region.
Unfortunately, it is clear that in the wake of the
deadline set by the Malian parties themselves under
the timetable of priority actions, a large part of the
commitments made have not yet been implemented.
The resulting delays are far from being inconsequential
on the ground for a number of reasons. Given the
lack of progress, all of the achievements to date and
the very relevance of the Agreement itself could end
up being called into question; the significant electoral
deadlines scheduled for the coming months make it
all the more necessary and urgent to move forward on
various aspects of the Agreement, which is imperative
to ensure the success of the elections to come; and there
can be no lasting stability in the Sahel absent the full
implementation of the Peace Agreement.
In terms of substance, it is still the same measures
whose implementation by the Malian parties we are
awaiting. It is particularly urgent that progress be
achieved, specifically in the areas of decentralization
and security. Specifically, I am thinking in terms
of the operationalization of interim authorities, the
establishment of territorial police and progress in
the process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and that of security sector reform. France
also encourages Malian authorities to pursue work
dedicated to combating impunity. It calls on all parties
to halt human rights violations.
We were pleased to note the adoption a few days
ago of a new road map, at the Prime Minister of Mali’s
initiative, announcing the implementation of measures
awaited for by Malian parties according to the revised
schedule. We can only support that initiative and hope
for its success, which includes the upcoming holding
of regular meetings of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee in Bamako. But let us be clear: the new road
map, which is unfortunately not the first, cannot let us
forget the fact that the commitments undertaken this
past January failed once again to be respected, while
the Malian people, the countries of the region and the
entire international community has been waiting for
their implementation for almost three years.
In that regard, the responsibility of the
Council — pursuant to the very terms of the peace
agreement — involves taking steps necessary to
encourage the parties to honour the commitments
18-10258

11/04/2018

The situation in Mali

that they made within that framework. The adoption
of resolution 2374 (2017), in September 2017, which
established a sanctions regime concerning Mali, was a
first step in that direction. Today, subsequent delays in
the implementation of the agreement and the failure to
realize commitments according to agreed deadlines are
driving us to take additional measures. We no longer
have the time to wait. In the coming weeks, together
with its Council partners, France will undertake the task
of identifying those obstructing the implementation of
the peace agreement, through which their names will
be determined. We intend to focus initially on a list
of officials who are undermining the implementation
of the agreement on the ground, in particular through
their collusion with terrorist groups and trafficking
activities. All Malian stakeholders must be aware that
the Security Council takes their word as their bond with
regard to upholding their commitments.
Despite the challenges it faces, MINUSMA
remains today an essential instrument for ensuring
the stability of Mali, in addition to the other security
forces present on the ground. Its role in supporting
the electoral process will be decisive in the holding of
presidential elections in July and August. Fully aware
of the difficult environment in which the Mission is
deployed, France reiterates its call on all Member
States to ensure that the Mission is provided with the
capabilities and equipment commensurate with the
mandate that the Council has conferred upon it. In
our view, that is an absolutely crucial point, especially
in terms of strengthening the safety of peacekeepers
on the ground, which is the priority of all of us. For
example, the installation of early-warning devices in
all of the Mission’s camps in the case of an indirect
attack would undoubtedly allow us to save lives, as
was tragically illustrated by the recent attacks on the
Kidal and Aguelhok camps, which were only a few
days apart. That is one of the areas in which we must
act urgently together with the Secretariat so long as
there are existing technical solutions that are moreover
available to us in the short-term.
We believe that the strategic review currently
being conducted by Ellen Margrethe Løj also affords
us a valuable opportunity to improve the performance
and outcomes of the Mission. We fully support that
process, which will be advantageous for all of us. We
will consider with interest the recommendations to
be made by the Secretary-General on the work under
way, in view of the upcoming renewal of the Mission’s

S/PV. 8229

mandate. We especially hope that they will enable us to
continue to move forward towards a better sequencing of
the mandate’s tasks so that MINUSMA can contribute
as effectively as possible to the stabilization of Mali,
including in the northern part of the country, while
supporting the Malian armed forces in conjunction with
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel), Operation Barkhane and the engagement of the
European Union. We will also take that opportunity to
work towards achieving increased clarity with regard
to the role and responsibilities of each element of the
security architecture deployed in Mali and the region.
Lastly, France welcomes the signing of the technical
arrangement between the United Nations, the European
Union and the G-5 Sahel set out in resolution 2391
(2017) in record time. The next report of the SecretaryGeneral on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force will provide a new
foundation for responding to legitimate demands for
support by the G-5 Sahel countries in terms of security
and development. We will do that by considering the
pace of the Joint Force’s operationalization on the
ground and by maintaining consensus on this issue
within the Council.
Today it is imperative to move forward quickly
towards the full implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It is that message of
urgency and shouldering responsibility that we want to
convey to all Malian parties today. We hope that it will
bring about the awaited leap forward by those who hold
the key to move Mali and the region towards lasting
peace and stability. France will continue to stand with
all those who want to advance in that direction.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We begin our statement by condemning
in the strongest terms the recent attacks perpetrated,
first, on 5 April against a camp of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in Aguelhok, in north-east Mali,
which claimed the life of two Chadian Blue Helmets,
and in which 10 were wounded, and, secondly, the
6 April attack on Gao, which resulted in the death of a
Nigerian peacekeeping staff member. The Republic of
Equatorial Guinea expresses its sincerest condolences
to the families of the fallen soldiers, to the Governments
of Chad and the Niger and MINUSMA, and wishes the
wounded a speedy recovery.
We welcome the presence of Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the

18-102587/25

S/PV.8229

The situation in Mali

Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, and His Excellency Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, for the detailed briefing that he
will deliver as he always does. We are also grateful to
Ambassador Olof Skoog, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali, for his
succinct briefing.
Equatorial Guinea accords great importance to
issues concerning Africa and the situation in Mali, a
brotherly country to which we attach great interest.
Equatorial Guinea is fully committed to achieving the
stability and peace of the country. We express our full
support for the Government’s efforts to achieve peace,
and, in that regard, we welcome its efforts to implement
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
We call on all stakeholders to join those efforts. The
international community must also monitor the process.
Mali continues to face major challenges. Terrorist
activity remains latent and a real threat to the work that
has been undertaken, as it will be nearly impossible to
stabilize the political and security situation if terrorist
groups are not eradicated. There is therefore a need
to strengthen the Malian Government in its efforts
in that struggle. It is important that the Government
consolidate its presence in all regions of the country.
In that process, it will require technical support
that must be provided with the full acquiescence of
the Government.
Terrorist activity in Mali extends beyond its borders
and represents a serious threat to the entire region, for
which reason it is important that cooperation in that
struggle remain sensitive to that aspect, thereby placing
emphasis on the importance of regional cooperation,
including regional and subregional institutions, such as
the Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union. The decision of the Heads of State of
the Group of Five for the Sahel to create joint counterterrorism forces for regional security is a welcome step
in this direction.
A few months before the presidential elections
scheduled for July 2018, it is important that significant
progress be made on the ground in the short term. The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea therefore encourages the
Government of Mali and all the signatory movements
to the Bamako Agreement to redouble their efforts to
8/25

11/04/2018

ensure the diligent implementation of all the provisions
of the Agreement, in particular by means of the timeline
of priority measures adopted at the twenty-third session
of the Agreement Monitoring Committee and to find a
consensus in the framework of the organization of the
forthcoming presidential elections. This Agreement,
which is a result of the Algiers process, remains the
only inclusive and consensual framework capable of
restoring peace and stability in Mali.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea fully subscribes to the communiqué of
23 March 2018 of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union, welcoming with full satisfaction the
operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel, which we thank for its determination and
sacrifices devoted to the promotion of peace, security
and stability in the Sahel. We reaffirm the importance
of the Nouakchott process in promoting peace and
security in Mali and the Sahelo-Sahara region and of
intensifying its efforts to bring together stabilization
and development efforts in the Sahel.
Referring to the report of the Secretary-General of
29 March 2018 (S/2018/273), it is necessary to strengthen
support for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and in
particular the capacity of the Malian defence and
security forces in terms of training and equipment,
so that they are in a better position to deal with the
asymmetric attacks they are suffering and with a view
to having better management at the national level, in
support of regional and international efforts to fight
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and
transnational organized crime.
Finally, we call on the international community to
join efforts to support the Government of Mali in the
framework of the humanitarian response plan 2018,
launched in Bamako, which aims to provide, inter alia,
basic assistance and protection in sectors such as food
security, nutrition, water and sanitation.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mahamat Saleh
Annadif and the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali,
Ambassador Olof Skoog, for their comprehensive
briefings on the activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) over the past three months and the
implementation of the Mali sanctions regime.
18-10258

11/04/2018

The situation in Mali

We are pleased to see the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly,
who is with us in the Security Council this morning.
We wish to pay tribute to the memory of the
fallen peacekeepers serving under MINUSMA. Their
greatest reward would be the restoration of full security
and peace in Mali. It is in that spirit that we strongly
condemn the series of terrorist attacks in Mali that
claimed the lives of innocent civilians and MINUSMA
peacekeepers. We express our sympathy and solidarity
with Mali, and we support all the statements issued by
the Council in this regard.
We appreciate the efforts of MINUSMA forces
in carrying out their mandated tasks under extremely
difficult circumstances. MINUSMA’s ongoing support
to Mali remains absolutely essential. It is indispensable,
as Ambassador Delattre said. That is also the case
with the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
to which we attach great importance. We welcome
the various efforts that have contributed to its full
operationalization. We acknowledge the contributions
of Operation Barkhane and of the European Union.
In the political area, we note with satisfaction
the appointment of a new Prime Minister and his
activities in working with the various stakeholders,
including fostering an environment conducive to
holding peaceful, credible and transparent elections
throughout the country. We very much welcome the
preparations made for the conduct of regional, district
and municipal elections scheduled to be held this month
and call upon all Malian parties to work towards the
smooth conduct of these elections, exercise maximum
restraint and resolve differences through dialogue. The
announcement made by the Prime Minister regarding
the measures to restore State authority and deliver
peace dividends to the people is also commendable.
It is encouraging that a timeline on the
implementation of the key provisions of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali was developed by
the Agreement Monitoring Committee, and we urge
that efforts be made for the speedy implementation
of the timeline and the strict implementation of the
peace Agreement. Those who are found to be creating
obstructions should be held responsible in line with
resolution 2374 (2017).
Despite the progressive registered, the continued
deterioration of the security situation in Mali largely

S/PV. 8229

due to the terrorist attacks in the north and the centre
of the country remains a source of serious concern.
The destructive intentions of the terrorist groups to
undermine State authority has resulted in a decrease in
the number of State officials redeployed to the northern
and central regions. The insecurity in northern and
central Mali and the limited State presence has also
worsened the humanitarian situation. Urgent action is
therefore needed to quickly reverse this situation.
We recall when Mali was a leading democratic
country in Africa and a beacon of hope for the continent.
There is no reason why Mali could not reach that status
again. It is with a view to assisting Mali regain the
momentum to achieve that noble objective that the
Council should do everything possible to have Mali’s
back. As Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Annadif has stressed, our support should not
be limited to the security area, as much that is no doubt
extremely critical.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks you, Sir, for calling today’s meeting.
We warmly welcome Mr. Coulibaly, Foreign Minister
of Mali, to the Security Council. We would like
to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Annadif and Ambassador Skoog for their
respective briefings.
Recently, there has been positive progress in
terms of implementing the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. The new Government of the
country is firmly committed to the peace process.
China expresses its appreciation for the efforts being
carried out by the Malian Government and the Malian
people. At the same time, however, the security
situation in northern and central Mali remains grim.
Terrorist activities are rampant inside the country and
in neighbouring areas, which seriously affects the peace
process. The international community should continue
to support the peace and reconciliation process in Mali
and help the country to enhance its ability to provide
for its own security and development.
First, it is necessary to increase input in the
peace process. China hopes that the signatories to the
Malian peace agreement will continue to demonstrate
political will, fully implement the various provisions of
the Agreement and work together to achieve national
development and reconstruction. The international
community should, on the basis of respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of

18-102589/25

S/PV.8229

The situation in Mali

the country, help Mali to increase its ability to provide
for its own development and governance. The Chair
of the Mali sanctions committee, Ambassador Skoog,
recenlty led the Council’s mission to the country and
held talks with various parties concerned. China hopes
that the sanctions committee will play a constructive
role in facilitating the Malian peace process.
Secondly, the security situation in the country
continues to deteriorate. The international community
should, as requested by the Government, continue to
support and help the Government to enhance its security
and counter-terrorism capacity-building so that the latter
can gradually assume the responsibility for maintaining
order and security on its entire territory. It is necessary
to take an integrated approach and, through regional
cooperation, to respond to terrorist activities inside
the country and along the borders. China welcomes
the formation of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which will enable them to
cope and respond to terrorist activities and threats on
their own initiative, and hopes that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the international community
will continue to provide support to the countries of the
region and the Joint Force.

11/04/2018

and installations for security are in place. At the
same time, we hope that it will continue to strengthen
communications with troop-contributing countries and
donors so as to ensure that it has the equipment and
resources necessary to execute its mandate and ensure
self-protection.
China has more than 400 peacekeepers deployed to
MINUSMA. We will resolutely honour our commitment
to peace in Mali and, with the rest of the international
community, to support the peace and reconciliation
process in the country so as to help it to achieve peace,
stability and development.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, for his very inciteful briefing, as always,
and the work he does with his team on the ground.
I also want to express our appreciation for the
presence, once again, of Minister Coulibaly, which is
much appreciated and useful.

China commends the timely briefing by the
Secretariat on MINUSMA’s support for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Forces and looks forward to an update from the
Secretary-General’s May report in that connection.

While it is clear that some progress is being made
in Mali, concerns remain over the security situation and
the pace of implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. I should like to pay tribute
to the work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
in difficult and often dangerous circumstances. Our
thoughts remain with the families of the peacekeepers
from Chad and the Niger who lost their lives in the
attacks that occurred in Aguelhok and Gao last week.
The Malian Government has the primary responsibility
to fight impunity for violence and ensure access to justice
for all, including by prioritizing the reconciliation and
justice measures in the peace Agreement. In this regard,
we welcome the new Government’s ambitious plans to
restore security, particularly in central Mali — always,
of course, in full respect for human rights.

The issue of the security of MINUSMA personnel
is deeply concerning. Since the start of this year, there
have been three attacks on peacekeepers, resulting in
the deaths of peacekeepers from Bangladesh, Chad and
the Niger. China offers its condolences to the bereaved
the families and to the Governments of Bangladesh,
Chad and the Niger. The international community
should do more to enhance the safety and security of the
peacekeepers, and we hope that MINUSMA will beef
up its security measures so as to ensure that supplies

On 24 January, the Security Council adopted a
press statement (SC/13177) that clearly set out our
expectations in relation to the key reforms foreseen
under the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. We expressed a shared sense of impatience at
persistent delays in the Agreement’s implementation,
as well as our intention to assess progress and respond
with appropriate steps, if needed. The time to evaluate
progress has now come; we are ready to engage with all
parties and key actors to do so.

Thirdly, China appreciates and supports the
tremendous work carried out by MINUSMA and
Special Representative Annadif to facilitate the peace
process and to strengthen security capacity-building in
Mali. We hope that MINUSMA will continue to work
in close cooperation and coordination with the Malian
Government so as to help the country to strengthen its
security capacity-building and promote disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

10/25

18-10258

11/04/2018

The situation in Mali

We welcome the continued engagement of the
parties in the implementation process. The recent visit
of Prime Minister Maïga to the northern and central
regions is encouraging, as is the ongoing drafting
process of a national strategy on security sector reform.
However, engagement must be further translated into
tangible actions. We regret that most of the deadlines
set out in the January timetable have not been met.
We stand ready to continue to work with the parties to
implement the roadmap, as further revised in March. We
hope that there will be no further delays or adjustments
to the timetable going forward.
We reiterate the need for substantial steps towards
the full implementation of the peace Agreement as
a prerequisite for successful elections. At the same
time, it is crucial for Mali and the peace process that
elections be duly and legitimately undertaken and that
electoral timetables be fully respected. As the date set
for the planned elections gets closer, there is no time
to spare. All parties have a responsibility to honour
their commitments and engage in confidence-building
measures without further delay.
We welcome and echo the Secretary-General’s
call for the inclusion of women and youth in all the
mechanisms supporting the implementation of the
Agreement, as well as among interim authorities.
Inclusivity and the full and effective participation of
women, including in elected and nominated functions
and decision-making structures related to the peace
process, is essential to building a sustainable peace.
For that reason, the meeting on 16 January between the
President of the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
the High Representative of the President for the
peace process and MINUSMA with a delegation of
women representing signatory armed groups and
civil society was encouraging. However, the further
institutionalization of women’s inclusion in the
mechanisms supporting the implementation of the
Agreement is needed.
All the tools needed to support the peace process
are now in place, including the independent observer,
the International Commission of Inquiry on Mali and
resolution 2374 (2017). We encourage the parties to
take advantage of this opportunity. I want to again
thank Foreign Minister Coulibaly for his availability
and active engagement during the visit to Mali of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017) concerning Mali. It was clear that the parties
took the sanctions instrument seriously, with all parties

S/PV. 8229

to the peace agreement expressing their support and
engaging. That engagement needs to be sustained
Finally, MINUSMA’s presence remains a key
factor for stability in Mali. Its support for the Malian
Government serves to build confidence between
State actors and the population. We look forward to
the conclusions of the independent strategic review,
which we hope will identify ways to enhance the
performance of the Mission. We are proud to contribute
to MINUSMA’s important work as it continues to
support the parties to deliver on their commitment
to implementing the outstanding provisions of the
peace Agreement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Foreign
Minister Coulibaly for taking time to join us today. I
should like to join colleagues in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing and my Swedish colleague for his report and
the expeditious work of his Committee.
Like other speakers, we condemn the recent
attacks against the peacekeepers in Mali, and we
offer our condolences to the families of the three
peacekeepers of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
who were killed last week, to MINUSMA, and to the
Governments and the people of Chad and the Niger. I
would just like to say how much I agree with what the
Ethiopian Ambassador said about the greatest reward
being progress on the ground. I think we all want to
help MINUSMA to that end.
The United Kingdom strongly supports the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It is
the primary basis for sustainable peace and stability in
Mali, and we need progress also in order to deny space
to extremists. As other speakers have noted, at the
Security Council’s last meeting on Mali in January (see
S/PV.8163) and also in its subsequent press statement
(SC/13177), we welcomed the renewed commitment
of the Government and the signatory armed groups
to actually implementing the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation by the end of March, and that was
agreed in the revised timetable of 16 January.
However, and disappointingly, it has been common
theme of all interventions today that the persistent
delays that tested the Council’s patience in January are
still continuing to frustrate us today, some time after
the original deadline. There has been some positive
progress, and I do not want to underplay that, but it is

18-1025811/25

S/PV.8229

The situation in Mali

also clear that this just has not been enough. The parties
have agreed yet another new road map, rather than
focusing on implementation of the existing timetable.
There have been numerous revised deadlines and
they have not been met. The delay to implementation
will, unfortunately, have an impact on Mali’s ability
to conduct peaceful and inclusive presidential and
parliamentary elections this year, and that, in turn,
risks further destabilization to the security and
humanitarian situation.
In January, the Council noted the tools available
under the Mali sanctions regime and expressed its
intention to respond with appropriate steps should the
parties not implement the commitments they made. In
view of the lack of progress, the United Kingdom now
supports action to identify those obstructing, delaying
or threatening the implementation of the Agreement,
with a view to imposing sanctions on those actors.
As I have stated, it is down to the parties themselves
to implement the Agreement; but, like others, I would
like to note the key role played by MINUSMA in the
implementation. We commend the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and all the staff,
especially considering the challenging circumstances
in which the military and civilian components are
operating. As we look forward to renew MINUSMA’s
mandate in June, we must ensure that its mandate is
clear, it focuses on supporting the implementation of
the Agreement and it is adequately equipped to support
peace in Mali.
With that in mind, I have another call on all
Member States to ensure that the continued shortfall
of troop numbers and equipment, including the need
for further air cover, reconnaissance capability and
armoured personnel carriers, is generously met. The
United Kingdom is committed to tackling threats in
the Sahel. Following the Anglo-French summit in
January, we have contributed Chinook helicopters to
support Operation Barkhane, and those are aligned and
working closely with MINUSMA. That is all designed
to promote stabilization in a bid to enable MINUSMA
to carry out its core mandate.
Finally, let me say that we too are disturbed by
reports of summary executions by the Forces Armées
Maliennes, and we strongly encourage the Government
to investigate those reports and ensure accountability
for those responsible. I join the French Ambassador in
stressing how important that is. Human rights reporting
12/25

11/04/2018

and monitoring should be prioritized in the MINUSMA
mandate, and we hope that it will be able to address
those and other important human rights violations by
signatory armed groups.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing appreciation to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Annadif and Ambassador
Skoog for their comprehensive briefings. We also
welcome to Chamber His Excellency Mr. Тiéman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Mali.
We thank him for being with us today. We fully
endorse
the
Secretary-General’s
well-reflected
quarterly report (S/2018/273) and make the following
observations and recommendations for the Security
Council’s consideration.
It is clear that the accelerated implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
should be our main priority. Kazakhstan welcomes the
efforts of the Malian Government, with the support of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the African Union and regional actors, to work
with all sides towards advancing compliance with
the Agreement. We hope that recent developments,
including the visits by His Excellency Prime Minister
Maïga to Mopti and Kidal and the visits to Mali by the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali,
and by the United Nations Panel of Experts, as well
as the establishment of the International Commission
of Inquiry for Mali, will give impetus to the peace
process. We encourage all parties to comply with the
agreed road map to operationalize the “chronogram”
for the implementation of the remaining provisions of
the Agreement.
To achieve lasting peace and stability in Mali,
it is necessary to implement the key provisions of
the Agreement related to decentralization, defence
and security areas. That should be accompanied
by efforts to bring about national reconciliation, as
well as ensure basic services, resilience-building,
economic development, good governance and the rule
of law. In that regard, we support the Government’s
multidimensional strategy for the central regions and
emphasis on the importance of creating potential for
the security-development nexus, as well as a revamped
and innovative regional approach to finalize the
development agenda for the northern regions. On the
other hand, genuinely including women and youth in the
18-10258

11/04/2018

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8229

peace process and decision-making is also important
for enduring stability.

special tribute to the brave men and women who made
the ultimate sacrifice of their life for the cause of peace.

Another critical task is to ensure the transparent,
fair, peaceful and inclusive holding of the 2018
presidential and legislative elections in one of the
leading democracies in Africa, as stressed today by the
Permanent Representative of Ethiopia. The assistance
from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and from
the international community will therefore be most
critical for a successful electoral process and final
elections, beneficial to all. Addressing the deteriorating
humanitarian situation is equally important. We
therefore call on international partners and donors to
fund the humanitarian response plan for 2018, and urge
all parties to comply with international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

Ms. Tachco (United States of America): Like
others, I want to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Annadif for his briefing, which
is always excellent, and also Ambassador Skoog for
leading the mission to Mali and for his briefing today.
I would also like to join others in welcoming Foreign
Minister Coulibaly back to New York. It is great to
see him here committed to moving forward on the
peace process in Mali and undertaking the security
challenges there.

Kazakhstan is deeply concerned by the significantly
deteriorating, grave security situation in the north
and centre of Mali. To address the capability gaps of
MINUSMA, it is essential to provide better equipment
and predeployment training for the contingents, with
enhanced equipment, surveillance and more robust
combat capabilities, which is needed as situations
of asymmetrical conflict arise in Mali. We believe
that the ongoing strategic review of MINUSMA will
contribute to enhancing the Mission’s capabilities and
improving the security situation. In that vein, it is
time to protect not only the Mission’s personnel, but
also Malians themselves. Most of the activities and
the budget of MINUSMA, from now on, should be
rearranged accordingly.
We are convinced that the operationalization
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) will substantially reinforce the efforts of
MINUSMA and the national security forces of Mali to
combat terrorism and other cross-border threats that
require innovative approaches to completely eliminate
the scourge. We commend international partners for
mobilizing financial support for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force at the Brussels conference, which will make the
Force fully operational. We also support the decision of
the African Union Peace and Security Council made on
23 March on the situation in Mali.
Finally, we, like others, strongly condemn violent
attacks perpetrated by terrorist groups against
civilians, humanitarian workers, Malian security forces
and MINUSMA. We would like to conclude by paying

Like others as well, I take this opportunity to
express our deepest condolences and sympathy to the
families of the three peacekeepers of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) who made the ultimate sacrifice in
the name of peace during last week’s attacks, as well as
to the Governments Chad and the Niger. We also wish
those injured in the attacks a very speedy recovery.
Foreign Minister Coulibaly vowed to the Security
Council in January (see S/PV.8163) that his Government
was committed to making progress on the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. In addition,
also in January, the signatories to the Agreement
agreed to a revised timeline — or “chronogram”, as
it is referred to — which promised major gains in the
Peace Agreement implementation by March. Now, in
mid-April, there is still no substantive progress in the
implementation of the Agreement. The United States
has expressed concern many times in this Chamber,
and the Council has made similar declarations in its
statements and resolutions, that time is running out for
the peace process in Mali. Yet we see little progress
from the parties, despite our repeated sounding of
the alarm.
In January the Security Council unanimously
declared its intention, absent progress on the timeline,
to respond with appropriate steps. Our tools include
the sanctions regime we have authorized for political
spoilers who engage in obstruction, including through
the purposeful delay of the implementation of the
Agreement. That also includes spoilers who obstruct
through collusion with transnational organized
criminals or those who plan or conduct attacks,
regardless of affiliation. We look forward to working
with our Council colleagues to identify, in a careful

18-1025813/25

S/PV.8229

The situation in Mali

and balanced way, individuals who fit that criteria and
proceed accordingly.
There is truly no more time to waste, because Mali
faces a desperate and worsening security crisis. We
are alarmed about the deteriorating security situation
in central Mali, in particular where violent extremists
exploit absent State authority by increasing their control
over disputed territory, restricting traditional practices,
forcing the closure of schools and threatening civilians
with violence if they cooperate with the Malian
authorities. We should also recognize that violent
extremists build their own community relations and
administration in the absence of Government.
The dangers continue to grow, as the number of
improvised-explosive-device attacks affecting civilians
have increased dramatically. The recent doubling of
lethal attacks against MINUSMA and Malian defence
and security forces is also extremely troubling.
However, the lack of State authority is not the only
problem. When the State moves into territories, it must
be seen as a positive thing for the local population.
MINUSMA’s support to deploy Malian armed forces
in order to establish State presence in central Mali is
crucial, but the operations must respect human rights,
promote accountability and engage local communities.
We are particularly concerned about the reports of
possible extra-judicial killings in Diora last week, as
well as other outstanding allegations of human rights
abuses and violations by security forces. We look
forward to the results of Government and MINUSMA
investigations into such allegations, including
appropriate steps to ensure accountability.
As others have done today, the United States
commends the conclusion of the technical and financial
agreements among the United Nations, the European
Union and the Group of Five for the Sahel, and we
applaud the ongoing operationalization of the Joint
Force. With half a billion dollars in pledges at the
February donors conference in Brussels, a technical
agreement to provide the Force with logistical support
and continuing regional efforts with partners to find
holistic solutions to the region’s problems, it is clear that
Mali has dedicated partners that contribute their time,
resources, political support and, in some instances,
their lives to counter the violent extremist threat. It is
all the more reason for Mali’s signatory parties to the
Peace Agreement to do their part.
14/25

11/04/2018

We look forward to the results of the SecretaryGeneral’s strategic review of MINUSMA next
month and urge the review team to make specific,
clear and achievable recommendations for the
Council’s consideration, with the inclusion of specific
recommendations for specific actors to undertake.
The situation in Mali is critical. The brave and
courageous peacekeepers in MINUSMA and the Malian
people deserve better than what the signatory parties to
the Peace Agreement are delivering. MINUSMA cannot
solve the current conflict in Mali. The Government of
Mali and the signatory parties must chart the way to
resolving Mali’s underlying conflict so the country can
turn its full attention to providing for its citizens and
addressing the terrorist threat. We look forward to their
immediate progress on the most recent road map.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like very much to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. Annadif, and the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali,
His Excellency Ambassador Skoog. We appreciate their
valuable briefings on the most recent developments in
the Republic of Mali. We also commend the Special
Representative on his efforts to ease political tensions
among all the parties concerned and to implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We
also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, Mr. Coulibaly, who
is participating in today’s meeting. In my statement
today I will address three key issues, namely, the
security, political and humanitarian situations.
First, with regard to the security situation, we are
concerned about, and have paid close attention to, the
increasing use of improvised explosive devices by
terrorist groups over the past two years. The number
of incidents in which such devices were used has
exceeded 269 since the beginning of 2016. They have
killed nearly 230 people and injured 480. We commend
MINUSMA and other international partners, as well
as the security forces in Mali, on their efforts to train
and build the capacity of security personnel, provide
the necessary military resources to the security sector
and support Operational Coordination Mechanism. We
must speed up the operationalization of the Mechanism
to ensure that all combatants are integrated into the
security sector, according to the number agreed upon,
18-10258

11/04/2018

The situation in Mali

in order to address security threats and ensure control
over the northern areas.
The State of Kuwait extends its deep condolences
to the families of the victims of the two terrorist
attacks that took place in Aguelhok and Gao, as well
as to the Governments of the Niger and Chad and to
MINUSMA. We are deeply saddened about the ongoing
deterioration of the security situation in Mali. We are
concerned about the increasing number of civilian
victims during the most recent reporting period and
about continued attacks on security personnel, in
particular the Blue Helmets, who risk their lives daily
to ensure stability and security in Mali. We reiterate our
support and gratitude to them and to all peacekeepers.
Our gratitude will always fall short, regardless of how
much we thank them.
With regard to the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel, the State of Kuwait welcomes the pledges
made during the donors conference held in Brussels on
23 February, which will enable the Force to carry out its
tasks to the fullest. In that regard, we look forward to
the report of the Secretary-General in May.
Secondly, concerning the political situation,
we welcome the road map that was signed by all the
relevant parties on 22 March. We urge them to commit
themselves to the timeline agreed upon. We reiterate
our position that the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is the main solution
to the ongoing crisis in Mali. We commend the group
of mediators, led by Algeria, the United Nations and
participating regional and international organizations
on their efforts to reduce security and political tensions
in Mali. We also call upon the Government of Mali to
play its role and create an environment conducive to
implementing the Agreement by taking key political
steps, such as cooperating with all parties to ensure
the completion of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, security sector reform and
the decentralization process. We underscore that the
absence of State authority in northern Mali will thwart
comprehensive progress.
We welcome the visit by the Prime Minister
Maïga to the city of Kidal, in northern Mali, to
bridge the political gap and rebuild trust between
the residents of that area and the central Government
and to resume social services in the region. We also
welcome the cooperation among all signatory parties
to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation with

S/PV. 8229

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in preparation for the upcoming presidential and local
elections. We also commend MINUSMA on its efforts
to prepare for those elections. We urge the Government
to ensure smooth and transparent elections in which
all segments of the population can participate. We also
encourage the Government to implement the remaining
provisions of the Agreement in line with the agreed
road map.
Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
we urge all parties to honour their commitments in line
with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, and to take the necessary steps to
prevent collateral damage in military operations. We
welcome the steps taken by the Malian Government
to investigate such incidents. We reiterate our support
to the International Commission of Inquiry on Mali,
which will investigate gross violations and abuses of
international law, including sexual violence in time
of conflict. We also welcome the Secretary-General’s
efforts to combat human rights abuses.
We welcome the decision of the Government of
Mali to adopt the Safe Schools Declaration. We fully
believe that educating youth will promote security and
stability in any country. We call upon the Government
to redouble its efforts to reopen all of the schools that
were closed throughout the country. We also commend
the efforts of humanitarian organizations that are
cooperating with the central Government to meet the
humanitarian needs of the residents of the northern
regions. We urge all parties to ensure the safety of
humanitarian workers.
In conclusion, Kuwait underscores that the role of
the United Nations in Mali and the Sahel is indispensable
at this stage. We look forward to the outcome of the
MINUSMA strategic review in preparation for the
renewal of its mandate next June so as to make its work
more efficient in the current difficult environment. I
would like to emphasize that we are ready to work with
all members of the Security Council during the coming
period to ensure the necessary mandate for the Mission
and facilitate the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his informative

18-1025815/25

S/PV.8229

The situation in Mali

11/04/2018

briefing, and Ambassador Skoog for his presentation on
the work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali.

and organized criminals, but also on creating job
opportunities for youth and ensuring accountability for
serious crimes that destabilize the peace process.

(spoke in French)

My third point concerns MINUSMA capacity gaps,
which continue to affect the Mission’s operations as well
as the safety and security of its personnel. MINUSMA
peacekeepers continue to be targeted by attacks that
are increasingly complex and lethal. Poland welcomes
the technical agreement among the United Nations, the
European Union and the Group of Five for the Sahel,
signed at the Brussels conference in February, with
a view to providing the Joint Force with operational
and logistical support through MINUSMA. We look
forward to the Secretary-General’s upcoming update of
United Nations support to Joint Force.

I also wish to welcome Mr. Tiéman Hubert
Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali.
(spoke in English)
Let me express my strongest condemnation of the
recent attacks against MINUSMA in Aguelhok and
Gao, which caused the deaths of one Nigerian and two
Chadian peacekeepers, and injured 10 others. I would
like to express my deepest condolences and sympathy
to the families of the victims and to the Governments of
Chad and the Niger, as well as to wish a quick and full
recovery to those who were injured.
I would like to focus my intervention on three issues,
that is, the political process, the security situation and
the capacities of the MINUSMA.
On the political process, the implementation
of the arduously achieved Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali remains slow in the face of
the current challenges and needs. Tangible progress
in priority areas, including decentralization, security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, is crucial to advance the peace process.
Holding the presidential elections on time will be vital
for Mali to avoid serious political tension. However,
organizing the elections in a situation where the State
remains absent in a large part of the country may
even deepen the crisis. In that context, restoring State
authority over the entire territory should be of the utmost
urgency. Poland supports all the necessary measures
taken by the Security Council against individuals and
entities engaged in actions or policies that threaten the
implementation of the peace process or the security and
stability of Mali.
On the security situation, the situation in northern
and central Mali continues to be critical and remains a
serious threat to regional stability in the Sahel. Terrorist
groups continue to carry out attacks against innocent
civilians as well as MINUSMA and French and Malian
forces. At the same time, counter-terrorism operations
continue to raise grave human rights concerns. We
believe that the fragile security situation in the region
requires a multidimensional approach focused not
only on military operations against terrorist networks
16/25

In conclusion, Poland commends the tireless efforts
of the men and women of MINUSMA in extremely
difficult circumstances and fully supports the Special
Representative Annadif. We also look forward to the
outcome of the ongoing strategic review of the Mission,
led by Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, which will provide
guidelines for the future direction of MINUSMA.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): The delegation of Côte d’Ivoire would
like to thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his briefing
on the progress in the peace process in Mali and the
support efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We would also like to thank Ambassador Olof Skoog,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali, for
his briefing. We would also like to welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Mali, Mr. Tiéman Hubert Coulibaly, to New York to
take part in these meetings.
Mr. Annadif’s briefing adequately informed us on
the encouraging indicators in the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
but also alerted us to the persistent threats, specifically
the resurfacing of security, humanitarian and
socioeconomic challenges in northern and central Mali.
Those challenges remain a concern for the Council
and remind us of the need to pursue multidimensional
support for MINUSMA, the Malian Government and
all stakeholders in the crisis, with a view to sustainably
restoring peace and stability to Mali.
18-10258

11/04/2018

The situation in Mali

Côte d’Ivoire, neighbour to Mali, is closely
following the developments in the political and
security situation in this brotherly country. We
reiterate our support to the Government of Mali in the
comprehensive and inclusive implementation of the
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement in the context
of a peaceful and sustainable resolution of the current
crisis. While the delegation of Côte d’Ivoire welcomes
the demonstrated progress in Mali, it also shares the
Secretary-General’s concerns about the delays in the
implementation of the Agreement and calls on all actors
to truly commit to its implementation, particularly with
regard to keeping to the timeline for the upcoming local
and presidential elections. Time is running out, and the
progress towards the implementation of the Agreement
would undoubtedly be a symbolic and irreversible gain
for a peaceful electoral process and a source of stability.
To that end, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the adoption,
on 16 January, by the Agreement Monitoring
Committee at its twenty-third session, with support
from MINUSMA, of a timeline for priority actions set
forth under the Agreement, particularly in the areas of
political and institutional reform, defence and security,
economic and social development, elections, justice and
reconciliation. Côte d’Ivoire encourages the Agreement
Monitoring Committee to seek national consensus on
the need for all Malian stakeholders to take ownership
of the Agreement and to work together to implement the
Algiers road map with the valuable support of Algeria,
which is leading international mediation efforts, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
With regard to national reconciliation, the Ivorian
delegation would like to express its support for the
recent visit undertaken by the Malian Prime Minister
Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga to Kidal, Gao, Tessalit
and Timbuktu. That visit, the first by a Malian Prime
Minister since 2014, enabled an easing of tensions
and restored trust by conveying a message of peace
and reconciliation to the people and political actors
of the region, who have suffered greatly as a result of
the crisis.
In view of the persistent security threats in
certain regions and the emergence of new hotbeds of
intercommunal tensions, MINUSMA should continue
to support the redeployment efforts of the national
Administration and strengthen the capacities of
institutions responsible for security in order to enable
the State to ensure the protection of civilians. If they are
to be effective, those efforts must be accompanied by

S/PV. 8229

support for the National Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commission of former combatants
and the National Council for Security Sector Reform.
Indeed, that support is essential to countering the illicit
traffic in weapons and building a republican national
army for peace and development in Mali.
Côte d’Ivoire condemns the attack on a MINUSMA
camp in Aguelhok on 5 April, which claimed the
lives of two soldiers and wounded a dozen troops in
the Chadian contingent. We salute the memory of the
deceased soldiers and wish the wounded a speedy
recover. That attack prompts the Council to consider
the importance of bridging MINUSMA’s capacity
gaps in terms of protecting its camps and securing
roads and supply convoys against attacks by terrorist
groups. The improvement of MINUSMA’s logistical
capabilities through the provision of armoured vehicles
and air assets for force projection and the evacuation of
victims remains crucial. However, it must be preceded
by calibrated training for troops on the asymmetric
peacekeeping environment specific to northern and
central Mali.
Our delegation welcomes the convergence of views
and the unity of action prevailing among Council
members with respect to MINUSMA’s support for the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
We welcome the signing of the technical agreement
among the United Nations, the European Union and the
G-5 Sahel States, pursuant to resolution 2391 (2017) of
8 December 2017, with a view to providing, through
MINUSMA, specific operational and logistical support
to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
In that vein, my delegation also welcomes the
adoption by the G-5 Sahel States of a compliance
framework on respect for human rights in order to
ensure the necessary coherence between the military
operations of the Joint Force and their obligation to
protect human rights. Respect for the compliance
framework, which incorporates the principle of
accountability, reflects not only donor demands, but
also the need for the engagement of the local population,
which is a prerequisite for the success of the Joint
Force operations.
In order to be effective, the security approach to
restoring peace and stability in Mali must be supported
by strong initiatives to provide lasting solutions to
structural development challenges, such as employment
for women and young people and their engagement in

18-1025817/25

S/PV.8229

The situation in Mali

the political process, as well as the fight against poverty
and regional disparities. By addressing the root causes
of conflict and its effects, we will be able to rebuild the
foundations of lasting peace and security in Mali.
In conclusion, I would like once again to make an
urgent appeal to all Malian stakeholders and convey to
them our country’s faith in their ability to overcome
their differences in the best interests of the people in
order to resolutely implement the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is grateful for the
briefing we received from the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Mali and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), Mr. Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, on the situation in the Republic of Mali and
developments concerning the activities being carried
out by the Mission on the ground. We also welcome
the briefing we heard from the Ambassador of
Sweden, Mr. Olof Skoog, in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017) concerning Mali. We would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome His Excellency Mr. Tiéman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Mali.
Before beginning our statement, we would like to
express our condolences and regret to the Governments
of the Niger and Chad, as well as to the families and
relatives of the MINUSMA staff who lost their lives in
the deadly attacks that took place in Gao and Kidal in
recent days.
Bolivia commends the important efforts made by
the Government of Mali as it seeks to strengthen its
institutional framework, achieve substantial progress in
the legislative and electoral fields, and set benchmarks
for the effective implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and its respective
provisions in the context of inclusive political dialogue.
We are hopeful that the strengthening of those processes
will continue to encourage the Security Council, the
international community and, of course, the people and
Government of Mali.
We also welcome the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali
and the Head of MINUSMA for the efforts that he
has undertaken to achieve peace and stability in that
brotherly country. We welcome the cooperation of the
18/25

11/04/2018

countries that contribute troops and police contingents
to serve in MINUSMA. We would like to express our
gratitude to the MINUSMA peacekeeping staff who
risk their lives, and we pay tribute to those who have
sacrificed their lives in fulfilling their duties.
We acknowledge that the challenges faced by
MINUSMA have evolved since the Mission was
deployed in 2013. The Mission is not only faced with
the violence unleashed by armed groups but must
also counter the growing threat posed by terrorist
groups and transnational crime. The terrorist threat
continues to put at risk the well-being and the very
lives of the civilian population and has put the brakes
on the economic growth and social development of the
country, which has contributed to the proliferation of
transnational organized crime and its repercussions
in the subregion, in addition to having significantly
depleted the capacities of the Malian security forces,
which have been the subject of horrific attacks.
Asymmetric attacks using improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) and small arms and light weapons
continue to worsen conditions on the ground. We are
deeply concerned to see that the insecurity in the north
and centre of Mali has continued to grow. Attacks on
State authority and Government institutions make it
abundantly clear that there is a need to craft strategies
that would provide for more effective and efficient
security mechanisms in the more vulnerable sectors
and regions.
MINUSMA’s priority should be to protect civilians
who live under the threat of physical violence, bearing
in mind that the main responsibility in that area lies
with the Malian authorities. We deem it vital to point
out that the Malian forces have suffered the most lethal
attacks and saw an increase in the number of casualties
and injuries. According to the most recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/273), 45 soldiers were
killed and 80 injured, compared with the 23 killed and
eight injured in the previous reporting period. This
underscores the vital need for MINUSMA, in line
with resolution 2364 (2017), to adopt a more active and
proactive stance in order to be able to fulfil its mandate.
On that understanding, we encourage MINUSMA
to continue to promote the implementation of the
memorandum of understanding with the Malian
Government, which will allow it to support the Malian
armed forces in the operational field as well as in
terms of intelligence-gathering, medical evacuation,
18-10258

11/04/2018

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8229

the elimination and handling of explosive ordnance,
and demining.

their lives, including in particular Dutch soldiers, in
previous years.

We therefore call on the Mission to redouble its
efforts in the area of coordination and exchange of
information with the Malian Government, so that
concrete, factual data can be obtained that can then be
captured in the relevant reports to be received by the
Security Council. The goal here is to maintain support
and enhance confidence-building measures between
the host State and MINUSMA.

Two weeks ago, the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
during its presidency of the Security Council, convened
an open debate on collective action to improve United
Nations peacekeeping operations (see S/PV.8218).
Today’s meeting affords the Council an opportunity to
translate the ambitions voiced during that debate into
concrete measures. Such measures are imperative in the
light of the plethora of problems facing Mali, including
terrorism, drug and weapons smuggling, human
trafficking and the threat of escalation and spillover to
the entire Sahel region and beyond, even to Europe.

In the light of the aforementioned, it is clear
that the security situation in Mali and in the broader
Sahel region is riven with major challenges. Bolivia
highlights the efforts made by regional and subregional
organizations, led by the African Union, in cooperation
and coordination with the Group of Five for the Sahel
joint force. We believe that such cooperation is vital in
order to combat transnational organized crime and to
ensure better and safer living conditions for the local
civilian population.
To conclude, it is vital to underscore that in this
particular instance the deep-rooted causes of conflict
that led to the volatile security situation in the region
are intrinsically related to the consequences of the
policies of interventionism and regime change.
Indeed, in the wake of the 2011 conflict in Libya, the
collateral destabilizing effects led to chaos, terrorism
and the militarization of the Sahel, with regrettable
consequences that persist to this day.
We call on and encourage the international
community to continue to lend its assistance, through
technical support and economic and humanitarian
cooperation, to all initiatives aimed at benefiting the
Malian people, with a view to achieving definitive
peace and stability in the region.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in
French): I wish to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Annadif, as well as the
Chair of the sanctions Committee, Mr. Olof Skoog,
for their respective briefings. We are pleased to note
the presence among us of His Excellency Minister
Coulibaly. As the Minister is aware, there is a deep
friendship between the peoples of our two countries,
a friendship forged by 35 years of development
cooperation and our participation in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) since 2014. I pay tribute to the
soldiers of this peacekeeping operation who laid down

In that context, I wish to focus on three elements:
first, the primacy of politics; secondly, performance;
and thirdly, the prevention of impunity.
My first point concerns the primacy of politics. As
was acknowledged by all those who participated in the
open debate, United Nations peacekeeping operations
must above all support the political process. Only with
a negotiated political settlement can lasting peace and
security come within reach. The support provided by
MINUSMA for the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali has proved essential
and remains so today.
The international community has invested heavily
in Mali. In return, we expect of all Malian parties that
they shoulder their responsibility to implement the
Peace Agreement. We join other colleagues today in
urging all signatories to renew their commitment to the
peace process. In the absence of an inclusive process,
peace will elude us. During the aforementioned debate,
Ms. Fatimata Touré noted that only 3 per cent of those
formally involved in the peace process are women.
We must see to it that all Malians are adequately
represented, as my Swedish colleague mentioned.
The most urgent steps that need to be taken
to implement the peace agreement include, first,
decentralization; secondly, security-sector reform; and
thirdly, the demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants in the Malian armed forces. We expect all
Malian parties to deliver on this. These measures are
critical to restore the legitimacy of the State in the north
and to regain people’s trust. Progress has been far too
slow for too long. We must not shy away from imposing
sanctions on spoilers of the peace process, including
trafficking networks.

18-1025819/25

S/PV.8229

The situation in Mali

My second point relates to performance. Action
for Peacekeeping, an initiative launched by the
Secretary-General during the open debate I mentioned,
emphasizes the fact that all of us bear the responsibility
to act. We must also dare to engage in an honest
process of reflection on MINUSMA’s mandate and on
the capacities necessary for it to be implemented. The
shifting conditions in Mali require MINUSMA to be
flexible and innovative. Last Thursday’s and Friday’s
attacks must serve as a reminder for Member States
of their responsibility to provide MINUSMA with
the appropriate equipment in terms of both troops
and capacities. Also crucial is the need to foster a
genuinely integrated approach among the military,
civil and police pillars, specifically when it comes to
information-sharing and intelligence-led planning.
With a view to the renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate,
in June, it would be advisable that the Security Council
receive the strategic plan requested in its resolution
2364 (2017).
The third point I wish to raise is the prevention of
impunity. Lack of accountability for the perpetrators
of human rights violations in Mali promotes instability
and jihadism. The restoration of State institutions,
including the security forces, is a basic condition for
achieving stability, but that stability can be sustainable
only within the framework of the rule of law, which
means that impunity is impermissible. The recent
discovery of a mass grave in central Mali unfortunately
shows the extent of the problems that the country is
facing. We call on the Malian Government to ensure that
the guilty parties are held accountable for their actions.
In conclusion, the only way to achieve the Malian
people’s trust is by demonstrating an unwavering
commitment to the rule of law. In that context,
the Netherlands welcomes the fact that the Malian
authorities recently handed over Mr. Al Hassan Ag
Abdoul Aziz Ag Mohamed Ag Mahmoud to the
International Criminal Court in The Hague. Given the
friendship between the peoples of our two countries, we
would like to see justice and sustainable development
for the people of Mali as soon as possible.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to welcome Mr. Tiéman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, and to thank him
for finding the time to join our meeting. I also thank
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
20/25

11/04/2018

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), for his informative briefing on the
situation in Mali, and our Swedish colleague, Mr. Olof
Skoog, for his thorough report (S/2017/1126). On the
whole, we share their concerns about the troubling
developments in Mali and believe that the dangerous
potential for conflict there remains. Unfortunately, the
geographic extent of terrorist and extremist operations
has been expanding, particularly recently. What can be
done to counter it?
First and foremost, all Malian stakeholders
should acknowledge the fact that the speedy and
comprehensive implementation of the 2015 Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is in both their
individual and national interests. In that regard, we
welcome the promulgation of the updated road map for
its implementation agreed to on 22 March between the
Platform coalition of armed groups and the Coordination
des mouvements de l’Azawad. We hope it will give
new impetus to completing the process of distributing
authority between the country’s centre and its regions
and to the successful and much-needed security-sector
reform. It will be particularly important to complete
as soon as possible the process of re-establishing the
civilian authorities and to use Government armed
forces and local volunteers to establish joint patrols
and military bases in the North, without which it will
be impossible to combat terrorist activity. At the same
time, of course, we must not lose sight of the country’s
central areas, where extremists have once again reared
their heads.
The problem of ensuring security is also a major
issue with regard to the presidential, parliamentary
and municipal elections to be held this year. It is in the
interests of all those in the military and political forces
working within the legal framework to ensure that the
elections will run smoothly and be seen to be legitimate.
We believe the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali is very important. We firmly condemn last week’s
attacks on its peacekeepers, which unfortunately
claimed several lives. Such tragic events should mobilize
us to finally bring the Mission up to full operational
readiness. We realize that MINUSMA’s successful
implementation of its mandate depends in part on its
Blue Helmets being provided with essential equipment.
We urge the troop-contributing countries not to delay
honouring the commitments that they have made not
18-10258

11/04/2018

The situation in Mali

only regarding their deployment of contingents, but
also in providing all the necessary equipment.
It will be difficult to achieve domestic political
stability without normalizing the situation in the
region as a whole. In that connection, we support
the concrete steps taken by the Group of Five for the
Sahel in establishing its Joint Force to combat terrorist
groups and conducting their first successful operation
on the ground.
As I said, we have perused Mr. Skoog’s report on
the work of the 2374 Committee with interest. I would
like to point out that in September of last year, Russia
responded to Bamako’s appeal by supporting the
adoption of resolution 2374 (2017), establishing that
subsidiary body of the Council. We believe that the
direct use of sanctions should be a measure of last resort
and that rushing to impose restrictions will hinder the
entire settlement process.
I would like to touch on one other issue. Much has
been said about the reasons for the ongoing deplorable
situation in the region, but one is truly worthy of
special mention — the current state of affairs in Libya,
the result of the overthrow of the Government in 2011.
Because of it, a virtually unchecked flood of terrorism
and weapons has been pouring out from there into
West Africa. In that regard, we stand in solidarity with
the opinions repeatedly expressed at the international
conference on the Sahel, which concluded its work in
Nouakchott on 29 March, that the Libyan crisis was
not just the main trigger destabilizing the situation in
the region but has continued to be a persistent negative
factor in it. It is crucial that Member States remember
that lesson for the future.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
At the outset, I welcome His Excellency Mr. Tiéman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali. We also thank
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), and Ambassador Olof Skoog, in
his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali, for
their briefings.
Despite some progress, Peru notes with concern the
deterioration of the security and humanitarian situation

S/PV. 8229

in Mali, particularly in the central and northern regions
of the country. Clashes continue among armed groups,
as do the activities of terrorist groups in areas with a
weak State presence. We stress the importance of the
implementation of the 2015 Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. In accordance with the timeline
and the road map adopted in March, we encourage the
promotion of defence, security, decentralization and
socioeconomic development with a view to building
lasting peace in the country. We commend the work of
the Agreement Monitoring Committee, the independent
observer and the 2374 Sanctions Committee in support
of the implementation of the Agreement. We would also
like to highlight the role of MINUSMA.
(spoke in Spanish)
We also underscore the need to move forward with
the following three goals.
The first concerns the holding of free and fair
elections this year. We believe that it is important to
ensure that the process is conducted transparently and
inclusively, includes broad citizen participation, and
serves to bring more women and young people into
political life. Regional and international support are
also important.
The second goal concerns the implementation
of a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme for former combatants, as well as reform
of the security sector. In that regard, we commend the
efforts of the Malian Government and encourage it to
continue to move ahead and pick up the pace.
Nevertheless, we must bear in mind that the crisis
in Mali is connected with the entire Sahel region. We
consider it necessary to pay special attention to the
links between terrorism and cross-border organized
crime and to strengthen the regional response to these
scourges, inter alia, by increasing operational and
logistical support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). In that regard, we welcome
the signing of the technical agreement between
MINUSMA, the European Union and the members
of the G-5 Sahel, in accordance with resolution 2391
(2017), and encourage donors to continue to contribute
to that effort.
Thirdly, with regard to the strengthening of
MINUSMA’s operational capabilities, we are concerned
that 100 per cent of the authorized force has not yet been
deployed and that it continues to lack equipment. We

18-1025821/25

S/PV.8229

The situation in Mali

look forward to the results of the MINUSMA strategic
review, which will help redefine the Mission’s action
plan and strategies in the light of the challenges on the
ground in the forthcoming renewal of its mandate.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Mali.
Mr. Coulibaly (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by mentioning the terrible news that came
to us this morning about the plane crash in Algeria, in
which 257 people died. On behalf of Mali and on behalf
of everyone in the Chamber today, I would like to
express our feelings of compassion and condolences to
the People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria, a country
that is dear to us and which plays an absolutely central
role in the peace process in Mali.
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your presidency of the Security Council for this month
of April and express to the delegation of the Netherlands
our appreciation for the remarkable manner in which
it conducted the work of the Council over the past
month. I would also like to convey the message of deep
gratitude of the President of the Republic of Mali to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr António
Guterres, for his personal commitment to the wellbeing of the people of Mali, the Sahel region and the
world as a whole.
Recent visits by United Nations officials and envoys
illustrate the quality of the cooperation that has existed
between the United Nations and the Government of
Mali since the beginning of this crisis, the settlement
and peace processes of which are under way. We take
note of the report of the Secretary-General on the period
under review (S/2018/273) and thank Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali and Head of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), for his briefing, which focused
on the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, the political perspectives and
the actions carried out by MINUSMA.
A little less than three months ago, on 23 January,
during an exercise similar to this morning’s meeting (see
S/PV.8163), I informed the Security Council of the four
priority objectives that the President of the Republic had
assigned to the new Government team, the first of which
22/25

11/04/2018

was the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, which emerged from the
Algiers process. Today Mali welcomes the recognition
in the Secretary-General’s report of the new impetus
given to the peace process since the establishment by
the President, on 30 December 2017, of the Government
headed by Prime Minister Soumeylou Boubèye Maïga.
The Head of Government’s tour from 22 to
26 March in the northern and central regions of Mali,
specifically in Tessalit, Timbuktu, Gao, Kidal, Koro,
Bankass, Bandiagara and Djenné, regions affected by
destabilization and infested by terrorists, is part of
this dynamic. The tour lived up to all its promises. It
embodied the hope of true peace and reconciliation in our
country. The Prime Minister’s visit not only addressed
the legitimate concerns of our people with respect to
the expected peace dividends, but also established the
Government’s commitment to continuing its efforts for
the full and complete implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation.
In Mali, the Government understands and shares
the impatience with the delays in the implementation of
certain provisions of the Agreement, but I would like
to reassure the Security Council and the international
community as a whole, which is assisting Mali, of the
Government’s firm determination, under the authority
of the President, to bring the peace process in Mali to
a successful conclusion. But we can already look back
with satisfaction at a number of advances that have
been made in the implementation of the Agreement.
The first appreciable achievements, which are not
often mentioned, are reflected in the total cessation of
all belligerence not only among the signatory parties
but also between the Malian army and the signatory
movements. Council members will recall that at a
one time the clashes among these groups seriously
undermined the implementation of the Agreement.
I would like to point out the progressive
redeployment of the Administration in the northern
and central regions through the recent appointment of
prefects and sub-prefects and the ongoing strengthening
of the interim authorities to respond to an appeal
launched by the international community, for which the
Malian State has allocated very significant budgetary
resources despite the well-known economic situation of
Mali and our limited means. I addition — and this has
been mentioned several times this morning — I would
point to the adoption, on 22 March, of the road map for
18-10258

11/04/2018

The situation in Mali

the implementation of the timeline that we presented
to the Council in January. This is important because
all parties have reviewed the implementation plan for
this timeline and have signed this new document, which
will soon be presented to those Council members who
have not already seen it.
The timeline not only presents a realistic approach
but it also expresses a commitment by the various
parties. Our position here in January was that the
Security Council should receive this timeline, consider
it as a working document and activate all possible tools,
including the Sanctions Committee, so that all actors
would be moved to respect commitments.
This new road map, which is not in fact an
additional document, but is a version of the actions
to be implemented wisely and perhaps to be sorted
out according to what is absolutely urgent, what can
wait a little bit and perhaps what divides us that needs
internal Malian discussion in order to move forward, is,
in my opinion, a document that will not only allow us
to navigate the presidential elections in July, which will
be partly secured by the signatory movements — this
commitment has been made — but also to lead us to
the legislative elections at the end of the year. This
year’s electoral process, once completed, will move us
towards the local and regional elections, which are very
important for the implementation of the Agreement
and in which we will see the emergence of new actors
from the signatory movements who will also be ready
to stand for election, take control of the regions and
restore political balance to the country.
I would also highlight the holding of the high-level
workshop on security reform. The Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Rule of Law and Security Institutions,
Mr. Zuev, was in Bamako and attended that exercise,
which heralded good news with regard to the reform
process, including the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. There were constructive
discussions on the issue of DDR and the registration
of ex-combatants in many regions. We are expecting
that the cantonment sites will soon receive the first excombatants to speed up all those steps.
Clearly, all those gains are fragile. I know that.
We know that. They are all the more fragile because
the implementation of the Agreement is taking place
in a complex and difficult environment, characterized
by the activities of groups linked to terrorism, violent
extremism or trafficking, mixed up with the interests

S/PV. 8229

set by a political agenda of terrorist groups who want
to replace States building democracy, or national
States, by States where the laws of evil and crime
prevail. That manifests itself at the transnational level,
which, as many have said, largely goes beyond Mali’s
borders. That project of violence, obscurantism and
enslavement is a cross-border issue. Our approach in
Mali is subject to that dynamic, which looms over the
entire Sahel region.
Those groups seek to establish a sanctuary for
criminal organizations in our region. We have to
fight every day in order for our stabilization and
peace processes for the Sahel region to flourish in a
climate that is endlessly disrupted by those groups. It is
therefore important to consider consistent international
action in support of the initiatives of our countries, such
as the operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), so that we can move
forwards towards peace and ownership of our process.
An objective set by the President of the Republic for
the Government is to contain the increasing insecurity
in the centre of the country. In that regard, we welcome
the encouraging results of the implementation of the
integrated security strategy for the centre with a view
to ensuring calm and the effective restoration of State
authority to that part of the country. The Government is
increasingly showing its presence and providing basic
social services for our population. We should note that,
during his visit, the Prime Minister highlighted those
central regions so that the population feels the State
presence and its commitment to restoring order there.
As I said early, the regional dimension of the
insecurity is part of the mandate entrusted to the Joint
Force of the G-5 Sahel. The implementation level of
the Force should be commended. Mali continues to
fully support the Niger presidency, which assumed
the leadership of that body a few months ago. In the
context of international solidarity, we would like to
support the appeal of the Secretary-General for the
release of the funds pledged at the Brussels meeting
of 23 February. That is extremely important because
that tool complements the actions led by United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali.
The third priority of our Government is the
successful organization of the elections. I would like to
clearly and categorically affirm that our Government
is determined to hold transparent, inclusive and

18-1025823/25

S/PV.8229

The situation in Mali

credible elections throughout the country, in line with
the constitutional timeline. As I said, the visit of the
Prime Minister to the northern region, provided an
opportunity for the signatory movements to affirm
their support for that process. It is essential that those
movements help to ensure the security of the electoral
process. We will start with the election of the President
of the Republic, which is the most important election,
followed by legislative elections for the new Parliament.
The material and logistical provisions have been made
for the vote to be free, fair and peaceful. The electoral
register will be audited independently so that key tool
for the elections enjoys consensus.
In its electoral practices, Mali has not experienced
post-electoral conflict violence because we have
always respected the principles of inclusivity and
consensus in advance. In the same way, today there
is a framework of consultation among the ministries,
regional administrations and all elements of our
society, including civil society. The concerns expressed
about the inclusion of women and young people in that
process have been taken into account. Since November,
Mali has been registering those who have reached the
age of legal majority in order for the registration to be
complete. That exercise was carried out and, at the time
of the audit, we can be sure that our electoral register
is fully agreed.
I would like to say that there is no place for
impunity in Mali. All acts found to contravene the law
or respect for human rights will be properly dealt with
in the courts. Judicial arrangements are in place and
the prosecutor is engaged. Any person found guilty of
human rights violations will be appropriately dealt with
under the law. We know that is a condition for the sincere
commitment of all to the peace process and for trust to
be restored in our country. However, I would like to
express our reservations with regard to reported events,
in particular the indifference of our army when there
was a series of fires in some villages. In the most polite
way, I would like to refute that. Our army could not
be indifferent to a part of the Malian population being
subjected to events that threaten the lives of their fellow
citizens. For all the rest, we will await the findings of
the judicial authorities so that any procedures provided
for under the law can be implemented, where necessary.
Here in this Chamber, I would like to affirm our
support for the actions of Ambassador Skoog, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2374 (2017) concerning Mali, whom we hosted.
24/25

11/04/2018

Before the Council, we would like to affirm our full
and complete cooperation with all missions — those
of the independent observer and of the International
Commission of Inquiry on Mali — and with everything
that is necessary for the peace process and cooperation
between Mali and the United Nations to be not only
smooth but also marked by the seal of trust.
The humanitarian situation is worrisome. Clearly,
we expect the support of the international community
while we ourselves, in line with our resources, which
are of course limited, do our utmost to support our
fellow citizens who may find themselves in a fragile
humanitarian situation.
With regard to schools, some have already reopened.
The Prime Minister has taken steps to ensure that all
Koranic schools in the centre are integrated into the
national educational system in order to take charge not
only of the material but also of the curriculum taught
in those schools. Those challenges are significant. We
support the appeal of the Secretary-General to the
countries that have pledged to fulfil their commitments
in order to bridge the gap between the available funds, at
approximately $8 million, and the urgent humanitarian
needs, estimated at a total of $263 million.
In conclusion, I would also like to express our
unequivocal support for MINUSMA’s work. We
commend the outstanding leadership of the Head
of MINUSMA, Mr. Annadif, who works tirelessly
every day to personally ensure the sound and smooth
functioning of MINUSMA. We also commend his team,
which works so hard in Bamako on a daily basis. That
is essential, particularly at a time when the strategic
review is under way and when, I have no doubt, in
June important decisions will be taken for the future
of MINUSMA.
I align line myself with the appeals made to increase
the resources available to MINUSMA and for measures
to be taken to enhance the protection of the troops, as
well as for greater interaction between MINUSMA,
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and all those involved in
military efforts.
The situation is worrisome, as many here in the
Chamber have said. Nonetheless, I remain convinced that
hope springs eternal, and we know that we can achieve
the noble mission set before us. Malians are committed
to the cause, as is the international community. I think
that each step we take is a sure step, albeit a baby
step. All that we have achieved thus far in restoring
18-10258

11/04/2018

The situation in Mali

trust between the different players is invaluable and
will allow us to build upon the achievements that we
have made.
I would like once again to reassure the members
of the Council of my Government’s commitment and
determination to leave no stone unturned in order to
ensure that this process continues to make the headway

S/PV. 8229

that we are all awaiting and that it follows an agenda to
continue moving forward rather than sliding backwards.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

18-1025825/25
