S/PRST/2009/30

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 November 2009
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6219th meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 November 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning Iraq”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq, and emphasizes the
importance of the stability and security of Iraq for its people, the region, and
the international community.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for the SRSG Ad Melkert
and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in advising,
supporting and assisting the Iraqi people and Government to strengthen
democratic institutions, advance inclusive political dialogue and national
reconciliation, facilitate regional dialogue, aid vulnerable groups, strengthen
gender equality, promote the protection of human rights, including through the
work of the Independent High Commission for Human Rights, promote the
protection of children, and promote judicial and legal reform.
“The Security Council encourages UNAMI’s continued work, in
coordination with the Government of Iraq, to help create conditions conducive
to voluntary, safe, dignified, and sustainable return of Iraqi refugees and
internally displaced persons, and welcomes further attention to this issue by all
concerned.
“The Security Council underscores UNAMI’s important role in
supporting the Iraqi people and Government to promote dialogue, ease tension,
and develop a just and fair solution for the nation’s disputed internal
boundaries, and calls upon all the relevant parties to participate in an inclusive
dialogue to this end.
“The Security Council welcomes the agreement reached on 8 November
in the Iraqi Council of Representatives on amendments to the electoral law of
Iraq, which will allow for parliamentary elections to take place in January
2010, as stipulated by the Constitutional Court of Iraq. The Security Council
emphasizes UNAMI’s efforts to assist the Iraqi Government and the
Independent High Electoral Commission in the development of processes for
holding elections. The Security Council strongly endorses UNAMI’s continued
assistance to the Iraqi people and Government in preparation for the Iraqi

09-60871 (E) 161109

*0960871*

S/PRST/2009/30

national parliamentary elections planned for January 2010. The Security
Council endorses the Secretary-General’s appeal to all political blocs and their
leaders in Iraq to demonstrate true statesmanship during the election campaign
and participate in a spirit of national unity.
“The Security Council underlines its condemnation in the strongest terms
of the series of terrorist attacks that occurred on 19 August and 25 October
2009 in Baghdad, which caused numerous deaths, injuries and damage,
including to Iraqi Government institutions. The Security Council reiterates its
deep condolences to the families of the victims and reaffirms its support for
the people and the Government of Iraq, and its commitment to Iraq’s security.
The Security Council reaffirms the need to combat threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts by all means, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, ensuring that measures taken to combat
terrorism fully comply with all obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law.
“The Security Council welcomes the recent visit of UN officials to Iraq
for preliminary consultations related to Iraq’s security and sovereignty. The
Council encourages the Secretary-General’s efforts in this regard, including
the possibility of facilitating technical assistance through the UN CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).”

2

09-60871
