TWENTY-FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:29JULY1970

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.,.........,..................

1

. . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . ., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Report of the ad hoc Sub-Committee established in pursuance of Security
Council resolution 276 (1970) (S/9863);
(b) Letter dated 22 July 1970 from the Permanent Representatives of Burundi,
Finland, Nepal, Sierra Leone and Zambia to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/9886) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 550)
Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV.1550

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FIFTIETH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. G. SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal, Nicaragua,Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 550)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
/al Report of the ucl hoc Sub-Committee established in
pursuance
of Security
Council resolution
276 (1970) (S/9863);
(b) Letter dated 22 July 1970 from the Permanent
Representatives of Burundi, Finland, Nepal, Sierra
Leone and Zambia to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/9886)
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Report of the adhoc Sub-Committee established in
pursuance of Security, Council resolution 276 (1970)
(S/9863);
(bl Letter dated 22 July 1970 from the Permanent
Representatives of Burundi, Finland, Nepal, Sierra
Leone and Zambia to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/9886)

MEETING

29 July 1970, at 3.30 p.m.
greedy military appetite of Pretoria is an exaggerated
overrating of the danger. However, the military expansion
of South Africa has reached enormous proportions, showing a,monstrous rapacity.
3. Irrefutable facts suffice to give an idea of the unbelievable military apparatus which the South African Government has acquired, The colossal armament of Pretoria is the
chief cause of its refusal to evacuate Namibia and the
principle instrument of its tyranny unleashed against the
Namibian people, whose fate cannot be discussed and
deplored without giving the statistics of the enormous
military machine that has been set up to deny the right of
self-determination to the Africans in that Territory.
4. The figures and data that I shall submit are based upon
a study of a rich documentation, a combination of United
Nations reports and a work entitled Armed Forces in A,fkica
of the Institute of Strategic Studies in London. The
statistics date in most cases from 1967.
5. First, the air force. Approximately
GO0 aircraft of
various types, from reconnaissance aircraft such as the
Mirage RZ, up to supersonic fighter-bomber jets, such as
the Mirage 3CZ, armed with air-to-surface weapons; many
hundreds of helicopters of various types; some 700 officers;
550 airmen and NCOs.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Before
opening the debate, I should like to call the attention of
representatives to the fact that two draft resolutions have
been submitted to the Council for consideration. The first
is sponsored jointly by Burundi, Finland, Nepal, Sierra
Leone and Zambia [S/9891], and the second is sponsored
by Finland [S/9892].

6. Secondly, the army. In five years credits for the
production of munitions have increased more than one
hundredfold, from R368,OOO in 1961 to R44,900,000 in
1967. There are 1,332 officers and enlisted men, and the
equipment of the army includes Sherman, Comet and
Centurion tanks and Panhard armoured vehicles. As was
stated by the South African commander-in-chief, Hiemstra,
as early as in 1966, his country was on the point of
producing 140 different types of ammunition, bombs and
infantry weapons of a quality equal to that of the best
foreign producers. C. Pandorf, an American nuclear physicist, revealed on 5 March 1967, in Salisbury, that thenceforth South Africa had the necessary technical means to
produce nuclear weapons.

2. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretation from French):
Another slap in the face, like those the Pretoria rdgime has
been constantly ‘giving the Security Council, forces us to
meet again after a brief interval of barely one week. Twice
in sevendays, Mr. President, you have been called upon to
preside over meetings dealing with the policies of apartheid.
The militaristic voracity of the Government of South Africa
is truly a source of a future world conflagration. Casual or
indifferent observers may feel that the denunciation of the

7. Thirdly, the navy: 368 officers, 2,825 seamen and
NCOs; over 35 units. On 19 April 1967, Mr. Botha, who is
called the Minister of Defence but who should actually be
called the Minister of War, announced that an order had
been placed for three French seagoing submarines of the
Daphne type. The price was R8 million. Each submarine
has twelve torpedo tubes and is manned by six officers and
thirty-nine men. The South African Government has begun
the work of installing a radar-controlled navigation system

made to resolution 282 (1970) adopted last week-“will
have the slightest influence on the delivery of am-,sto
South Africa. . . . One can foresee that this competitie,,
will increase even more among British and French
companies, especially
ln naval COnStrUCtiOn,
becausethe
British ship builders are trying to regain the markets
which were lost by the Labour Government, to the prcgt
of the French ship builders.”

along the coastline of Namibia, capable of determining the
position of ships at sea to within twenty-five metres.
8. The cost of this gigantic operation has been estimated
at about R6 million. The permanent armed forces numbered 17,000 men in 1967 and this number has tripled
since. But there is also the task force which is used for
interventions and is in fact an integral part of the army and
is composed of the troops which have received the best
training and are equipped with the latest weapons, covered
by air protection. These units can intervene anywhere at
any time. The strength of this task force is secret.

15. It is notorious that the South African Aryans sre
concentrating enormous armies whose principal and first
targets are the indigenous peoples. It is equally true fist
Namibia and South Africa also have been progressively
turned into a base of aggression against the liberation
movements in southern and central Africa. The third
objective of the apartheid leaders comprises the in&.
pendent African States which are situated within the
immediate reach of the greedy talons of the South African
vultures.

9. The Citizens’ Force, or militia, conscripts all men over
seventeen years old who are physically fit to be called to
the colours. In 1967 it numbered more than 12,000 men
and the number of recruits is likely to increase by 50 per
cent because of the compulsory drafting law. The commander&chief
Hiemstra stated on 15 March 1967 that
before another ten years have elapsed over 100,000 people
will be mobilized by the Citizens’ Force. In 1966 the
commandos had 60,000 men on their rolls. There are also
the Air Force commandos, a special category composed of
pilots operating private aircraft which may be requisitioned
at will by the police State. Initially, this special category of
commandos had,a total of 250 aircraft.

16. The complaints voiced against these States by the
aacist leaders have multiplied lately. Sometimes they are
accused of sheltering African nationalists, whom the cynical
subtlety of the masters of Pretoria qualifies as terrorists,
Sometimes they arouse the suspicions of the leaders cf
apartheid because of their growing power which the
usurpers see as a possible threat to the second cradle of
nazism.

10. As for the budget of South Africa, it is astronomical as
far as defence is concerned since, for the time being, it has
been increased enormously; this can be very well established by the Council because in 1966 the budget was
R44 million and was increased to R225 million for the
years 1966.1967.

17. The massive war preparations carried out by the
Whites in South Africa cover these three phasesand tend to
produce direct confrontation between the champions of
racism and the rest of Africa. One does not have to be a
prophet to realize that such confrontation is inevitable if
we judge the situation by the mad manoeuvres ofPretoria.
Despite ,the total mobilization of the Whites to defend
racial supremacy, this fortress and the abundance of
military means will prove to be powerless to stop the
irreversible wave of liberation which has aroused the
peoples of Africa. And since the independent States of our
continent will no longer be able to tolerate the perpetual
subjugation of the peoples who at present are subjectedto
the abominable practices of apartheid, the range of their
oppressors will not delay in extending itself to the wholeof
Africa.

11. Police forces: The budget amounted to $40 million in
1960 and has benefited by an enormous increase which has
recently boosted it to $100 million,
12. The partial figures and the incomplete data on the
frightful arsenal and the armed forces at the disposal of the
South African racists disclose a militaristic voracity which,
as I said at the outset, can be regarded as the source of a
future international conflagration.
13. In its capacity of guarantor of international peace the
Security Council cannot, unless it fails to perform its
function, minimize this danger. The obstinancy of the
Vorster Government in wishing to absorb Namibia into the
system of apartheid shows the malicious intentions of the
racists who frustrate every attempt made to achieve
sovereignty for that country,

18. Thus the partners of Pretoria in various fieldscommercial, military, diplomatic, consular, political and
economic-are deprived of pretexts for refusing to recognize that the Vorster Government has offensive objet.
tives.

14. The militaristic attitude of the Pretoria leaders prepares to go beyond the frontiers of the two countries which
they have subjugated and to assume world proportions.
This painful reality may, of course, be regarded as remote
by certain circles which have so far chosen to arm South
Africa to the teeth and which seem to be irrevocably
determined to over-saturate it with armaments, as is shown
by the unbridled competition foreseen with good reason in
an article published by Philippe Ben in Le Soir and Le
Monde on 25 July, from which I quote:

19. Indeed, it should be added that South Africa’s trading
partners run the risk of becoming perpetual prey to their
own
wishful thinking. According to those who remain
captives of these false expectations, the African States,
overawed by the tremendous armament built up by
Pretoria, will feel themselves doomed to acceptance of the
status quo, which is as degrading as it is revolting. But it
would be a serious mistake to believe that the whole cf
Africa will indefinitely resign itself to submission tc the
tyrannical diktat which condemns the people of Namibia
and South Africa to perpetual dehumanization.

“In United Nations circles there are grave doubts as to
whether the adoption of this resolution”-reference is
2

0. At this stage, therefore, .the Council must inevitably
dmit that a conflagration of unforeseeable dimensions is in
reparation in southern Africa.

ti0n. The s1.yarrogance of the Pretoria r6gime requires more
effective measures. How can the States he deceived by
South Africa, which has violated and betmyed every
and self-goverkinienl. of
principle of “non-arfllcxation
peo@es”-principles of which ‘the leaders irl Pretoria
were
the protagonists at one time?

1, In this nuclear era, any international conflict of course
$1 affect a11 countries, although not equally perhaps.
‘herefore, the relations with the tyrannical r@me of South
,frica are in fact a boomerang which, in the final analysis,
fill be most detrimental to the very Powers which
ncourage that r&&me.

26. General Smuts was the one who proclaimed that the
mandate system was to be entirely free of any pc&cy of
annexation and thal: any mandate govercment should be
based on the principle of the self-determinalion of peoples
so that no State could possibIy profit throu.;$ ,the weakness
of any such Territory in order to e:c@it it f0r it:: own
benefit, This was the thesis nlltich. was slipported by
General Smuts on the eve of and dluring the conference
which event.ually created the League of Nations in 1918
and therefore it was, of course, the thesis of South Africa.

2. The reasoning which I have adopted in making this
:atement leads me now to the draft resolution which
ppears in document S/9891, published on 27 July and
[ready distributed to the members of the Council. Repreintatives whom I am addressing will recall that all the
lembers of the Security Council on 6 February last
:corded me the honour of presiding over the ad hoc
ub-Committee which was entrusted with the implelentation of resolution 276 (1970). That Sub-Committee,
hose mandate wasprolonged until 30 June, has performed
)nsiderable work, the result of which is condensed in the
rport contained in document S/9863 of 7 July 1970.

27. What trust, therefore, can statesmer; deserve who
violate such formai commitlnents
and sacred principles?
The Governments wl&h trust Pretoria shtslrjd recall this
stzrnrring change of attitude and therefore should accordingly control their propensity t.0 deal with that racist
rdgime because, if those racis.&s deny the very principles
they have .proclaiiled, as I have just shown, so much more
probable is it that they will coolly betray their partners of
today.

3. As shown clearly by the content of that report, it has
:come necessary to emphasize the need to treat the
lrious bilateral or multilateral relations which are cxoited by the Pretoria rigime to fan its racial rage. The
jotation of the editorial of a very objective newspaper
lpports this thesjs. I am referring to LeMonde and I wish
1quote this editorial. It states:

2E. In view of the testimony of experts who were kind
enoup,h to audress the ci-d hoc Sub-Committee, which was
created by resolution 276 (1970) of the Security Council,
certain caseshave been communicated which desz~vc to be
known with more detajls ‘by the Security Council., May I
quote Mr. Sanl Mujoma, President of the South West Mica
People’s Organizatjon (SWAPO), who spoke of coucentration camps in Namibia. He said:

“It is true that in some European capitals an effort is
being made to draw a distinction between defensive
armaments, those that can be used only against an
aggression, and the armaments which can be used for
repressive purposes and. in the service of .the upar&ereid
policy. But in fact the distinction is not always easy to
draw. At any rate, the encouragements given to the
Pretoria regime have the result of strengthening it not
only militarily but also diplomatically. After his recent
visit to Europe and the various contacts made in
European capitals, Mr. Vorster can now boast that he has
achieved a new success.Of course, the bitterness will be
the greater in a large part of Africa.”
lat is the editorial
7 July.

which appeared in Le MO&~

““At the present time the Soljth A.frh~ almy has over
4O,OUO men permanently stationed in Namibia, which are
supported by commardos and a ~~anlerous militia.
“The immense air-base in the eastern part of the Caprivi
region is not exclusively used for the defence of Ihe
territory, but it is also a threat to the independent
African States because the jet fighters of South Africa can
very weli proceed to at-t,zk ;+.ny park of %,a.mbia or of
Katanga as well as the Democratic Republic 0f the

on

COIlgO."

1. The countries ‘which are competirg f6r military or
onomic objectives on the South African market, thereIre, act in a manner which is obviously incompatible with
e friendship towards African States to which they pay
j-service. Indeed, how is it possible to reconcile the
verish eagerness to supply weapons to the champions of
~arhh’,
who are unyielding foes of Africa, and on the
her hand to offer a hand of friendship to the African
ates which are so much detested by the racists of
atoria?

29. Mr. Sea,n MacBride, Secre tary”Genera1 of the International Commission of Jurists, stated:
“We arc Aready aware of the infant mortality rate in
the whole of soilthern Africa. Out of 1,000 African
children, 400 die before the age of two years, which is in
striking contrast with twentyseven per thousand which is
the ratio for the white population. It: would be interesting
to know what afe the figures for N;Jmibia. If they are as
high as one fears, this would raise the question of whether
this is almost genocide because the complete neglect of
health services is tantamouut
to a deliberate extep
mination of the African race. Economic sanctions are
important because they shake the confidence of the
South African Government and even if the countries

i. The humiliating slaps in the face constantly given to
e authority of the world Organization because of the
lplacable refusal of Pretoria to restore Namibia certainly
quire more energetic action on the part of this Orgatia3

3 1. WC rccognizethilt

IlilS ccrtnin
prevailing in tha
Council. ‘I’hcrcforc it WoUkt hc Very tkSiKlhk
if :I11WI1
~olleagt~~~would undcrstilnd (1~ irl~pcrntive KIIS(9IIS (hilt
IliIVC
pmnptcd us to submit, in substnrlccand in fmm, the
proposals contained in this drilf(. ‘I’hc sp~91~~9rs OF resdntion
276 (1970)-~Finlnnd, Nepal,Sierra IAX~IW, Xdrin
mi
Burundi-arc
GISO th
SpWlSI9lTi
Ot’ ttlC 1ilXft
rtsotutiori ttlIlt
is 110~
submitied for the c‘ouncit”siIttenti(ln. It is (~1behilif
of the five sponsorstha( 1 introduce this tlr:ift rcsolutitm,
which is inspired by the main tints of the rqmf of the nd
hut Sub-Committee on Niullibi:I. ‘t’h~sport itsctf is but iI
reflection of il SitWtiOll
ttlilt
WElS studied Ii92 fiVC IllC9IlttlS
I9y
the Sub-Comniittec and it is the lOgiCill ml noriixtt
conclusion of the laborious Cffirrts exerted by ill1 ttE
mcrnbcrsof (he Council during the s:unCpcritjd,
wcnknesses

ttcriving

froni

tl1C

test

IlOW

prtp9scrl

(ho situation

32. To sum up, in the view of the spomors on whose

behalf I am speakingthe tmnitllc)us :ittoption of this dmf(
resolution by the Council would bc a ctrnsistuntstop that
would be the logicill crowning elf the COII~IWI~ endcuvour
to
which all ~ncrt~t~~s havejointly contributed.
33. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland):

III
.h~~unry
this year
Pir~tandjoined with Burundi, Nctli\t, Sierr;\ LXXIC nntt
Zambia
in sponsoring Security Council rcsotuLion
276 (1970), by which the ud ftoc SubX’ommi((ec tm
Nmibiu wils cstabtishcd.WCcmph:~sizctt
:lt (h:lt time tl\ilI
this was to bc regarded(IS(1~intcrinl step ttcsigncdto holt~
the Council to mukc mrc substclntint&&ions irz the
months to come, It is logical (hrlt (hc mnc live detcgI1tioi1ri
have now rcqucstcdthe convening of this inccting of the
Security Council to resumeits considercltionof the ques.
tion of Namibia and huvcrdso jointly
spol1sored
the
dr:rft
resolution /s/9891] which cmbodiosmost of the rccommendationsof the nCr/XX Sub-Commi((cc.

34, At the time the Sub-CommitteeWRSset up (hcrc ~11s
scepticismabout the riced for suchn body. Now that
we have its report before us (5/9SG’/ (hcrc cati bc no
doubt, I think, that its work has been useful, It bus put
forward practical and substantiverccortl~~~c(~ctn(i~)r~~
bnsed
on wide agreement among its members ~11 on full and
detailed information given by more ttz:m forty tsttlcr
Governments a~wolt as on suggestionsand idcnssubrnittod
by experts. The USC of suchsutl-ctrlnrni((ccsmrly be worth
considering in conncxion with other questions bcforc the
Security Council. It coutd welt be onemtzthodby which the
work of the Council could bc made mm cff”cfectiVe.
some

35. I should like to take (his opportuni(y to pay (ributc to
the reprcscntativc of Durundi, Arnb;lssador‘rcrcncc,for (he
n~anncr in which he conductcd the work of the Sub.
Cornrnittcc and for his cornprchcnsivcpresentation of (hc
five-Power driift resolution,
4

40. Subtile, ilIt tld\~ist~ry
rrpinitrn wa>utd&J be of value

in defining more pracisrty the rights of Npmibians-tllo%
staying in Ntmrihis as wctl QSix~h:~hitti~tt~
of Namibia
residinla,rtbroad, In this way it could perhapsnccordsome
mcasurc of” ad&d prtrtecticrn to Namibians whosebasic
hutnnn rights tire b&Q nupprcsscd(hruugh tha npplication
of South African rcprcsivc tcgi&tion.
41. ‘Il~irdly, it is our cxt9ect:ItirrIl
tfint
:in advisoryopinion
of (hc lnterrrotitrnet C’cmrtuf JuXCct could undcrtinc(he
forfeit& its MttndfitcoverSoutll
West Africa bcc:tuacof it6 viol:~(ion of (hc tams of the
Montlatc itsctl: ~XXXI~IFX
Struth Africa has a&d contrary(0
its irrtcrrmtiiirml tl\)li#Jti~~~l$,
Ctllltr;lry
lo (hc intcrna(ton~
statusof the R!rri(t,rV ml ctmtrary icj intcrnntionattaw.It
is iItlt9OrtilIlt,
in I&
view,
tct expsc
the
fikie front Of
tcgatity which South At’ricitrr:Ititheri(ics attcmpt to present
to’ the world. This would http the United Nationsandtlte
fKt

ttlilt

!GMtt\

AfriCil

t\Zi

Governments of Member States to mobilize public opinion
in their.countries-especially
in those countries which have
the pawer to influence events in s’outhern’ Africa in a
decisive way.
42. In addition to the arguments I have now mentioned,
another more general argument suggests, itself. I have in
mind the need to reactivate the International Court of
justice itself. It is one of the principal organe of the United
Nations, and the highest international authority on law. We
in Finland consider that its role’ is essential for the
development of a peaceful international order.’ We ,are
therefore very much concerned about the present state of
affairs. An organ which is left unused is in danger of
atrophy. The decline in the authority of the Court is
damaging to the interests of the United Nations system as a
whole and to the structure of international law. The request
for an advisory opinion on a que&on,df great interest to
the international community would reactivate the Court at
a particularly difficult time in its existence.
,’
,,,I
‘.
43. Having taken the irrevbcable steh df terminating South
Africa’s Mandate over South West Africa, the United
Nations has assumed direct responsibility for the future of
Namibia and its people. The Security Council must ccsntinue its search for practical and effective means by which
this responsibility can be discharged, The two draft
resolutions before the Council today-though far technical
reasons presented separately-form together a programme
of action which represents significant progress in our efforts
to help the people of Namibia to achievti self&determination
and independence to which they, like all other peoples, are
entitled.
44. Mr, NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President; under your
wise and skilful direction the Council is once again convened
to resume deliberation this time of the important question
of Namibia begun in January last, As you are aware, the
Council decided, in operative paragraph 9 of resolution
276(1970), “ , , . to resume consideration of the question
of Namibia as soon as the recommendations of the
Sub-Committee have been made available”, The ad hoc
Sub-Committee
has submitted its report, contained in
document S/9863 of 7 July 1970, and as a result the
Council is now convened for the purpose of resuming active
consideration of the subject on the agenda,

successive decisions of the International Court of Ju_s_t@e
and by numerous resolutions of the General Assembly and
this august body itself. We called attention to South
Africa’s persistent refusal to put an end to its policy of
extending apartheid to that Territory. Instead of listening
to enlightened world opinion and attempting to conform to
the normal standards of conduct established by this world
body, the South African Government has continued on a
course that is likely to bring it into confrontation with the
United Nations. It has also embarked on a number of
political, military, economic and commercial steps calculated to strengthen its hold on Namibia. It has spared no
efforts to enlist the sympathies of the Western Powers by
conferring upon itself the mantle of Britain as the most
influential Power vis-&vis the trade routes after the closure
of the Suez Canal, On the pretext that a vacuum is being
created in that part of the worId, it has emphasized its
ability to keep the sea lanes open against possible communist infiltrations and has tried to persuade countries to
lift the arms embargo and resume the supply of arms in
spite of our Council resolution 181 (1963).
47. Last week [1549th meeting] this body pronounced
itself on South Africa’s intransigent behaviour and, by a
resounding majority, agreed to take far-reaching steps to
strengthen the arms embargo against South Africa.
48. The ad hoc Sub-Committee, comprising all members
of the Security Council, has now this afternoon submitted
its report [S/9863/ for consideration by the Council. My
delegation endorses its findings and subscribes fully to the
view that the Sub-Committee should be allowed to study
the replies submitted by various Governments to the
Secretary-General, and to report further to the Council as
appropriate. Such an approval is necessary to enable the
Sub-Committee to conti?ue its work without interruption
and to produce far-reaching and significant results.
49. My delegation would urge those delegations which
have reservations on the report to support it, as its adoption
will contribute to the solution of this troubling issue. We
look forward to their assistance and support since every
inch gained in the struggle of the people of Namibia against
the forces of imperialism and colonialism is a victory gained
for human dignity and self-respect.
50. Some delegations entertain genuine misgivings with
regard to the draft resolution contained in document
S/9892, which seeks to reopen the question of Namibia at
the level of the International Court of Justice. After the
decision handed down by the Court in July 1966l that it
could not pronounce on the substantive issues of the case
because Ethiopia and Liberia had “no legal interest” in it,
my delegation can understand the basis of their doubts
about the wisdom of this step.

45. l%~ delegation if Sierra Leone is a co-sponsor of draft
resolution S/9891, presented this afternoon by the distinguished Permanent Representative of Burundi, who is also
Chairman of the Sub-Committee. We congratulate him for
his assiduity in supervising the efforts of the SubCommittee towards fulfilling its difficult task and arriving
at conclusions which deserve our praise. Our commendation
also goes to Ambassadors Jakobson of Finland and Khatri
of Nepal who, in their capacity as Vice-Chairmen, contributed significantly to the work of the Sub-Committee.

51. But we must remember the view recently given by Sir
Muhammad Zafrulla Khan, the distinguished President of
the International Cotirt of Justice, in an article in the
United Nations Monthly Chronicle of July 1970, about the
potential usefulness of his Court which has not been fully

46. When the question of Namibia was discussed in
January last my delegation drew the attention of the
Council [152&h meeting] to the flagrant refusal of South
Africa to heed world opiriion and relinquish its stifling hold
over Namibia while there was yet time. We pointed to the
international status of this Territory, a status guaranteed by

1 South West Africa, Second Phase, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports
1966, p. 6.

5

cxploitcd;
bud

Sir Muharntmd

stated that no advisory opiuim

%ee~~ scttucstctl by ft~ &xxrity Council, and trrlly tw
by the speci;ilixcd ngencies,While it may bc possible to

discern 11 CertiliIl reaction in [X~St~WillS ttliukiilg qyinst ttlC
cwlicr, sometiincs CXil~CratCd,
C~~Ili’itlCflCC
in the pOS*
sibility of mlucing all questions TV legal questions. it is
not possible to dismiss the advisory work of the PerIllitIleIlt
Court as the pmluct of 31 csccssivtl Imptmsity
t0 IKlVC lX!COllTSL’ tU IilW. , . . In 1’10CaSCdid the I’CrIlli~IWllt
Ctsurt have tu dccliric to give ali Opiniork on the ground
thUt
tt1C issue lilid hCibR it WitS IlOt il ICgaI question.”
WC thcrcforc think ttlilt the preccdcnt Of the CiKC against
Africa which \V;Is ptlt fOrWild
by Ethiopia ilnd
Liberia and which had 3 rcvcrsc decision ilg:IillSt it, is tm!
which s]~ould not discourage us from procecditig fitrthcr on
this matter ttr the International Court of Justice.
SoUth

52.
WC II~ldl?rStil11d
the
rcscrvatirms which IliIVC IXCn IllildC
Of1 the report under discussion tutlay by the 1l~l~giltit~llS Of

Poland, Syria ilIlt the lhiiim of Strvict Socialist IZcpuOIics
atld WC N’C it1 COllSid~rilblC SyllI~Xlttly with tl1CHl iIS 10 tlte
SlOWI1CSS,
through crrdlcss discussions ilfld 1Il:IIlOCtIVr’CS. with
which the whole matter of Nan~ibian i~idq~endcncc is being
implcnmtcd.
We agree tllilt our support 01’ tllC r~~~tllllll~ll~liItitl~lS
Of
this report is based on the fcclitlg that their attention might
lcad in smnc way towards ;I solution of this vexed situation.
This is why we support the need for contirnkx1 study and
further cffcctivc rccommer~tltttiotis 011 WilyS ;Hld ItlCil~lS h)l
which the rclcvant resolutions of the (‘ouncil cm lx
effectively implenientcd.
53.

54. WC have llild occasion, as I rncntirmctl carlicr, to draw
attcntiorl to the cxtcnsicm of the obnoxious doctrirics of’
uprthcid, ~hid1 11:tVe IYXXI esportcd by South Africa to
Namibia, a Territory urrder the llnitetl Nations. Africans
have very little opening for cinploynm t outside manu;rl
work, arzd Namibia has been 11scd us a rcscrvoir for cllcaI>
labour by South Africa, The highest stratum of education is
that of teacher-training collcgcs, tlcsigncd lo product
tcachcrs to work it1 schools opcratcd under the ljairtti
education System, which is a travesty of true cducati~jri;d
philosophy and practice,
55. Again, in a Territory which was lmdcr a sacred
mandate and which is now under the lJriitctl Nations, WC
have witncsscd forcible removals of citizens from thcjl
ancestral IlOltlClillldS t0 tit ii1 with the I]aDt\]starl policy,
again dcsijincd ttj confine Africans to the Ic:tst weiktttky
;lTCiIS
Of
their country, Efforts have been niadc by the
SOuth Africarr Ck~vemrncnt to set one nOn-Whitc ct11i1.
mnity
against another 0Il ttrc 1XlSiS of tritx :tnti mixed
ancestry, My dtlcgittion unrcscrvetlly ct~~~d~m~s t,ho,sc
atrocities Of’ ttlc Ssotll
AfriCilII (kmrnmnt.
56.

IIldllStIiillty,

diillllt7~ltlS,

copper

;111tl zinc I1i)Ve tlr[lWIl

flCW investors to the country, in addition to the fl<ulrishiqj
industry in hides and skins. Oilficltls have attracted internatimal investors. Dri tish ilt1tl SOlIll
AfriCi111 coqx1I1icS
have obtaincci large cunkssiais.

63. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): My delegation has joined with
those of Burundi, Finland, Sierra Leone and Zambia in
requesting this meeting of the Security Council to resume
its consideration of ‘the report [S/9863] submitted by the
ad hoc Sub-Committee under the terms of Security Council
resolution 276 (1970). The five delegations have also
jointly prepared a draft resolution [S/9891/, which was
introduced at the beginning of our meeting by the
Ambassador of Burundi, who was the Chairman of the ad
hoc Sub-Committee.

indicated, our primary concern was to make the joint draft
resolution as widely acceptable as possible,
69. The present draft resolution contains many positive
and novel features lacking in previous resolutions. In
addition to providing for complete non-recognition by
States of the authority of South Africa over Namibia and
termination cf all existing relations with South Africa in so
far as those relations pertain to the international Territory,
the Security Council, under the draft resolution, would call
upon States not only to ensure that their national companies cease all present or future commercial, industrial and
concessional enterprises in Namibia but also to withhold
protection of any such investments against claims of a
future lawful government of Namibia.

64. The joint draft resolution incorporates the recommendations made by the ad hoc Sub-Committee, except for
those related to seeking an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice on the legal consequences for
States of the continued presence of South Africa in
Namibia, Those latter recommendations form the subject
matter of a separate draft resolution [S/9892] introduced
just now by the Ambassador of Finland on behalf of his
delegation,

70. Those provisions are largely based upon the steps
taken’recently by the Government of the United States. At
the 1496th meeting of the Security Council on 11 August
last year, Ambassador Yost stated that a continued assertion by the Council of unequivocal condemnation of the
violation of the Charter in Namibia, coupled with possible
positive steps on the part of member States, represented a
promising means of realizing our common objectives.
However inadequate they may prove to be in the light of
the over.all question of Namibia, the steps taken by the
Government of the United States will have some practical
,effect, and we welcome them. We urge that other States, in
particular South Africa’s major trading partners, follow the
example set by the Government of the United States,
which, we hope, will take more effective measures in the
future.

6.5. My delegation co-sponsored resolution 276 (1970),
which was provisional in nature, in the belief that the
report of the ad hoc Sub-Committee established in pursuance of it would provide a basis for more substantive
action by the Security Council in respect of the Territory
of Namibia, Referring to document S/9620 which subsequently became resolution 276 (1970), I stated [1528th
meeting] that it sought to move the Security Council in its
search for a solution of the question a little ahead of the
dead centre in which the Council had been placed as a
result of South Africa’s refusal to comply with United
Nations decisions.

71. The co-sponsors have also sought to provide for a
detailed study and review of all bilateral and multilateral
treaties to which South Africa is a party and which might
be considered to apply to the Territory of Namibia, so that
the results of the study might assist States-if indeed
assistance were needed-in the implementation of United
Nations resolutions on Namibia.

66. The ad hoc Sub-Committee discussed several proposals
submitted to it. A few of those proposals have now come
out in the shape of recommendations in the SubCommittee’s report, Weakened by both the variety of
reservations entered by a number of delegations and by the
political necessity for reducing our conclusions to a lowest
common denominator, the final set of recommendations
contained in the report represents, none the less, a
modicum of progress-and progress, however inadequate, is
desired by all.

72. Another novel and significant feature of the joint draft
resolution is that under it the Security Council would
request the United Nations Council for Namibia to make
available to the Security Council its study and proposals
regarding not only passports and visas for Namibians for
travel abroad but also regulations governing the travel to
Namibia of the citizens of other States. It may be recalled
that General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V), which set up
the United Nations Council for Namibia, did not receive the
support of any one of the four permanent members.

,67. The five-Power draft resolution is based on the most
widely acceptable parts of the recommendations made by
the Sub-Committee. It has been conceived in a spirit of
co-operation and drafted with a view to securing the widest
possible support in the Council.
68. My delegation is happy to be one of the co-sponsors of
this draft resolution. I may point out, however, that some
provisions in the draft resolution seem to make a distinction between resolutions adopted without the concurring
votes of two permanent members and those adopted
without the votes of three, or between resolutions adopted
with the votes of all non-permanent members and those
adopted with one or more abstentions on the part of those
members. As far as the delegation of Nepal is concerned, it
does not view with total satisfaction the increasing tendency among delegations, permanent as well as nonpermanent, to ascribe a scaling degree of validity to
Security Council resolutions on such grounds. However, as I

73. Under paragraph 12 of the draft resolution, the
Security Council would request the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session to set up a United Nations fund for
Namibia to provide assistance to Namibians and to finance
a comprehensive educational and training programme for
them with particular regard to their future administrative
responsibilities in the Territory, This is one positive element
of the draft resolution which, we hope, will receive the
support of even those States which are noted for their
continued opposition to alI United Nations endeavours in
Namibia.
7

74. The clbspoIIsors believe that the ud IrOt’ SubConmittce should he re-cstablishcd with the smc terms ot
rcftmnce iis before. Although iii il limitctl SCIISL’,the wl)rk
Of the Sllh-C~J~lJ~~ittC~ IlilS bfXJ1 uSCfu1. I$)( rWXtilhliShi1~~
tlic Sub-Cornlnittcc, the Security Council will retnifl the
iriitintive with JTgiLrd to the question in its IlUldS. My
dcIcg:ltion WitCKltCS its firm belief that the Security
Council should continue to seek ;ill possible avenues :tnd
nmke 311 possible efforts with a view to the ultirnn te
solution of the question of Nmi bin.
75. The utf Ito(* Sub-Conuuittec, in its report, h:ls rccom
Jllcrltlcd thilt the Sceurity Council rctiffirni its Cllll IJpOll ;I11
Stiltcs t0 CCilsc! forthwith the SillC iltld shipment of NJlIS,
nmnnmition
illld all types of niilitcq~ vehicles to SOJltll
Africa, as WCII 3s materials for the mnnuf:lcturc ilIld
maintcnancc of mu and ammunition in South Afrim “I’ht!
Sub-Committee IlilS furlhcr reconrrnended that the Sccuritp
Council rcqucst all StiltCS to take mrc stringrlt Jll(1i1SlIrCS

tu give cffcct to the resolutions of the Security Council
concerning the ilr1118 embargo. All thoSc recomnleildations
ililvc ilhildy
found expression in Security Council rcsoiution 232 (:1970), iltlO[>tL?d only J”W.X~~Lly. TllC J)rc:rmblo Of
tbc prcscnt draft resolution JWlffirJU that rcsoltiticm.
70. In this coJlJiexion, I should like to express ilg:JiJl 0iiJ’
strong SCnSC Of diSSiltiSfilCtbr1 illId regret 3t tllC politics Of

those States which have violated both the: spirit ant1 the
Icttcr of rclev:uit Security Council resolutions hy supplyir~y,
ilrIllS t0 South Africa. WC IlilVC rcjcctcd the distinction
drawn by those States bctwcca arms for intcmal \ISC and
thsc fur cxttmial defcllcc. We arc also Jlal at il11 cotrvinced
by the argument of the present British Govcrnmnt
regarding
its need for 4 dcfcricc urrariperiient with Snuth
AfriW-,-ill1
mangemc~lt which hi Jl0 iJ[TpliCiJtiOJl in the
prcscnt iI@,
77. My ilclegalicm wishes to cmphusi~~e the signific;tncc t)f
:lII Security Council resolutions cmlccrning the ilJ%lS cJib
bqo, IXlrticulilrly resolution 282 ( 1070), :~~oinst the hackground of the rlucstian of Nt\n\il)ii~. Aircraft supplied to
So\ith Africa, in violation of the embargo and ollcgcdly for
extcml dcfctm, 3rc known to have bcctl used for iutcrnal
repression. Submnrincs, similarly supplictl, hvc ptovctl vital
in bolstering South Africa to JWiJltiliJl contraI owt
Nmiihin. SWtll Africa’s rllilitil~ irlSti~ll~tiW$
in tllc Q7riVi
strip arc helping ta cmurc its conthiucd prusencc in the
iiitcriiation:~l
Territory. Experts h;nc tcstificd al the
meetings of the Sub-Committee to the cffcct thrlt St)uth
hfrkil
IlilS ikt IeXit OJlC opcrotio~~al military
bnse ill
N:mibi:t. ‘ill1 intcrnntimll
Territory which is supp0sc~ to
be UJ1ilrJllS-frW

7X. M~ly

%OJlC.

States, -South Af&~‘s

trading purtncrs ;ltrd

Hlilitilry
Cd1d~OKltOJYi ~IllOJlg thcril Si]y r+l?pe;ltctlly hut tllc
~~CSSUK c)f world public opinion should bc c()nstantly kq)t
fOUlSed 011 the situation prevailing irl soutlle~m Africa. Yet,

when intcrn:~tional movcmunt agiiimt the policies of South
Africa giim JllOlJlCJlttJIfl illIll SWJttl AfriC;] fcigrrs 21larm,
those very States collie to the resduc of South Africa 011
v3rious untcnnble pretexts, Those arc the St:ltcs which help
SWlth Africa in breaking out of the stigm of intcrnati(m;t]
is&tiors ilnd gairGng diplnmutic and political rcsJ)cot;ibility,
I IlUVe stated before, and will state again, that supplyir~g
H

opinion strictly to the question put to it, and not review or
examine the legality or validity of the resolutions adopted
by both the General Assembly and the Security Council.

democratic system upon the irreplaceable foundation of equality of opportunity and, consequently, rejection of
discriminatory practices-I would not feel at ease if I
failed to express my most forceful protest against the
reactionary policy of the Government of South Africa or
to voice the solidarity of my people with all those who,
like the indigenous people of Namibia, are struggling for
their independence and for respect for human dignity.”

82. My delegation is mindful of the doubts on the part of
many delegations regarding the usefulness and timeliness of
seeking an advisory opinion on the question of Namibia.
Indeed, the records of the International Court in the whole
matter concerning this international Territory are far from
distinguished, nor have they been in accord with the
legitimate and natural aspirations of an emerging world.
The 19.50 Opinion of the Court3 stating categorically that
South Africa was under no legal obligation to place
Namibia-then
South West Africa-under United Nations
Trusteeship, fortified South Africa in its determination to
perpetuate its hold over the international Territory. I need
hardly recall the disappointing impact created by the
unfortunate Judgment of the Court in 1966.4 The misgivings expressed in some quarters that the judgements and
opinions of the Court fail far too often to take into account
the full import of the progressive development of the new
norms of international law under the United Nations
system would appear to be not too much exaggerated.

86. In view of the foregoing, I need now refer only very
briefly to the fact that my delegation is anxious to see this
problem settled. It does not affect us directly and materially.
It is, however, of constant concern to my delegation.
This statement may seem to be contradictory, but it is
understandable when one considers that my delegation, as
is true of other Latin American delegations in the Security
Council, has a very clear-cut legal tradition that has always
prompted us to defend the basic rights of human beings and
particularly the principle of self-determination, without
which genuine freedom could not exist. It would be quite
wrong to think that simply because we do not have direct
contact with the country we are indifferent to the problems
of Namibia. The United Nations would not be truly
universal if the interests of all countries, no matter how
weak or remote, were not recognized and constantly
protected by all Members of our Organization.

83. However, we have great respect for the institution of
the International Court of Justice. It is the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations, and it should remain so. If,
therefore, the draft resolution is to provide an opportunity
for the International Court to redeem its impaired image,
my delegation will only be too glad to support it. The scope
of the question put to the world Court is restricted. My
delegation would be surprised if the advisory opinion of the
Court in this matter spurred the major trading partners and
rtiilitary collaborators of South Africa into any positive
effective actions, because, if they have so long resisted
world opinion and neutralized the thrust of all positive
United Nations endeavours on the question of Namibia, it is
too much to expect that they will change their minds on
the basis of the Court’s opinion, whose effect would only
be advisory. Nevertheless, this recourse to the Court might
result in the provision of highest legal guidance and
assistance for many law-abiding States, which sincerely wish
to implement the United Nations resolution on the subject.

87, I should like to make just one comment on the draft
resolution contained in document S/9891. It certainly
seems appropriate that there should be close and if possible
planned co-operation between the Security Council and the
ad hoc Sub-Committee, whose existence is continued under
paragraph 14, for this cannot fail to have a beneficial effect
upon the work of both bodies.
88. Finally, Mr. President, may I ask you to consider
having the next meeting of the Council take place next
week, in view of the fact that on Friday, 31 July, all
members of the mission dispatched by the TJnited Nations
Council for Namibia will return to New York from Africa.
Certainly it would seem to be desirable and useful to wait
until the relevant information is received before closing
debate on the draft resolution to which I have just referred.
In this connexion, I would ask the Council to bear in mind
paragraph 10 of the draft resolution contained in document
S/9891. This paragraph contains a specific reference to the
work of the United Nations Council for Namibia.

84. Mr. MORALES-SUAREZ
(Colombia) (interpretation
porn Spanish): In connexion with the item that the Council
has before it, and specifically with the draft resolutions
submitted by Burundi, Finland, Nepal, Sierra Leone and
Zambia fS/9891/,
on the one hand, and *by Finland
/s/9892/,
on the other, I should like to say that my
delegation is in basic agreement with these draft resolutions.

89. Mr, JOUEJATI (Syria): The Security Council is now
engaged in the consideration of the report of the ad hoc
Sub-Committee [S/9863] that it created on 30 January of
this year for th& purpose of considering ways and means to
implement the relevant United Nations resolutions on
Namibia. The ad hoc Sub-Committee, under the able
Chairmanship of the Ambassador of Burundi and with the
valuable assistance of the two Vice-Presidents and the
constant efforts of the Secretariat, has left no stone
unturned in the examination of the various aspects of the
situation and the search for its appropriate and acceptable
solution.

85. The Security Council has repeatedly considered this
entire problem. The position of Colombia on this subject is
contained in the statement made on 30 July 1969 by
Ambassador Turbay Ayala in this Council f1492nd meeting/. He stated, inter alia:
“As the representative of Colombia-a country with a
long tradition of anti-colonialism, which has built its
3 International

90. At every juncture of its consideration the ud hoc
Sub-Committee found itself faced with the intransigent
attitude of the Government of South Africa, for what
remains to be discussed when that Government heeds no

status of South West Apica, Advisory Opinion:

I.C.J. Reports1950, p. 128.
4 South

West APica, Second Phase, Judgment,I.C.J. Reports

1966, p. 6.
9

Urrit.ed Nations resolution, whether they be recommendations by the General Assembly or decisions by the
Security Council; takes no positive attitude toward the
appeals for justice and reason made by our SecretaryGeneral; co-operates with no United Nations organ; makes
abundantly clear its de,te&nation
to annex Namibia,
purely and simply; deliberately propagates the condemned
practices of racial discrimination; and crowns all this now
with the pretence that it is affording the Namibians the
opportunity to exorcise their right of self-determination,
while it is, in fact, as was eloquently illustrated in the
statement of the representative of Sierra Leone, denying
their most elementary tights?
91. On the other hand, most of the members of the
Sub-Committee realized how painful was the failure of the
Security Council to apply the appropriate sanctions against
tho Government of South Africa for its continued occupation of an African Territory that belongs to its peoplesanctions cl.early provided for in the Charter to meet such
cases, but opposed by certain members without whose
consent they would not be effective. Out of this sad
realization, and for the sake of unanimity, the SubCommittee recommended a gamut of measures designed to
put material and moral pressure on the Government of
South Africa to change its policies.
92. The representative of Burundi, at the beginning of this
meeting of the Security Council, introduced a draft
resolution (s/9391]
which crystallizes these recom”
mendations. The thoroughness with which the representative of Burundi, on behalf of the co-sponsors,
explained the philosophy of the draft unraveled its
numerous merits. In fact, it strengthens the attitude of
non-recognition of South African authority in Namibia. It
goes further by calling for an end to any commercial and
ind.ustrial relations and links with South Africa as far as
Namibia is concerned. It calls for an end to foreign
investment in Namibia and opens the way for a thorough
study of all bilateral treaties to which the Government of
South Africa is a party, in order to assessany possible
bearing on the status of Namibia. It provides for other
measures also to strengthen the Namibians in their will to
liberate -their territory.

which sponsored the draft resolution, to the representative
of, Burundi for introducing it, and especially to you
Mr. President, for having convened the Security Council td
take a decision on this lmtter.
Let
us
hope that tl,e
measures that will be decided upon will bring nearer the
day of the attainment by the Namibians of their freedom
and independence and their full enjoyment of their
inalienable rights.
95.
1 come
now
to draft
resolution
S/9892 introduced
this
afternoon by the representative of Finland with his usud
mastery rind precision.
The legal implications of the
continued presence of the authorities of South Africa h
Namibia have indeed been dwelt upon at some length by
the ad hoc Sub-Committee established in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 276 (1970). It was then esti.
mated that the International Court of Justice might play a
useful role in strengthening the will and the means of States
to oppose this illegal act by South Africa perpetrated
against a Territory that is now juridically under inter.
national authority. My delegation wishes, therefore, to pay
tribute to the representative of Finland for having em.
bodied this desirability into a commendable draft resolu.
tion.

96. The International Court of Justice, aswe seefrom the
draft resolution, is not asked to rule on the status of
Namibia as such; rather it is requested to elicit. the scopeof
legal means at the disposal of States, which may erect a w&U.
of legal opposition to the occupation of Namibia by the
Government of South Africa. Accordingly, our under.
standing of the draft is that it seeks to add a valuable
element to the range of actions that can be taken by States
in fulfilment of their obligations under the Charter andthe
resolutions of the Security Council.
97. Nor does the draft call for a suspension of the
consideration -of the question of Namibia in the organsof
the United Nations until the advisory opinion of the
International Court has been obtained. For the United
Nations to press unceasingly for the withdrawal of the
South African a.dministration from Namibia is indeed an
imperative duty that must be pursued assiduously. Oncethe
advisory opinion of the Court is given, it will merely
represent an element in forcing United Nations measures
against the defiance of South Africa.

93. My delegation does not belittle the scope of these
measures and would, naturally, vote for them in solidarity
with their authors, with whom it entertains the closest
brotherly relations. But we believe that nothing short of
drastic measures in the form of effective sanctions provided
by the Charter would deter the Government of South
Africa from its thrust into the political and human rights of
the Africans and the territorial integrity of their lands. We
wish the situation were different. But daily evidence, as
rightly noted in the preamble to the draft resolution, points
to (‘the continued flagrant refusal of the Government of
South Africa to comply with the decisions of the Security
Council demanding the immediate withdrawal of South
Africa from the Territory”. This is indeed a challenge that
the United Nations cannot ignore any longer; otherwise its
efficacy as the instrument for peace and justice would be in
jeopardy.

99. Mr, MWAANGA (Zambia): The Security Council is
again seized with the ever burning question of Namibia*
Only last week the Council adopted a far-reaching rescl@
tion prohibiting the sale of arms and spare parts to the
South African apartheid regime. This meeting is therefore
timely because Namibia has been a defenceless victim Of
South African aggression, using weapons which have been
supplied by Western imperialist Powers.

94. Whatever the odtcome of these measures may be, one
cannot conclude without paying tribute to .the delegations

100. The position of the Zambian Government on *e
report of the ad hoc Sub-Committee [S/9863/ wasmade

98. On the basis of such understanding, and within this
scope, my delegation will cast its vote affirmatively on the
draft resolution of Finland and wishes to reiterate its
gratitude to the representative of Finland for the initiative
that may prove useful in its consequences.

10

clear in the Sub-Committee itself. Let me take this
opportunity, however, to pay unstinting tribute to my
friend and colleague, Ambassador Terence of Burundi, for
the outstanding manner in which he performed his duties as
Chairman of the ad hoc Sub-Committee throughout its long
spell of work. His dedication and wisdom were a great
source of inspiration to all of us, He was undoubtedly
helped in this formidable task by the able representatives of
Nepal and Finland, who presided impressively over the
deliberations of the SubCommittee
in his absence, We
express our indebtedness to them,

104 Having passed resolution 282 (19’70) which has been
reaffirmed in draft resolution S/9891, which has been ably
presented by Ambassador Terence of Burundi on behalf of
the five co-sponsors including Zambia, the time has now
come for the Security Council to make a direct appeal to all
trade unions throughout the world to refuse to handle
shipments of arms of all types destined for South Africa, If
this proposal is accepted, as I hope it will be, it will be
necessary to follow it through energetically by making
direct approaches, not only to the three main international
confederations of trade unions-I mean the International
Federation of Trade Unions, the World Federation of
Labour and the World Federation of Trade Unions-but
also to the specialized transport, dockers, engineering,
seamen’s and marine trade unions, In addition to its
practical results, I believe that this approach to the trade
unions would serve to focus public attention on the
problem of Namibia.

101. I would be less than candid if I did not confess that
the ad hoc Sub-Committee operated under very difficult
and sometimes strained circumstances, since Governments
maintained their well known positions on all issues,
However, all things considered, I think we could not have
obtained better results under the circumstances, The report
lists a number of measures which are within the reach of
every Government to take in order to apply pressure on the
South African Government to bring an end to its illegal
occupation of Namibia.

105. The Western Powers by not identifying themselves
with the cause of the majority in Africa are going to pay a
very high price in terms of loss of influence, Time is not on
their side. The primary objective of all countries which
cherish freedom and justice for all men in southern Africa
ought surely to be the freedom and welfare of all the
peoples of the area. More specifically this means: first,
preserving the political independence of neighbouring
African States; second, promoting the economic develop
ment of these States; third, supporting the principle of
self.determination as the basis for independence throughout
southern Africa; fourth, seeking to replace the present
regimes in southern Africa with Governments based on
majority rule; fifth, preparing the peoples of southern
Africa to assume the responsibilities of self-government,

102. The refusal of South Africa to comply with Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions pertaining to the
withdrawal of that country from Namibia, is probably the
most serious threat ever posed to the very existence of the
United Nations as an effective instrument for the maintenance of international peace and security. It is becoming
harder and harder to explain to African public opinion why
the United Nations and the Security Council in particular
have not been able to implement their numerous resolutions relating to Namibia.
103. The world, I am sure, knows by now that it is not the
African people who are obstructing a settlement; it is not
the Asian people who are obstructing a settlement; it is not
the Socialist countries which are obstructing a se.ttlement; it
is not the Latin Americans who are obstructing a settlement; it is not the silent Western European majority
which are obstructing a settlement. It is the United States,
the United Kingdom and France which are obstructing a
settlement, by blocking measures under Chapter VII of the
Charter, which are adequate to bring an end to the illegal
occupation of Namibia by South Africa. They are providing
South Africa with the moral, political and economic
support which it badly needs to continue defying world
opinion and also to continue subjecting the people of
Namibia to the most barbaric and inhuman treatment. We
,have repeatedly stated that mere condemnations of
apartheid do not impress anybody on the African continent. The Western major Powers are on the wrong side of
the colour line, simply because they want to protect their
narrow political and economic interests. While, of course,
the racial and colonial policies pursued in southern Africa
by South Africa, Rhodesia and Portugal are as objectionable as those pursued by South Africa in Namibia, one
would have hoped that it would be possible to secure a
greater amount of support for measures to be taken to free
Namibia by reason of the United Nations direct responsibility for Namibia. The freeing of Namibia is the direct
responsibility of the United Nations and of all Member
States; it is not solely an African concern.

106. In pursuing these objectives a number of principles
should obviously be borne in mind:
(a) Southern Africa must be treated as a unit, The issues
that divided the white communities in the past are less
important than the ties that bind them today. Even the
theoretical differences in approach to race are now eclipsed
by the fact of a common pattern of white domination;
(b) The privileged white minorities in southern Africa are
not going to abdicate power voluntarily. Appeals to
morality, reason or even self-interest will prove unavailing.
Majority rule will therefore have to be imposed;

(c) It is crucial to ensure that the responses of the West
to the issues of southern Africa should be in terms of
freedom rather than in terms of race;
(d) It is important for the Western Powers to know that,
whether they like or not, the ruling classesin southern
Africa are their “kith and kin”; They cannot, therefore,
escapebeing blamed for their behaviour.
107. The problems of southern Africa are increasingly
intractable and solutions are becoming more difficult and
dangerous as white solidarity and white supremacy grow.
108. Turning now to the draft resolution contained in
document S/9892, which was introduced this afternoon by
11

legitimate and natural aspirations of the Namibian people
for freedom and independence. In violation of well-known
decisions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, the Republic of South Africa is illegally extending
to the Territory of Namibia South African racist laws, acts
and administrative orders and the policies and practices of
apartheid which have been condemned by the United
Nations and the entire international community.

of the racist South African regime is being used, It is being
used not only for maintaining the racist system in South
Africa itself by armed force, but also for combating
national liberation movements in Namibia and Southern
Rhodesia, for assisting the Portuguese colonialists in their
campaign against the patriotic forces in Guinea (Bissau),
Mozambique and Angola and for threatening the sovereignty of the young independent African States,

120. In January this year, the Security Council decisively
condemned the Republic of South Africa (resolution
276 (.Z9?0j] for its refusal to comply with the General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions on Namibia.
Nevertheless, the South African racists are continuing their
illegal acts in respect of Namibia, What are the reasons for
the situation which has arisen? Why do the South African
racists take the liberty of insolently defying the United
Nations, the peoples of Africa and all freedom-loving
peoples? The answers to these questions are now obvious
to everyone.

124. We are firmly convinced that the essential prerequisite for the granting of independence to the peopIe of
Namibia is the expulsion from that country of the South
African racists and the South African administration,
troops and police. Since South Africa refuses to leave
Namibia, it is essential to get the Western Powers to
discontinue their political, economic and military aid to the
Republic of South Africa, as a country which is violating
the United Nations Charter. The Soviet Union has repeatedly stressed the need for the General Assembly and
the Security Council to take effective measures to bring
pressure to bear on South Africa, to force it to comply with
the decisions of United Nations organs on the question of
Namibia and to pave the way for a settlement of the
Namibian problem in the interests of the people of
Namibia.

121. The discussions in the Security Council and the
General Assembly on questions relating to the situation in
southern Africa do not leave a shadow of a doubt. In
pursuing its policy, the South African regime is relying on
the political, economic and military support of leading
NATO Powers, which are endeavouring to maintain their
economic, military and strategic positions in southern
Africa. Obviously, there are some people who want to
preserve forever the racist Pretoria regime, which is armed
to the teeth, and to use it as a police truncheon to terrorize
the African countries and suppress the national liberation
movement in Africa.

125. Basing itself on this approach, the Soviet Union took
part in the work of the ad hoc Sub-Committee of the
Security Council on Namibia which was set up to study
ways and means by which the relevant Security Council
resolutions could be effectively implemented.
126. In our opinion, the Sub-Committee has done some
useful work in this direction and has considered many
proposals and ideas in accordance with its terms of
reference.

122. This explains the policy and actions of the Western
Powers in regard to the Republic of South Africa. During
the discussion ‘on the question of apartheid at recent
meetings of the Security Council, the representatives of
African countries provided extensive information from
documents of United Nations organs testifying to the
development of economic, trade and military co-operation
between the Western countries and the Republic of South
Africa, and demonstrating the expansion of trade relations
‘-and the immense flow of investments from those countries
to the South African economy. According to information
given in the report circulated at the request of the Special
Committee on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government
of the Republic of South Africa, dated 18 June 19705-a
report to which the Soviet delegation has already referred
in its statement in the Security Cou~il on 21 July[1547th
meeting]-the
United States of America, the United King
dom, West Germany, Italy, France, the Netherlands, Japan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Canada and Australia are the prin:
cipal trading partners of South Africa or the main investors
in the South African economy.

127. In order to bring pressure to bear on South Africa
and end its unlawful occupation of Namibia, the USSR
delegation proposed in the Sub-Committee that the Security Council should be recommended to demand that all
States comply strictly with the decisions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly on Namibia and cease
completely all economic, trade, transport and other relations with the Republic of South Africa.
128. Recent events confirm that this approach of the
Soviet Union was correct. That is why-as the delegation of
the USSR has already stated in the Sub-Committee-the
recommendations made by the Sub-Committee in its report
to the Security Council [S/9863/, and subsequently reflected in the draft resolutions submitted (S/9891 and
S/9892], cannot in our view be regarded as entirely
satisfactory. In order to fulfil the main requirement for the
independence of Namibia-which is the expulsion of the
South African racists and their administration and military
and police forces from Namibia-it is essential to define and
apply more effective measures than those proposed by the
Sub-Committee and contained in the above-mentioned
draft resolutions.

123. Relying on economic and military co-operation with
the Western Powers and also on their political support, the
‘South African racists are expanding their military and
economic potential, enlarging their army and providing it
with more weapons. The members of the Security Council
are well aware of the purpases for which the armed might

129. Nevertheless, since today’s discussion has made it
clear that the representatives of the Afro-Asian countries
members of the Security Council consider that the measures

5 Document A/AC.llS/L.276.
13

racist South African regime from the Western Powers and
their monopolies. The Soviet Union is in favour of the
adoption by the Security Council of measures to force
South Africa to comply with the decisions of the United
Nations and compel it to leave Namibia.

provided for in the draft resolution which they have
submitted jointly with Finland (S/9891] may to some
extent contribute to a solution of the question of Namibia,
the Soviet delegation will support this draft resolu-tion.
130. At the same time, we should like to repeat the
reservations regarding paragraphs 10 and 12 of this draft
which the Soviet delegation expressed in the SubCommittee. The Soviet delegation doubts the advisability
of extending the terms of reference of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to include, inter a&z, questions relating
to the issuance of passports and visas, Quite apart from the
fact that these questions fall strictly within the domestic
competence of States Members of the United Nations, the
extension of the activities of the Council for Namibia into
this sphere would yield no appreciable or tangible results,
would rather distract attention from urgent problems
relating to the question of Namibia and might merely give
rise to illusions in the minds of the Namibian people. This
organ cannot make any progress in solving the problem of
liberating the Narnibian people, as long as the South
African racists continue to rely on the aid and protection of
the Western Powers, which are in fact supporting South
Africa’s domination of the Namibian people.
131. With regard to the recommendation in paragraph 12
of the draft, concerning the establishment of a United
Nations fund for Namibia, the Soviet delegation sympathizes with the humanitarian aims of this proposal. As to
the fmancing of the fund, however, the Soviet delegation
considers that it should be financed exclusively from a
special tax to be levied by States Members of the United
Nations, particularly African States, on foreign companies
operating both in the territories of these States and
simultaneously in Namibia and South Africa.

135. Mr. KUGAGA
(Poland) (interpretation
from
French): In this statement, my delegation wishes to confine
itself to the documents that have been submitted to the
Council: the report of the ad hoc Sub-Committee [S/9863]
established under resolution 276 (1970) prepared under the
Chairmanship of Ambassador Terence of Burundi; and the
two draft resolutions [S/9891 and S/9892], which are a
reflection of the long and difficult negotiations that took
place in the SubXommittee.
136. It goes without saying that, as regards the substance
of the problem of Namibia, we continue to maintain the
position we have always maintained here in the Council and
in our foreign policy: to put into effect the 1960
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, that is to say to grant freedom and
independence to Namibia.
137. The main obstacle to the achievement of ‘that
objective continues to be the policy of aggression and
expansion of the Republic of South Africa, a policy that we
have so frequently denounced, One of the principa1
bulwarks of that policy is the economic, political and
military assistance and co-operation provided to the Republic of South Africa by a number of Western Powers. I
wished to mention these few guiding principles here, so that
the following comments may be more readily understood.
138. The delegation of Poland will vote in favour of the
draft resolution contained in document S/9891. We recog
nize the new elements which it introduces and which the
representative of Syria, in particular, mentioned in the
course of his statement. We shall vote in favour of that
draft resolution despite the hesitations which other provisions of the draft call forth. In particular, we are mindful
of the fact that the draft resolution concentrates its
recommendations solely on the Territory of Namibia, To
confine the question to those limits may be, technically
speaking, defensible, but politically it is not,

132. The Soviet delegation wishes to express serious
doubts concerning the draft resolulion [S/9892] requesting
an advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice
on the question of Namibia. In our view, this proposal
cannot be regarded as an effective measure which would
help to drive the South African racists out of Namibia.
Moreover, the adoption of such a decision would only delay
the solution of the Namibian problem and create false
illusions as to the possibility of solving it by legal means,
rather than by serious political action on the part of the
Security Council. The Soviet delegation will bear all these
consid.erations in mind in determining its attitude to this
draft resolution when it is put to the vote.

139. We have always considered that it was impossible to
deal with Namibia independently from the Republic of
South Africa, the occupying Power, and that it is illusory to
deal with the question of the economic relations rnaintained by many States with Namibia while at the same time
disregarding their relations with the Republic of South
Africa. It is as if one wished to do away with the hydra by
paralyzing one of its tentacles while generously feeding the
hydra itself. In fact, the impracticability
of such an
operation is amply demonstrated by the responses of
certain States that continue to recognize the legal sovereignty of South Africa over Namibia in disregard of the United
Nations decisions, States that do not even draw a distinction between economic relations with South Africa and
those with Namibia and do not even keep separate
statistics.

133, The Soviet Union has consistently advocated and still
advocates the granting of independence to the people of
Namibia without delay. Our country is strictly complying
with the Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on South Africa and does not maintain any political,
economic or any other relations with the racist South
African regime,
134. In conclusion, the Soviet delegation would like to
stress once again that it is essential for the Security Council
to adopt effective measures for the pr&icd
implementation of decisions taken-by the United Nations to bring
independence to Namibia. The Security Council should first
of all demand the cessation of all aid and support for the

140. First and foremost, then, we question the effectiveness of the measures envisaged in a draft resolution the
14

provisions of which are limited to Namibia. We continue to
hold that the realization of the United Nations objectives in
respect of Namibia depends upon effective measures taken
against the occupier of the Territory, the Republic of South
Africa.

political and legal decision on the part of the United
Nations to put an end to the Mandate of the Republic of
South Africa and to declare illegal South Africa’s presence
there, as well as the measures taken by that Government on
behalf of Namibia.

141. I shall not comment in detail on the other provisions
of the text; we did so in the course of the meetings of the
Sub-Committee, There are, however, two additional comments that I think might be in order. The first concerns the
possible creation of a United Nations fund for Namibia. We
have noted the fact that the Council for Namibia and many
delegations as well have said that they favoured financing
such a programme through the collection of a levy on the
investments of foreign companies operating, in particular,
in Namibia. We share that view, We for our part have
provided and shall continue to provide the people of
Namibia with direct assistance, including, among other
things, scholarships, a form of assistance the effectiveness
of which has been stressed by representatives of SWAPO.

147. We have also borne in mind the statement by the
President of SWAPO, Mr. Nujoma, and the questions which
he raised in the Sub-Committee as regards the usefulness of
measures that would only give the appearance of genuine
action. Likewise, we have borne in mind the experience we
gained as a result of the last request that was sent to the
International
Court of Justice, and the many years of
debate which resulted in the ruling that was so severely and
so justly criticized by many Governments, including the
Government of Poland. In view of these reasons which we
have most sincerely set forth, we shall abstain in the vote
on the Finnish draft resolution.
148. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi)
(interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, please excuse me for taking the
floor again, but I should like to speak on the draft
resolution presented by Finland /S/9892].

142. Another thought comes to our minds regarding
certain provisions of the draft resolution, particularly
paragraphs 1 and 2 thereof. In paragraph 1 the Security
Council:

149. It is true that the advisory opinion contemplated in
this draft is due to the initiative of the Finnish delegation
and in a wider context this initiative would be a corollary
to the other resolution already adopted.

‘Requests all States to refrain from any relations
-diplomatic,
consular or otherwise-with South Africa
implying recognition of the authority of the South
African Government over the territory of Nambia”.

150. However, it would not be correct to minimize the
doubts and apprehensions held in African and other circles
abroad which can be attributed to the very bitter disappointment so justly felt by the members of the Organiza- ’
tion of African Unity as a result of the fate of the Namibian
submission in 1966. Those apprehensions are fully justified
in view of the fear felt in Africa and within the United
Nations that this second submission may repeat the
experience of the first. However, the International Court of
Justice is now sitting in different circumstances. The
advisory opinion requested by the Security Council is
related to aspects which are not necessarily ide’ntical to
those raised a few years ago. In that regard it would be
proper to stress that the International Court of Justice,
whose prestige was impaired by the partiality of some of its
members in 1966, would gain in prestige by adopting a new
attitude which would rehabilitate the Court and the United
Nations as a whole.

Paragraph 2 appears in the draft resolution, and I will not
quote it.
143. We should not like to have those provisions interpreted by the Republic of South Africa as constituting even
an indirect disavowal of the position taken by a large
number of delegations in the United Nations that have
called for a severance of economic and military relations
with the Republic of South Africa itself. We are convinced
that that is not the intention of the sponsors of the draft
resolution. This at least is our interpretation.
144. I have mentioned some of the reasons why the Polish
delegation would have preferred a stronger draft resolution.
We are, however, very grateful to the sponsors of the draft
and we appreciate the fact that it represents a step forward
towards the foal goal of the United Nations, that is the
freedom and independence of Namibia. Wb shall therefore
vote in favour of that draft resolution.

151. In any case, a unanimous adoption of this measure
by the Security Council would stimulate the deliberations
of the Judges at The Hague. Of course at the present stage
it would be premature to prejudge or try to foresee with
any degree of mathematical accuracy the turn that the
deliberations of that court might take. If the information
available to the Security Council does not make it possible
to foresee a favourable or an unfavourable result for this
action, there is, however, always the hope that an impartial
judgement, which would be in conformity with .the
inalienable rights of the Namibian people, would serve the
twofold purpose of rehabilitating the International Court
before the world opinion, which was so bitterly disenchanted, and also of harmonizing the position of the Court
with the position taken by the General Assembly in putting
an end to South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia.

145. We have also very carefully considered the draft
resolution
presented by the delegation of Finland
[S/9892].
We believe we understand the intentions of the
Finnish delegation and its desire to bring out all aspects of
the situation in Namibia. We have no objection to addressing a request to the International Court of Justice, although
we have not forgotten the ruling which it handed down in
July 1966-a ruling which Poland resolutely opposed.
146. We would, however, like to stress that as far as we are
concerned the essential element for the achievement of the
United Nations objectives in Namibia is action-political
action in the broadest sense of the term, based on a
15

152. At any rate, whatever the result, my delegation
believes that the political decision of the General Assembly
with regard to the status of Namibia is irrevocable, because
the political nature of the Namibian problem is such that it
is definitely within the sphere of political solutions to be
imposed by the Security Council and the General Assembly, as the most competent organs. Thus, it is in the
recognition of the primary role of those two organs, the
Security Council and the General Assembly, that my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
submitted to us.
153. Mr. MORALES-SUAREZ (Colombia) (interpretation
from Spanish): Bearing in mind special circumstances to
which members of the Council have drawn my attention, I
withdraw my request for postponement of action on the
draft resolutions submitted to the Council today.

of the delegation of France under rule 32 of ,the rules of
procedure to have a separate vote on those words. Of
course, my ‘delegatioh will vote for their retention hi the
text.
159. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
representative of France has asked for a separate vote on
the last phrase of .the request to the International Court of
Justice in paragraph 1 of the draft resolution contained in
document S/9892. The Council would be voting separately
on the following phrase: “ . . . notwithstanding Security
Council resolution 276 (1970)“. The representative of
Finland has said that he is not opposed to a separate vote
on this phrase.
A vote wastaken by show of hands.
In favour: Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, United States of
America, Zambia.

154. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
Speaking as representative of NICARAGUA, I am very
pleased to say that I shall vote in favour of the draft
resolutions which have been considered this afternoon by
the Council.

Against: None.
Abstaining: France, Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.

155. Speaking as PRESIDENT, I see that there are no
further speakers on my list. If no other representatives wish
to take the floor at this time, I shall put to the vote the
joint draft resolution sponsored by Burundi, Finland,
Nepal, Sierra Leone and Zambia (S/9891].

By 11 votes to none, with 4 abstentions, the phrase
“ulotwithstanding Security Council resolution 276 (1970)”
wasadopted.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

160. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
shall now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/9892 as a whole.

In favour: Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United States of America,
Zambia.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
in favour: Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, United States
of America, Zambia.

Against: None.
Abstaining: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.

Against: None.

The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions. 6

Abstaining: Poland, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

156. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): .We
shall now proceed to vote on the draft resolution submitted
by Finland [S/9892] I

The draft resolution was adopted by 12 votes td none,
with 3 abstentions. 1
161. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
now call on those representatives who have asked t;o be
allowed to explain their vote.

157, Mr. BOUQUIN
(France) (interpretation
from
French): I have asked for the floor on a point of order, My
delegation wishes to request a separate vote on the last
phrase of paragraph 1 of the draft resolution submitted by
Finland, reading as follows: “ . , , notwithstanding Security
Council resolution 276 (1970)“. The request of my delegation is based on rule 32 of the rules of procedure, If the
representative of Finland, the sponsor of the draft resolution does not object, I should be very grateful if the passage
that I read out were put to the vote first.

162. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): The
United States was pleased to vote in favour of the two
resolutions just adopted by the Council. The substantial
support which was accorded them is, we believe, a fitting
tribute to the ad hoc Sub-Committee, whose work they
endorse. We should like to make our congratulations to that
Sub-Committee a matter of record,

158. Mr. PASTINEN (Finland): I am pleased to say that
the Finnish delegation will have no objection to the request

163. On 20 May of this year my Government announced
new policy steps which it intended to take to discourage

6 Seeresolution 283 (1970).

7 Seeresolution 284 (1970).
16

’

investment by our citizens in Namibia and to deny credit
guarantees and other assistance for trade with that Territory. We are gratified to note that the economic measures
which States are called upon to take in operative paragraphs
4 through 7 of the resolution contained in document
S/9891 are consistent with and in fact, we believe, reflect
the policy already enunciated and being implemented by
my Government. In our view, such steps constitute a
meaningful contribution to the Council’s efforts to deal
effectively with the problem of Namibia.

tative views both as to the duties of South Africa and the
responsibility of other Members of the United Nations in
light of resolution 276 (1970). In this connexion, we would
wish to commend very warmly both the Government and
the delegation of Finland for their vision and wisdom in
raising this very important matter with the Council and,
through it, with the International Court of Justice.
171. My delegation harbours no illusions that the two
resolutions we have adopted today will solve the problem
of Namibia, but we do believe that both of them,
embodying as they do peaceful and practical steps, make a
useful contribution
to furthering our efforts to find a
solution. Again, we congratulate the ad hoc Sub-Committee
for its effective work and we look forward to further
constructive suggestions from that Committee.

164. In explaining our vote, I must recall that the United
States did not vote in favour of resolution 282 (1970) and
therefore cannot join in its reaffirmation, as provided in
preambular paragraph 6.
165. With respect to operative paragraphs 2, 10 and 12,
the positions taken previously by my Government on the
matters of substance dealt with in those paragraphs remain
unchanged.

172. For its part, the United States will continue its
efforts bilaterally to persuade South Africa to acknowledge
United Nations responsibility for Namibia and we hope that
other Members will do likewise.

166. As for operative paragraph 2, my Government
continues to maintain that Member Governments must be
free to take appropriate action to protect their own citizens
and to assist the people of Namibia.

(France) (interprstntion flum
Mr. BOUQUIN
My delegation wishes to explain its vote on the
two draft resolutions which the Security Council had
before it on the initiative of five Powers [S/9891] and of
Finland [S/9892/, following the submission of the report
[5’/9c263/ of the ad hoc Sub-Committee which wascreated
under resolution 276 (1970) of the Security Council.
173.

French):

167. On operative paragraph 10, I would merely say that
my Government’s position on General Assembly resolution
2248 (S-V) is well known,
168. Finally, I should reiterate what has already been said
in the Sub-Committee, namely, that our support for
operative paragraph 12 constitutes no undertaking on our
part to contribute to a special fund for Namibia in the
event such a fund is established,

174. At the 17th meeting of the Sub-Committee our
representative, while reassuring the authors that he was
grateful for their work, set forth the reservations which he
had on the recommendations of the ad hoc Sub-Committee
and expressed once again the doubts of the French
delegation which had already been expressed a few months
earlier [1529th
meeting] when resolution 276 (1970) was
adopted.

169. My Government particularly welcomes the adoption
of the resolution contained in document S/9892, which
requests an advisory opinion of the International,Court of
Justice. This is the very first time that the Security Council
has availed itself of the procedures contained in Article 96,
paragraph 1, of the Charter, and we are most pleased at this
historic development, which is consistent completely with
the recommendations made by our own Secretary of State
in a statement in New York last April,’ advocating greater
use of this major organ of the United Nations. We believe
that 2he international community has indeed a serious need
for impartial and authoritative legal advice on the question
of Namibia.

175. The position of my Government on the important
problem which the Council has once again considered today
is in fact very well known. On many occasions the French
Government has voiced its disapproval of the extension of a
discriminatory and repressive policy to a Territory with
international status.

1’70. We recall that the Court, in its advisory opinions of
1950,g 19551° and 1956,l’ has already provided useful
guidance to the Assembly on legal issues concerning
Namibia, and we believe that the Court can and should now
give the Council the benefit of its impartial and authori-

176. Our traditions and our record show that France i;s
opposed to these policies. We consider further that they are
contrary to the spirit of the Mandate, for South Africa had
an obligation to ensure “the material and moral well being”
of the people over which it had authority and to lead them
to self-determination. It is for this reason that, with the
same clarity, my Government expressed its opposition to
any initiative by Pretoria arbitrarily to divide the Territory
or to incorporate it in the Republic of South Africa,

8 Made before the American Society of International Law on 25
April 1970.
9 International status of South West Africa, Advisory Opinion:
I.&J. Reports 1950, p. 128.
10 South West Africa - Voting procedure, Advisory Opinion of
June ?th, 19% I.C.J. Reports 1955, p. 67.
11 Admissibility of hearings of petitioners by the Committee on
South West Africa, Advisory Opinion of June Ist, 1956: I.C.J.
Reports 19.56, p. 23.

177. We are among those who believe that the international status did not come to an end with the disappearance of the League of Nations and cannot unilaterally
be modified by the administering Power, and that it is only
when the people exercise their right to self-determination
that, this will come to an end. On the other hand, it is
doubtful that the United Nations, heir to the League of
Nations, can claim to have powers exceeding those which
17

the League of Nations had, The Geneva Organization did
not seem to be empowered unilaterally to deprive a country
of its Mandate.

185. Mr. WARNER (United Kingdom): I should like to
explain why my delegation has, with regret, abstained in
the voting on each of the two draft resolutions.

178. In view of these doubts, we were much interested in
the initiative taken by the representative of Finland to
request an advisory opinion on the question from the
International
Court of Justice. Of course, the-in our
view-imperfect language of the request to the International
Court may be a matter of regret. Without prejudging the
opinion of the Court, it might be appropriate to leave it to
the Judges at The Hague to question the legal foundations
of the revocation of th.e Mandate.

186. Our basic position, on both the legal and the
practical aspects of the question before us, has often been
explained here in the past and it has in no way changed.
First of all, we believe in the thought in the first paragraph
of the preamble of draft resolution S/9891, namely, that
the people of South West Africa have an undisputed right
to self-determination. On the other hand, we have always
seen certain difficulties about the way in which this Council
has sought to help the people of Namibia to exercise that
right, I explained to the Council on 30 January of this year
[1529th meeting] why we found certain difficulties in the
series of resolutions on South West Africa, and after that
the United Kingdom representative to the ad hoc SubCommittee drew attentioq to what I had said, both at the
beginning and at the end of the Sub-Committee’s discussions. I pointed out that we could hardly support a draft
resolution whose basis lay in earlier resolutions on which
we had already abstained in the past.

179. It is, then, because we consider that it would make it
possible for the International Court of Justice to clarify the
legal position as regards the legality of the revocation that
we have decided none the less to support the text.
180. Howeve; this may be, there can be nd doubt that the
mandatory Power disregarded its obligations and that the
measures which it is planning to adopt, or has adopted, are
in contradiction to the commitments flowing from Article
22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations and the
Agreement signed on 17 December 1920 at Geneva.

187. To those resolutions which caused us difficulty has
now been added, in the case of the main resolution which
has been voted on today, a reaffirmation of Security
Council resolution 282 (1970) on which we abstained last
week [1549th meetirzgl.

18 1. The Security Council should bring the very serious
matter of these wrongdoings to the attention of the
authorities who are responsible and urge them to take a
sounder view of their obligations. It would seem preferable
in this difficult and complex matter, and in view of the
legal position the soundness of which does not seem to have
been established unquestionably, not to engage the authority of the United Nations in a course of action which in
the past has proved likely to lead to an impasse.

188. I have also had occasion to point out the practical
considerations that have to be faced and the need for the
United Nations to act within its capabilities. I am very well
aware that these views are not shared by all, but it must be
admitted that none of the factors to which I have drawn
attention in the past has changed since, and the Council
will, I believe, understand that our reservations, therefore,
remain with them, It is for these reasons that my
Government has abstained today on the longer of the two
draft resolutions.

182. Such initiatives, it must be confessed, have not
helped to strengthen the prestige of the Organization. We
are all aware that steps taken in the past in similar
circumstances have hardly led to a solution of this irritating
and difficult problem, The problem has in fact become even
more serious due to the furtherance in the Territory of a
policy which is deliberately contrary to the spirit of the
Mandate and which we deplore and would like to see come
to an end.
183. No matter how shocking the situation may be there
is reason to fear that the first victims of this pointless series
of actions and counteractions might well be the people
themselves whose material and moral well-being was the
objective of the Mandate because, above and beyond all
controversies and procedures, we should be concerned with
the fate of the people involved.

189. As is known, my Government has doubts about the
legal status of South West Africa; at the same time, asevery
speaker today has noted and deplored, South Africa is in
fact controlling the territory of South West Africa. It is, of
course, our view that full examination and clarification of
the legal position would be desirable and helpfu1. In the ad
hoc Sub-Committee the United Kingdom representative
made it clear that my Government was quite willing to
consider a request for an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice. I-Ie did, however, add that
our support for this’depended upon the submission to the
International Court of the issue of the status of South West
Africa as a whole.

184. These are the considerations which have prompted
my Government to take the position which it has adopted.
While my delegation was not able for these reasons to vote
in favour of the text presented by the five Powers, it was
nevertheless in a position after expressing its reservations by
abstaining in the separate vote on the question put to the
Court, to vote in favour of the draft resolution put forward
by Finland.

190. The question before us does not appear to do this. It
is based on certain assumptions about the legal status of
South West Africa which, in the opinion of my Governmerit, ought themselves to be examined by the Court.
These assumptions are not expressly stated in the’question
itself but they do clearly emerge from some speechesof the
sponsors made in the ad hoc Sub-Committee and also
today,
18

191. In the first place, there is a question whether, having
regard to all the circumstances, the General Assembly was
competent to terminate the Mandate over South West
Africa as it claimed to do by virtue of General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI).

194. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
resolutions which we have just adopted are beyond any
doubt a new step which the Security Council has taken in
the necessary search for feasible solutions which in one way
or another may contribute to safeguarding the interests of
international peace and security.

192. In the second place, if it were established that the
General Assembly was so competent to terminate the
Mandate, there would remain a question whether it was
entitled to vest in the United Nations responsibility for the
Territory.

195. We should like to thank the Sub-Committee presided
over by the representative of Burundi for the very careful
work it did so unselfishly, I wish to convey an expression of
our thanks to the Vice-Chairmen, the Ambassadors of
Finland and Nepal, and to the other members on the
Committee. I also should like to thank all members of the
Security Council for their co-operation during the deliberations in the Security Council this afternoon. Since I have no
further speakers listed and if no other representative wishes
to take the floor, I propose to adjourn the meeting.

193. These questions pose complicated legal issues which
have not hitherto been the subject of any decision or
advisory opinion of the International Court. My Government regrets that the question which it is now proposed to
submit to the Court is constructed in such a fashion that
the Court might feel itself inhibited from pronouncing on
the more fundamental issues concerning the present status
of South West Africa. It is for these reasons that my
Government has abstained on the request for an advisory
opinion asexpressed in the shorter draft resolution.

The meeting rose at 7.5 p.m

19
