A /73/PV.56

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

56th plenary meeting

Monday, 17 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Korneliou
(Cyprus), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/589/
Add.3)
Draft amendment (A/73/L.60)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
continue to hear explanations of vote before the voting.
I first give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan to introduce draft amendment A/73/L.60.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic):
Unfortunately, the consensus, if not unanimity, that the
General Assembly enjoyed while voting on a number
of issues has been undermined through an initiative
launched by several States, in particular our friends
in the European Union, to include a call to join the
International Criminal Court in draft resolutions that
deal with such issues. Over time, such referrals have
led to extreme polarization, particularly following the
decision taken by some States to refer to the authority
of the International Criminal Court as an integral part
of their foreign policies. Those States seek to link
humanitarian assistance and economic cooperation with

the stance of other countries towards the Court. That
has coincided with the Court’s attempts to single out
Africa and its leaders exclusively, which has had serious
political and strategic repercussions for countries that
are targeted by the Court if they try to depart from its
regional jurisdiction on the African continent.
The number of cases that are currently before
the Court, the pending cases in its chambers and the
exorbitant amount of money spent on each case very
clearly illustrate that the International Criminal Court
has not succeeded and will not succeed in effectively
fulfilling its mandate, given its unacceptable selectivity,
while it claims to be an independent judicial body. Those
issues add to the danger posed by the Court due to its
flagrant activity, clear preference and political bias,
while trying to single out African leaders with arrest
warrants and putting political considerations before
reconciliation, peace and post-conflict rehabilitation.
All those factors pose an imminent danger for social
peace and national unity in developing countries. The
Court has simultaneously undermined peace and justice.
With regard to draft resolution I, entitled “Situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea”, since 2014 we have faced serious obstacles
from proponents of the Court. In accordance with the
rules of procedure, we therefore wish to introduce draft
amendment A/73/L.60, which proposes the deletion of
operative paragraph 12. We call on Member States to
vote in favour of it.
Mr. Hassani Nejad Pirkouhi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): I deliver this statement in relation to draft

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-44309 (E)

*1844309*

A/73/PV.56

resolution II, on the so-called situation of human rights
in the Islamic Republic of Iran.
This is another unfortunate instance of the General
Assembly being forced into taking a deeply biased
and politicized decision, which further erodes the
credibility of the United Nations. This political charade,
which is annually orchestrated by Canada, has only one
objective: to put political pressure on my people by
abusing the noble cause of human rights.
There are no greater adversaries to human rights
and democracy than the countries that conveniently
exploit those belonging to the nations and Governments
they dislike. In fact, the biggest threat to human rights
comes from hypocrisy, politicization and double
standards. Such Governments are not confronting
their political foes; rather, they are condemning the
cause of human rights itself. Their foreign policies, by
default, are run on hypocrisy, inconsistency and double
standards. That is clearly reflected in the behaviour of
the main proponents of draft resolution II, presented
by Canada.
Canada needs to realize that such a pointless and
futile exercise disrespects the wisdom of the people
who observe its selective stance on the issue of human
rights. Sadly, each year the main sponsors of the draft
resolution wage a vigorous campaign of pressure and
intimidation, while collecting votes by putting pressure
on Member States. Reaping votes by threatening cuts
in financial or development funds will not contribute
to promoting human rights; rather, it further exposes
the dishonesty of such States and should be viewed as
another clear assault on the cause of human rights.
The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
recognizes that promoting and protecting the human
rights of its citizens is not only a legal and moral
responsibility, but also a paramount requirement of
its national security. During the past four decades, the
people’s voice, expressed through ballots, has decided
the country’s overall policies in both internal and
foreign affairs. Regardless of the challenges, Iranians
will never give up their enthusiasm for human rights
and their dreams for democracy.
Similar to other countries, deficiencies may exist,
which we are determined to address. However, it is not
for those countries that traditionally, historically and
practically supported colonialism, slavery, racism,
apartheid, torture, pre-emptive wars and interventions
to lecture Iranians on human rights. Those are the same
2/26

17/12/2018

countries that openly glorify terrorists and separatists,
including in the very draft resolution that the General
Assembly will act upon. Those are exactly the States
that are brazenly committing crimes against humanity
by weaponizing food, drugs and medicines, imposing
unilateral sanctions against civilians in my country
and elsewhere.
We regret that a few unscrupulous Governments
continue to challenge the integrity and credibility of
the United Nations by forcing it to make decisions that
are absolutely irrelevant to the realities on the ground.
The Assembly may have already decided how to vote,
but please remember that rejecting and voting against
this futile draft resolution is a step in the right direction
towards the protection and promotion of human rights.
Please remember that, unlike those few that have
historically abused human rights as instruments in
their foreign policy tool boxes, Iran continues to
earnestly believe in dialogue that is based on mutual
understanding, cooperation and respect in order to
promote and protect human rights.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
We deeply regret that the Sudan has yet again
introduced a draft amendment (A/73/L.60) seeking to
delete references to the International Criminal Court
(ICC). That issue has already been duly considered
in the Third Committee and this morning (see A/73/
PV.55), and the outcome of that consideration was a
clear rejection of the respective draft amendment.
The EU and its member States consider the fight
against impunity for the most serious crimes as critical
to ensuring a fair and just society and sustainable
peace, with perpetrators held accountable and justice
ensured for victims. We also believe that peace and
justice are complementary and not mutually exclusive.
We are strong supporters of the International Criminal
Court, which is a key institution that assists victims in
achieving justice when confronted with the most serious
crimes, when that is not possible at the national level.
All perpetrators of such crimes must be held
accountable for their actions. The creation of the ICC
has given millions of victims of atrocity crimes, many
of whom are African, new hope that justice will be
done. States from all over the world have joined efforts
to make that possible. The 28 States members of the
European Union will therefore vote against the draft
18-44309

17/12/2018

amendment proposed by the Sudan. We call on all
other States, in particular States parties to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, to also vote
against it.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation has traditionally refrained
from supporting so-called country-specific draft
resolutions on human rights, which are often based on
unreliable information and have little to do with the
real state of affairs. Such openly political initiatives
discredit the human rights structures of the United
Nations. Rather than continuing the counterproductive
practice of making unfounded accusations, we should
focus our efforts on establishing cooperation on an
equal footing and a basis of mutual respect.
We outlined our position on country-specific draft
resolutions in the Third Committee, and it has not
changed. We will vote against the draft resolutions
on the human rights situations in Iran, Myanmar and
Syria, and we dissociate ourselves from the consensus
on the draft resolution on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the honour
of delivering this statement on behalf of Andorra,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal.
Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine and my
own country, Liechtenstein.
Draft resolution IV, entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Syrian Arab Republic”, again this year
reflects recent developments in the atrocious human
rights situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, as set
out in the reports of the accountability mechanism,
the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism; the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism; the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry; as well as the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and many brave
civil society actors.
We are deeply concerned about the well-documented
abhorrent crimes that constitute serious violations
of international law, in particular international law,
humanitarian law and human rights law, in many cases

A/73/PV.56

amounting to war crimes or crimes against humanity.
We welcome the draft resolution’s emphasis on the need
for accountability and continue to reiterate our call on
the Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court, which can ensure
a comprehensive judicial process for all the relevant
crimes committed by all actors in Syria.
In the absence of a Security Council referral,
the General Assembly has taken a much-needed
first step to close the immense immunity gap by
creating the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism, which is carrying out its functions with
remarkable effectiveness and success. With the
overwhelming support of the General Assembly, the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
is fully operational and discharges its mandate in a
diligent manner, with the seriousness and breadth of
expertise needed, to prepare case files for the many
different grave crimes committed. We welcome that
the draft resolution before us supports those efforts in
practical terms.
Paragraph 31 mandates the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism to present its reports on
an annual basis to the plenary of the General Assembly,
under the existing agenda item entitled “Prevention
of armed conflict”, under which the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism was created
two years ago. The paragraph is fully in line with the
existing rules of procedure of the General Assembly
and adds clarification to the relationship of the General
Assembly and its subsidiary body the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism.
Paragraph 32 notes the steps taken by the SecretaryGeneral in response to last year’s decision to include
the necessary funding for the Mechanism in his next
budget proposal. The transfer of the Mechanism’s
funding from voluntary contributions to the regular
budget corresponds to the wish of a large majority of
States that agreed to it last year. It does not come with
programme budget implications, as incorrectly claimed
by some. With those provisions, the draft resolution
makes an important contribution to the quest for justice
for victims of the crimes committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic. We call upon all States to vote in favour of
the draft resolution and to oppose attempts to amend
or alter it.
Mr. Budhu (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to deliver this explanation of vote before the

18-443093/26

A/73/PV.56

voting on a number of draft resolutions presented under
sub-item (c) of agenda item 74.
Trinidad and Tobago is committed to upholding the
rule of law at the national and international levels. In that
regard, our Constitution, which is our supreme law, has
entrenched fundamental human rights and freedoms, in
keeping with our legally binding obligations that arise
from various global and hemispheric human rights
instruments. Consequently, we condemn all violations
of human rights, wherever they are committed, as
we subscribe to the view that the human rights of the
individual are inviolable. As a responsible member
of the international community, we are committed
to ensuring that all human rights and fundamental
freedoms are globally promoted and protected.
However, Trinidad and Tobago wishes to recall
that the Human Rights Council, an independent
and impartial body, was established by the General
Assembly to address violations of human rights
in Member States, including through its Universal
Periodic Review process and its special procedures.
Additionally, it must also be recalled that human rights
treaty bodies established by different conventions
and treaties contribute to addressing human rights
violations through monitoring the implementation of
treaties by States parties.
Accordingly, we have some difficulty with the
selectivity with which draft resolutions were put
forward on the situation of human rights in certain
countries and the apparent politicization of those issues
in this forum. Trinidad and Tobago submits that the
Human Rights Council and treaty bodies should be
allowed to discharge their mandates and to examine in
a dispassionate manner the question of human rights
violations in any Member State. We also subscribe
to the view that mutual dialogue, cooperation and
understanding are key to improving human rights
situations, as they contribute to creating an environment
in which there can be meaningful action.
Trinidad and Tobago therefore encourages all
Member States to cooperate with the Human Rights
Council special procedures and treaty bodies in that
regard. For those reasons, Trinidad and Tobago will
abstain in the voting on the draft resolutions submitted
under sub-item (c) of agenda item 74.
Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): I already made a statement this morning (see
A/73/PV.55) with regard to sub-item (c) of agenda item
4/26

17/12/2018

74, so I will not repeat the same things again. I will,
however, very briefly emphasize the key points of my
statement for the General Assembly’s understanding.
First, my delegation totally and categorically
rejects draft resolution I, entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”,
as a product of a political plot by hostile forces aimed
at disgracing the image of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and overthrowing our political and
social system.
Secondly, the text of the draft resolution is consistent
with the ongoing lies and that plot and severely distorts
the real human rights situation in my country.
Thirdly, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea maintains a consistent and principled position of
solving all issues through dialogue and negotiation. We
cannot compromise with confrontational approaches,
such as that of the draft resolution presented by the
European Union and Japan, and we will not be forced
to adopt the draft resolution against my country.
Finally, we neither recognize nor accept the draft
resolution, and therefore never feel any need to call for
a vote.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela wishes to explain its position
regarding the draft resolutions under sub-item (c) of
agenda item 74, to be acted upon in this meeting and
relating to country-specific human rights situations,
namely, draft resolution I, on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, draft resolution II, on the Islamic
Republic of Iran, and draft resolution IV, on the Syrian
Arab Republic.
In that regard, Venezuela wishes to reaffirm its
principled position with regard to the adoption of draft
resolutions, special procedures and other mechanisms
on country-specific human rights situations, while
rejecting politically motivated selectivity in addressing
those issues, as that constitutes a violation of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. As
well as exceeding the remit of the Committees of the
General Assembly, the continued practice of selectively
adopting draft resolutions relating to country-specific
human rights situations violates the principles of
universality, objectivity and non-selectivity that we
should employ when addressing human rights issues.
18-44309

17/12/2018

Cooperation and dialogue are the appropriate
means and essential principles for effectively promoting
and protecting human rights. In that regard, we support
the ongoing calls of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries concerning this issue. Venezuela urges
States to build on the positive progress made since the
establishment of the Human Rights Council and to foster
the Universal Periodic Review mechanism as a form of
cooperation to address the issue of human rights. We
call for the elimination of the practice of selectively
adopting draft resolutions concerning countries, which
weakens the mandate of the Human Rights Council.
Finally, on the basis of our principled position,
Venezuela will vote against the draft resolutions to be
put to the vote and we disassociate ourselves from the
consensus on draft resolution I.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
consistently maintains that human rights differences
should be resolved through constructive dialogue and
cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual respect.
We reject the politicization of human rights issues and
the exertion of pressure on other countries under the
pretence of human rights. We also reject the practice of
country-specific human rights draft resolutions.
In view of those reasons, the Chinese delegation
will not join the consensus on draft resolution I, on
the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and will also vote against other
human rights-related country-specific draft resolutions.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolutions I, II and IV.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea”. In connection with draft resolution I, the
General Assembly has before it a draft amendment
circulated in document A/73/L.60. In accordance
with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly
shall first take a decision on the draft amendment. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Bahrain, Belarus, Burundi, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Oman, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles,

A/73/PV.56

South Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Zambia
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Barbados, Bhutan, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Israel,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Papua New
Guinea, Qatar, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Togo,
Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Viet Nam
Draft amendment A/73/L.60 was rejected by 95
votes to 19, with 43 abstentions.
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution I, as a whole. The Third Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

18-443095/26

A/73/PV.56

Draft resolution I, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 73/180).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of
Iran”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Maldives,
Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against:
Afghanistan,
Armenia,
Belarus,
Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Eritrea, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Nicaragua,
Oman, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Serbia, South
Africa, Syrian Arab Republic, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brazil, Cabo
Verde, Cameroon, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
6/26

17/12/2018

Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Zambia
Draft resolution II was adopted by 84 to 30, with 67
abstentions (resolution 73/181).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab
Republic”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen
18-44309

17/12/2018

Against:
Algeria, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Burundi, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Mauritania, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian
Arab Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei
Darussalam, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, GuineaBissau, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines,
Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao
Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 111 to 15, with
55 abstentions (resolution 73/182).
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to those delegations wishing to speak in explanation of
vote after the voting.
Ms. Elmansouri (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): My
country abstained in the voting on resolution 73/182, on
the human rights situation in the Syrian Arab Republic.
In that connection, my country’s delegation would like
to emphasize our rejection of all human rights violations
committed since the beginning of the Syrian crisis,
regardless of the perpetrators. We call on all parties to
respect their commitments under international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, and
to providing the necessary protection to defenceless
civilians. Tunisia also calls for all perpetrators of
crimes and grave violations of human rights to be
held accountable and to ensure that they do not enjoy
impunity. My country is convinced that, if all parties
reject escalations of violence, mitigate the suffering of
the Syrian people and respect human rights, we will be
able to create a political climate conducive to moving
forward towards a complete resolution of the Syrian
crisis, under the auspices of the United Nations. That
will enable our brotherly Syrian people to re-establish

A/73/PV.56

peace and security and look towards reconstruction
and development.
Mr. Hassani Nejad Pirkouhi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): My delegation disassociates itself from the
consensus on resolution 73/180, entitled “Situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea”. In our view, the resolution takes a
counter-productive and confrontational approach
and contravenes the principles of universality,
non-selectivity and objectivity in addressing human
rights issues.
Mr. Cepero Aguilar (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Cuban delegation disassociates itself from the
consensus on resolution 73/180, entitled “Situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea”, in line with our stance against the imposition
of selective and politically motivated resolutions
and mandates. We believe that genuine international
cooperation based on the principles of objectivity,
impartiality and non-selectivity is the only way to
effectively promote and protect all human rights.
We urge that, in this case, as in others, the Universal
Periodic Review mechanism be given the opportunity to
foster a discussion free of politicization or confrontation
and to stimulate respectful cooperation with the country
concerned. The resolution continues down the path of
sanctions and dangerously and counter-productively
involves the Security Council in matters that do not fall
under its remit.
Cuba can therefore not join the consensus on a
resolution that seeks to safeguard Security Council
punishment and sanctions in situations that do not
infringe on international peace and security. We cannot
be complicit in the attempts to deny the people of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea their right
to peace, self-determination and development. We
wish to point out that the opposition to this selective
and politicized mandate does not promote any value
judgement on the other outstanding issues that are set
out in the twentieth paragraph. Those call for a fair
and honourable solution, with the agreement of all
interested parties.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia on a point of order.
Mr. Khashaan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
First, my country’s delegation would like to point out
that the name of my country is the Kingdom of Saudi

18-443097/26

A/73/PV.56

Arabia, not the Saudi regime. Moreover, my country’s
delegation refuses to enter into the mire into which the
Syrian delegation is dragging us.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 74.
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/589/
Add.4)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Third Committee?
It was so decided (decision 73/526).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 74?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 74.
Agenda item 109
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/590)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it nine draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 45 of its report and a draft
decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
46 of the same report. We shall now take a decision on
draft resolutions I to IX and on the draft decision, one
by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Enhancing the role
of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice in contributing to the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 73/183).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Follow-up to the Thirteenth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
8/26

17/12/2018

and preparations for the Fourteenth United Nations
Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 73/184).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “The rule of law, crime prevention and criminal
justice in the context of the Sustainable Development
Goals”. The Third Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 73/185).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Strengthening the United Nations crime
prevention and criminal justice programme, in
particular its technical cooperation capacity”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 73/186).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “Countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Belarus,
Belize,
Benin,
Bhutan,
Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Chad, China, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Guinea, GuineaBissau, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
18-44309

17/12/2018

A/73/PV.56

Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Vanuatu

The Acting President: Draft resolution VIII is
entitled “Preventing and combating corrupt practices
and the transfer of proceeds of corruption, facilitating
asset recovery and returning such assets to legitimate
owners, in particular to countries of origin, in
accordance with the United Nations Convention against
Corruption”. The Third Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Cabo Verde, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Lesotho, Liberia,
Mauritius, Mexico, Nauru, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Samoa,
Senegal, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uruguay

Draft resolution IX was adopted (resolution 73/191).

Draft resolution V was adopted by 94 votes to 59,
with 33 abstentions (resolution 73/187).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VI is
entitled “United Nations African Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (resolution 73/188).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VII
is entitled “Strengthening and promoting effective
measures and international cooperation on organ
donation and transplantation to prevent and combat
trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ
removal and trafficking in human organs”. The Third

Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution
73/189).

Draft resolution VIII was adopted (resolution
73/190).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IX is
entitled “Special session of the General Assembly
against corruption”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?

The Acting President: We shall now turn to
paragraph 46 of the report to take action on the draft
decision entitled “Documents considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the question
of crime prevention and criminal justice”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/527).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 109.
Agenda item 110
International drug control
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/591)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report.
We shall now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “International cooperation to address and
counter the world drug problem”. The Third Committee

18-443099/26

A/73/PV.56

adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/192).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 110?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/592)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
We shall now take a decision on the draft decision,
entitled “Programme of work of the Third Committee
for the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/528).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 123.
Agenda item 137 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Third Committee (A/73/593)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Third Committee?
It was so decided (decision 73/529).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 137.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like to
thank His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations
and Chair of the Third Committee, as well as the
members of the Bureau and representatives for a job
well done.
10/26

17/12/2018

The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Third Committee
before it today.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee
(A/73/600)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 12 of its report.
I should like to note that, since the meeting of the
Credentials Committee, formal credentials in the form
required by rule 27 of the rules of procedure were
submitted by Madagascar and the United Kingdom.
The General Assembly therefore has before it a draft
resolution approving the report of the Credentials
Committee and the additional credentials submitted
subsequent to the meeting of the Credentials Committee.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on the draft resolution, entitled “Credentials of
representatives to the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly”. The Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
73/193).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who
wishes to speak in explanation of postion following the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation joined the consensus on resolution 73/193,
just adopted. However, I would like to express my
delegation’s reservations about the parts of the
report contained in document A/73/600 and in the
resolution that could be construed as recognizing the
Israeli regime.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 3 and of
agenda item 3 as a whole?
It was so decided.
18-44309

17/12/2018

Agenda item 34
Prevention of armed conflict
(a) Prevention of armed conflict
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/295)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.47)
Draft amendment (A/73/L.68)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.47.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Draft resolution
A/73/L.47, which I have the honour to introduce today
under sub-item (a) of agenda item 34, entitled “Prevention
of armed conflict”, focuses on a pressing legal and
political issue — the problem of the militarization of
the occupied territory of Ukraine, in particular the
Crimean peninsula and respective parts of the Black
Sea and the Sea of Azov. The draft resolution addresses
a matter of fundamental concern to my country and, I
believe, the broader United Nations membership.
The Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol have been occupied by the Russian
Federation since February 2014. The attempt to annex
that sovereign Ukrainian territory was not recognized
by the international community, which was confirmed
by resolution 68/262, on the territorial integrity of
Ukraine. Following the Russian Federation’s occupation
of Crimea, it has progressively militarized the Crimean
peninsula, which includes in particular destabilizing
transfers by Russia of weapon systems, including
nuclear-capable aircraft and missiles, weapons,
ammunition and military personnel to the territory
of Ukraine.

A/73/PV.56

long-term negative environmental consequences in
the region.
The Russian Federation is also actively militarizing
the Sea of Azov by increasing the number of warships
and their expansion to the whole territory of the Sea.
As an example, in October the Russian Government
allocated a huge designated area in the Sea of Azov
to the Russian Defence Ministry. That area is located
just 65 kilometres from the city of Mariupol, one of
Ukraine’s largest seaport cities.
The progressing militarization of the Sea of Azov
not only has implications for maritime trade and
supplies into Ukraine, but also poses an additional
military threat to Ukraine and is leading to an escalation
of the security situation in the region. The illegal
construction of the Kerch Strait bridge between Russia
and temporarily occupied Crimea has substantially
contributed to that threat, in particular by facilitating
further militarization of Crimea and the involvement
of additional Russian maritime and other forces in the
area under the pretext of protecting the bridge and
its infrastructure.
As a result, on 25 November a group of Ukrainian
naval vessels was deliberately attacked by the Russian
border guard patrol in the Black Sea near the Kerch
Strait. Russia adopted a shoot-to-kill policy by openly
firing at the Ukrainian servicemen and then ramming
the Ukrainian vessels, which were in the process
of conducting legitimate and peaceful transits to a
Ukrainian port.

The occupation and subsequent militarization of
Crimea led to the expansion of the area of use of Russian
warships and military aircraft in the Black Sea region
and far beyond in the entire Mediterranean basin. As
such, that activity has far-reaching consequences for
security in not only the Black Sea region, but also the
whole of Southern Europe, as well as North Africa and
the Middle East.

That attack represents yet another blatant and
barefaced act of military aggression against Ukraine
by the Russian Federation. Three Ukrainian military
vessels were shot at and then seized by the Russians in
the waters beyond the 12-mile zone in the Black Sea on
their way back to Odessa port. Twenty-four Ukrainian
servicemen were seized and imprisoned, with six
wounded, including two in critical condition, and
paraded on Russian television as part of a show trial.
The provocative actions of the Russian Federation in
the Sea of Azov were condemned by Security Council
member States during the briefing requested by the
delegation of Ukraine on 26 November (see S/PV.8410).
The Secretary-General, in turn, also sounded an alarm.

Multiple military exercises conducted by Russian
armed forces in Crimea and in the area reflect Russia’s
aggressive policy towards Ukraine and other Black Sea
littoral States. Such exercises also entail considerable

Given the current volatile security situation in
the mentioned areas and its far-reaching negative
implications, Ukraine, together with Australia, Austria,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, the Czech Republic,

18-4430911/26

A/73/PV.56

Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovenia, Sweden,
Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States
of America, submitted draft resolution A/73/L.47,
“Problem of the militarization of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine,
as well as parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov”.
That group was later joined by Belgium, Greece,
Hungary, Liechtenstein, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Malta, New Zealand, Slovakia and
Spain. We are very grateful for that strong solidarity
and support.
The main goal of the draft resolution I am
introducing today is to urge the Russian Federation
to withdraw its military forces from Crimea and to
stop the illegal occupation of Ukraine’s territory. By
bringing before the General Assembly the issue of
the militarization of Crimea, Ukraine and the other
co-sponsors do not seek confrontation or politicization.
Rather, we believe that it is a matter of the utmost
importance for every Member State to fully support the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
I believe that the draft resolution will enjoy the
same support and constructive attitude on the part of
Member States that has been displayed concerning other
General Assembly resolutions on Ukraine. I urge all
Member States to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Such a vote will demonstrate their strong commitment
to the fundamental principles of international law and
the United Nations Charter.
Ukraine is also convinced that the progressive
militarization of the temporarily occupied Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol in Ukraine
by the Russian Federation and Russia’s continued
aggressive acts, threats and use of force against Ukraine,
in violation of the United Nations Charter, will have
far-reaching consequences for international peace and
security. The issue therefore constitutes an important
question, as envisaged in rules 83 and 84 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly. Thus, the decisions
on the draft resolution and draft amendment A/73/L.68
shall be made by a two-thirds majority of the members
present and voting.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
introduce draft amendment A/73/L.68.
12/26

17/12/2018

Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran): On
behalf of the delegations of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
the Republic of Nicaragua, the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, I have the
honour to introduce draft amendment A/73/L.68 to
draft resolution A/73/L.47. The draft amendment was
submitted on 13 December.
But before introducing the draft amendment, we
deem it necessary to reiterate our principled position on
Russian and Ukrainian disputes. We firmly believe that
debates on multifaceted issues of a highly political and
controversial nature within the setting of the General
Assembly will have little, if any, utility in furthering
efforts to achieve a workable solution to an issue on
which agreements were decided in Minsk in 2015,
endorsed by Security Council resolution 2202 (2015).
While there is an agreed international mechanism in
place, which is supported by the Security Council,
referring the dispute to the General Assembly could
bring out existing differences and sow division among
Member States, instead of achieving a resolution.
Such action could even undermine the internationally
recognized agreed settlement format on Ukraine.
We need to give the already agreed mechanism
more time and refrain from taking hasty decisions. Our
principled position is to support a peaceful solution to
the Ukraine and Russia dispute, and we firmly believe
that the issue must be resolved by the States concerned.
Any solutions outside of that framework will not work
unless endorsed by both Russians and Ukrainians. A
prestigious representative organ should not prematurely
engage itself in a debate that has been on the Security
Council agenda since the occurrence of the events that
prompted it.
As for our draft amendment, I should point out
that it contains three new operative paragraphs, to be
incorporated after the current paragraph 5 of the draft
resolution. Furthermore, it proposes that a new phrase
be added to the end of the current paragraph 6. After
the inclusion of the proposed new paragraphs, the
paragraphs of the draft resolution, from paragraph 5
onwards, shall therefore be renumbered accordingly.
Regarding the substance of the draft amendment,
according to the proposed new paragraphs, both Russia
and Ukraine are urged to conduct a full, transparent and
evidence-based investigation of the incident in question,
with a view to holding accountable those responsible for
the aggravation of the situation. The draft amendment
18-44309

17/12/2018

also stresses that the incident and subsequent measures
taken should not affect the implementation of the
binding decision adopted within the United Nations,
namely, Security Council resolution 2202 (2015), of
17 February, on the issue. In addition to endorsing
the package of measures for the implementation of
the Minsk agreements and welcoming the declaration
by the Presidents of Russia, Ukraine and France and
the German Chancellor in support of the package, the
resolution calls on all parties to fully implement the
measures.
Moreover, the draft amendment proposes that
a reference to the 2003 treaty between Russia and
Ukraine on cooperation in the use of the Sea of Azov
and the Kerch Strait be added at the end of current
paragraph 6, as we believe that the treaty should be
seen as the relevant legal instrument in force between
the parties concerned in the exercise of navigational
rights and freedoms.
The proposals put forward are in line with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially as they call on the parties to
exercise restraint, respect each other’s sovereignty
and the inviolability of borders and refrain from
inflammatory rhetoric, which, in our view, is key
to de-escalating tension. The proposals intend to
contribute to restraining both parties and call on them
to avoid any further escalation of the situation, which is
in line with encouraging the parties concerned to find
a peaceful solution to the dispute, as called for by the
United Nations Charter.
Furthermore, the proposals in the draft amendment
have been taken from agreed texts, some of which were
adopted by the Assembly in its resolution 68/262, of
27 March 2014, on the subject. In paragraph 3, it urges
all parties to immediately pursue the peaceful resolution
of the situation with respect to Ukraine through direct
political dialogue and by exercising restraint, refraining
from unilateral actions and inflammatory rhetoric
that may increase tensions and fully engaging with
international mediation efforts.

A/73/PV.56

and Ukraine. As a result, they do not take sides with
either of the parties concerned. We invite all Member
States to support the inclusion of the proposals in
the draft resolution and to vote in favour of the
draft amendment.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/73/L.47.
The representative of Ukraine has stated that, in
his view, a two-thirds majority of the members present
and voting is required for the adoption of the draft
resolution and draft amendment A/73/L.68.
As I see no objection, may I therefore take it that
a two-thirds majority of the members present and
voting is required for the adoption of draft resolution
A/73/L.47 and draft amendment A/73/L.68?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
delegations in explanation of vote before the voting,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation would like to express
its position on draft resolution A/73/L.47.
We are concerned about the practice of certain
delegations of using sub-item (a) of agenda item 34,
entitled “Prevention of armed conflict”, as a tool to
put forward politicized and non-consensual draft
resolutions. That practice by the authors of such draft
resolutions is based on exclusion, singularity and
overlooking the established working mechanisms of the
General Assembly, which call for holding consultations,
taking into account the concerns and positions of States
and providing ample time for arriving at consensual
draft resolutions.

It was the original intention of our delegations to
submit those proposals during the informal consultations
on the draft resolution. However, as no consultations
were convened, we have no other option but to present
the proposals in the form of a draft amendment.

In principle, the Syrian Arab Republic opposes
General Assembly draft resolutions whose main
objective is to apply political pressure and worsen
disagreements among Member States uselessly,
while even overburdening the agenda of the General
Assembly and depleting the energies and human as
well as financial resources of the United Nations in a
way that undermines the fundamental purposes and
principles of the Charter.

Last, but not least, the proposals are of a general
nature and fully respect the sovereignty of both Russia

A draft resolution such as the one contained in
document A/73/L.47 becomes, regrettably, a means

18-4430913/26

A/73/PV.56

for political politicization, discord and dispute,
rather than bringing us together to achieve peace,
security and development for all, without exception
or discrimination. The legal interpretation and political
position of the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the
situation in the Republic of Crimea is based on the
fact that the results of the referendum that took place
on 16 March 2014 are reflected by the current stable
situation in the region.
We reaffirm that the draft resolution before us
now is politicized and unbalanced, in particular its
paragraphs 6 and 7, which we consider an unsuccessful
attempt by the authors to impose biased views that do
not serve the cause of stability in the region. Those
paragraphs allow certain Governments to exploit the
current situation between two historic neighbours, the
Russian Federation and Ukraine, in order to impose
political pressure on Moscow.
However, despite our principled position in
opposing such draft resolutions, we, alongside the
delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran, have
submitted amendments contained in document
A/73/L.68. That is a sincere and positive attempt on
our part to contribute some form of balance, credibility
and realism to the draft resolution.
In conclusion, my delegation calls on Member
States to vote in favour of the amendments to which
I referred. If those amendments are not adopted,
then we call on Member States to vote against draft
resolution A/73/L.47. Our position today in opposing
the politicization of the work of the General Assembly
is based on our respect for the Charter and international
treaties that govern the situation in the Republic
of Crimea. It is also based on our commitment to
the rules of procedure and to avoiding the General
Assembly from dealing with such politicized issues
and overburdening its agenda with non-consensual
draft resolutions, particularly when they do not lead to
the settlement of disputes at the international level and
do not contribute to international peace and security in
that region or the world at large.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We very much appreciate the efforts of some
of our colleagues from various Member States to bring
a little balance to Ukraine’s hateful draft resolution
A/73/L.47. We understand their desire to introduce
some objectivity into even one element of this draft
text on the incident in the Kerch Strait on 25 November.
14/26

17/12/2018

I believe that many here today have realized the
true goals of this overt act of provocation by Kyiv
aimed at achieving two main objectives, the first of
which is arresting the free fall in the ratings of the
current post-Maidan authorities, above all President
Poroshenko, who is running for re-election for a second
term, and the second, in violation of the General
Assembly’s established working norms, adopting an
openly politicized anti-Russian resolution. Today we
are seeing the apogee of those efforts, which were
given a green light by various Western countries in
the Security Council’s meeting on 26 November (see
S/PV.8410).
I would like to remind the Assembly that on the
evening of 25 November, three Ukrainian military
vessels violated the rules of peaceful passage through
Russia’s territorial waters in the Black Sea, in an area
that was Russian before 2014, and set a course for
the Kerch Strait. They did not respond to the border
guards’ legitimate demands and carried out dangerous
manoeuvres that threatened normal navigation. Just
for information, there were 166 civilian vessels in the
adjacent area at the time.
The Ukrainian vessels’ violation of Russia’s
sovereignty left the Russian border guards with no
choice but to use force. Any country’s border control
personnel would have done the same in the situation.
However, thanks to the high level of professionalism
shown by our guys, we managed to avoid any casualties.
Three of the Ukrainian servicemen were slightly
injured by fragments of ship equipment and were given
medical assistance, with no threat to their lives. All 24
members of the crew were arrested and given access to
Ukrainian consuls, while the impounded ships are in
the port of Kerch. Criminal proceedings are under way
and the investigation is ongoing. We intend to affirm
the provocative nature of the Ukrainian authorities’
actions with documentary proof in court. The actions of
Ukraine in the Black Sea are in themselves a violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and the standards
of international law, including the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, whose articles 19
and 21 fully define the rules of peaceful passage and
coastal States’ rights to ensure their security.
If anyone is still unclear about this after these
clarifications, I would like to add the following. The
incident on 25 November was not accidental. Ukrainian
military vessels intentionally entered the Kerch Strait
from Russia’s territorial waters. I want to emphasize
18-44309

17/12/2018

once again that those waters were Russian even before
Crimea’s reunification in March 2014. On board those
vessels were two Ukrainian security officers, who
identified themselves as such. It seems that from the
very beginning Kyiv planned to sacrifice the crews
of the three ships, tasking them with opening fire on
the Russian border guards. However, common sense
fortunately stopped them carrying out that criminal act.
In an attempt to cover its tracks, Ukraine’s Ministry
of Defence concealed material information on the events
of 25 November in the Kerch Strait, which Assembly
members may verify for themselves. Kyiv was well
aware of the rules for the passage of ships through the
Kerch Strait and complied with them from 2014 until
recently. Indeed, on 23 September two Ukrainian ships
freely passed under the Crimean bridge with the help of
Russian pilot vessels.
Incidentally, the Ukrainian delegation has
continued to mislead everyone regarding the United
Nations assessment of what occurred, including during
their submission of their draft resolution. I would like
to quote the words of Ms. DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, in the meeting on
26 November:
“Regrettably, a serious security incident took place
yesterday near Crimea, close to the Sea of Azov. I
wish to underline that the United Nations currently
cannot independently verify the circumstances
surrounding the incident.” (S/PV.8410, p. 2)
There is therefore no clear assessment from the
United Nations of the incident, and there cannot be
one. In other words, we are dealing with carefully
planned and ongoing act of provocation that is still
going on under our noses in this Hall. It was made
possible thanks to the approval of the United States and
a number of European Union countries that are playing
a confrontational game with the Kyiv authorities, and
we can see that most of those countries have sponsored
the draft resolution.
I would like to draw the Assembly’s attention to
the fact that rumours began to be spread about the
situation in the Sea of Azov several months ago. Our
assurances that we are not planning to create military
bases or military infrastructure in the area were
not taken into account. The forces we have there are
essential to navigation safety and the protection of the
Crimean bridge. Our random checks of vessels are also
carried out in strict legality, and all these measures for

A/73/PV.56

protecting critical infrastructure are extremely urgent
given the regular calls from Kyiv and across the ocean
for blowing up the bridge.
As long as we are talking about militarization, we
should be looking at Ukraine, which has declared its
intention to establish a military naval base in Berdyansk
and has been systematically closing various areas of
the Sea of Azov for firing artillery, and yet the draft
resolution says nothing about that.
I have no desire even to comment on the Ukrainian
draft resolution. It not only has nothing to do with
reality, it also contains outright lies and disinformation.
It is clearly one-sided and provocative. Its purpose, like
others that the Ukrainian delegation has previously
submitted and will undoubtedly do again in the future,
is not to solve problems but to polarize Member States,
divide the General Assembly and give Kyiv’s foreign
masters a further opportunity to count heads and ensure
that the number of countries supporting Ukraine’s
destructive policy in the region has not diminished.
This is not the first time that the General
Assembly has allowed itself to be dragged into internal
political games contrived in Kyiv, Washington and
Brussels, and it is extremely dangerous. That is how
to undermine the authority of our most representative
international platform.
Unfortunately, nothing about the attitude or working
methods of the authors of the draft resolution can be
said to be constructive. They did not trouble to hold
even one round of consultations to ascertain Member
States’ views of this initiative. If such consultations had
taken place, many inconvenient questions would have
been raised. For example, why is there no reference
in the document to the 2003 bilateral treaty between
Russia and Ukraine on cooperation in the use of the Sea
of Azov and the Kerch Strait, which the authors of the
draft amendments before us have inserted? After all,
it is what regulates passage through the Kerch Strait. I
will explain why. It is because that document proves tha
Russia’s actions during the incident on 25 November
were completely legitimate.
We intend to vote in favour of the aforementioned
reasonable amendments (A/73/L.68) to the Ukrainian
draft resolution, which call on both parties to exercise
restraint and refrain from inflammatory rhetoric. It
would be odd if we did not to support that conciliatory
message. Unfortunately, however, no amendments
can change the provocative essence of Ukraine’s draft

18-4430915/26

A/73/PV.56

resolution. My delegation will therefore vote against it,
and we urge all sensible delegations to do the same.
We urge those who intend to support the Ukraine’s
provocative action despite everything to think about
the message that they are sending to Kyiv. By voting
for these kinds of draft resolutions, in practice they
are enabling Petro Poroshenko to continue destroying
his own citizens, undermining peace in the region and
dragging his neighbours into confrontations. That is
hardly consistent with the purposes and principles of
the General Assembly.
Mrs. Van Eerten (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands will vote against draft amendment
A/73/L.68, which is not in line with the core message
of draft resolution A/73/L.47 and contradicts the facts
on the ground.
Let us be clear that the root cause of the current
tension in the region was the illegal annexation of the
Crimean peninsula by the Russian Federation. In its
original form, the draft resolution once again calls on
the Russian Federation to end its illegal annexation
of the Crimean peninsula, to restore the territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders and to respect the Charter of the
United Nations. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
therefore asks the representatives in this Hall to vote
against the draft amendment.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): As one of the many
co-sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.47, Sweden has
closely followed the drafting of the text. We also follow
the situation on the ground in the region with great
concern, as it is playing out in our own neighbourhood.
It is clear that the illegal annexation of Crimea by the
Russian Federation in 2014 was a flagrant breach of
international law and that the progressive militarization
of Crimea and parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov
are of the utmost concern, with dangerous regional and
global implications.
We consider the proposed draft amendment
A/73/L.68 as an attempt to distort the core message of
the draft resolution and we believe that it contradicts
the facts on the ground. Sweden will therefore vote
against the proposed draft amendment and respectfully
asks the representatives present to do the same.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me thank Minister
Kyslytsya for his introduction of draft resolution
A/73/L.47. We call on all States to reject draft amendment
16/26

17/12/2018

A/73/L.68, presented by the Islamic Republic of Iran,
and to support the draft resolution, entitled “Problem
of the militarization of the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well
as parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov”, which
reflects the serious situation on the ground correctly
and in a balanced manner.
Russia’s provocative actions in the Kerch Strait
and the Sea of Azov resulted in a dangerous escalation
of tension. The recent incidents are in keeping with
Russia’s persistent policy towards Ukraine — creating
aggression to destabilize the country. Poland underlines
that the illegal use of military force by the Russian
Federation against Ukraine in the region of the Kerch
Strait and the Sea of Azov constitutes a flagrant
violation of both international law and the bilateral
agreements concluded between Russia and Ukraine.
Through its illegal annexation of Crimea and by
directly assisting separatists in eastern Ukraine, Russia
violated the basic premises of a rules-based international
order. Russia’s recent actions against Ukraine are
clearly part of its ongoing breaches of the fundamental
principles of international law. No country has the legal
right to benefit from its own illegal actions. We believe
that the international community must rigorously react
in the face of Russia’s systematic violations of its own
obligations under international law. Our common
response must be strong enough to discourage Russia
from crossing other red lines. We cannot forget that,
under international law, all States have a duty not to
recognize as lawful serious breaches of obligations
arising under peremptory norms, such as the prohibition
of aggression. It is important to emphasize the legal
character of that obligation. Not to recognize such
actions as lawful is not a matter of taking a political
decision or approach; it is a legal requirement.
Recognition of Crimea as part of the Russian
Federation is in itself a violation of international law
because it constitutes a form of support for a State that
breaches peremptory norms in an attempt to legalize an
unlawful situation. Poland therefore does not, and will
never, recognize Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea
and reaffirms its enduring support for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Furthermore, Poland calls for the unconditional release
of the vessels, crew and equipment without delay, since
Russia’s attack on and seizure of the Ukrainian vessels,
as well as its capture of Ukrainian servicemen, were
illegal. Recent developments have clearly demonstrated
18-44309

17/12/2018

that the infrastructure that Russia treats as critical, be
it the Kerch Bridge or the pipeline, serve as a pretext
for its illegal militarization. That is a worrying sign
for the future and undermines regional stability and
international peace and security.
Ms. Plepytė (Lithuania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of Estonia, Latvia and my own
country, Lithuania. As co-sponsors of draft resolution
A/73/L.47, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania strongly reject
and oppose the amendments to the draft resolution put
forward by the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Syrian
Arab Republic, contained in document A/73/L.68.
The proposed draft amendment contains hostile
amendments that have the sole intention of disrupting
the adoption of the draft resolution and changing its
meaning. The amendments distort the current reality
in the occupied territories of Ukraine, as well as in the
adjacent areas of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
The amendments do not have any legal or factual
background. The events that took place in the Black
Sea on 25 November constitute a blatant violation
of international law and bilateral agreements by the
Russian Federation. Russia once again showed complete
disregard for the norms of international law and, for
the first time since the annexation of Crimea and the
instigation of conflict in eastern Ukraine, openly and
directly attacked the Ukrainian navy with military
force. In that context, we once again express our strong
support for the draft resolution, as it fully reflects the
real situation on the ground and calls for appropriate
and realistic action. Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania will
vote against the draft amendment. Accordingly, we
urge all Member States to reject the blatant attempt
to distort the draft resolution and to vote against the
draft amendment.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I am taking the
floor to urge all Member States to vote against draft
amendment A/73/L.68. The amendments that it contains
have been proposed by representatives of a tiny group
of countries that have supported Russia’s actions in
the face of resolution 68/262, which was adopted with
100 votes in favour and upholds the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The amendments seek to distort the facts, sow
confusion and frustrate the adoption of draft resolution
A/73/L.47, proposed by Ukraine, on which we will
vote shortly. Above all, in paragraph 6 of the draft
amendment, the text creates the misleading impression

A/73/PV.56

that territorial waters were violated during the incident.
We must be clear — there was no such violation. The
Russian authorities have admitted using force to
seize the three Ukrainian naval vessels. They have
also acknowledged opening fire during the incident,
injuring three servicemen. That incident happened in
international waters in the Black Sea when Ukrainian
vessels were moving away from the Crimean coast. It is
important to note that Crimea and its territorial waters
are internationally recognized as part of Ukraine.
I listened with interest to the Russian
representative’s comments, but no evidence has been
offered by Russia to back up its claims. In paragraph
7 of the draft amendment, the text, if inserted into
the draft resolution, would seek to justify Russia’s
arrest and prosecution of the 24 detained Ukrainian
servicemen. That language would provide Russia with
insurance that its actions are in line with a United
Nations resolution and therefore justifiable. The draft
amendment risks being misused by Russia.
However reasonable the sponsors may sound, their
aims are unreasonable. It is for those reasons that the
United Kingdom will vote against the draft amendment
and urges others to do the same. The essence of the
issue is our common belief that States must not use force
in their international relations, including to acquire
territory or to change borders, which is inconsistent
with the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): One of the most toxic
features of this discussion is that a small number
of countries that cannot help lapsing into repetitive
violations of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations have given us an earful of post-truths,
manipulative statements, distortions and blatant lies. I
would therefore like to bring our discussions back to
the legal realm. Draft amendment A/73/L.68, proposed
by Iran, contains amendments to draft resolution
A/73/L.47 that are not acceptable to its sponsors, as we
have just heard, on the following grounds.
The proposed amendments do not have any legal
or factual background and do not meet the provisions
of current General Assembly resolutions, notably
resolution 68/262, “Territorial integrity of Ukraine”,
adopted on 27 March 2014 by an overwhelming
majority under the same agenda item. What happened
on 25 November in the Black Sea is not an incident, as
the Russian propaganda machine consistently states. It
is yet another violation by the Russian Federation of the

18-4430917/26

A/73/PV.56

United Nations Charter and a deliberate armed attack
by Russian military forces against Ukraine within the
neutral borders of the Black Sea. The Russian Federation
brutally violated Ukraine’s right as a coastal State in
Ukraine’s territorial waters, intervened in its freedom
of navigation in an international strait and violated
Ukraine’s rights in that exclusive economic zone.
As a result, Ukrainian sailors and vessels were
captured by the Russian Federation. In violation of the
Geneva Conventions, Russia is treating the captured
crew members as criminals and is conducting a socalled criminal investigation, as we have just heard.
How can the General Assembly be expected to support
a draft amendment that does not meet the requirements
of international humanitarian law? That is nonsense in
a civilized world. Ukraine has already initiated arbitral
proceedings against the Russian Federation with regard
to violations of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. Ukraine also informed the arbitral
tribunal of Russia’s recent violations of 25 November,
which aggravated the dispute.
Ukraine is committed to solving all disputes by
peaceful means, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter. Having said that, my delegation calls for a
recorded vote on draft amendment A/73/L.68, which
Ukraine will vote against, and asks other delegations
to do the same. I also once again call on delegations to
vote in favour of draft resolution A/73/L.47.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): The
United States will vote against draft amendment
A/73/L.68 and urges all delegations to do the same. We
reject the notion of equivalency contained in the draft
amendment. We do not support the General Assembly
calling on both States to take action when the Russian
Federation is the sole Member State to have repeatedly
and shamelessly engaged in aggressive activities
directed against Ukraine, including the purported
annexation of Crimea and the aggressive activities in
the Kerch Strait.
The United States is pleased to co-sponsor draft
resolution A/73/L.47, which highlights serious concerns
about the militarization of Crimea and Russia’s recent
unprovoked attack on Ukrainian naval vessels in the
Kerch Strait. Russia’s attack is a dangerous escalation
in its ongoing aggressive activities towards Ukraine.
The United States reiterates its call on the Russian
Federation to immediately release the 24 captured
Ukrainian crew members and the three detained vessels.
18/26

17/12/2018

In short, the United States calls on all Member
States to vote against the draft amendment and to vote
in favour of the draft resolution.
Ms. Agladze (Georgia): I would also like to speak
against draft amendment A/73/L.68, proposed by
the Islamic Republic of Iran. The draft amendment
substantially harms the very essence of draft resolution
A/73/L.47 and gravely distorts the real situation on
the ground in the occupied territories of Ukraine, as
well as in the adjacent areas of the Black Sea and the
Sea of Azov. It lacks any legal or factual background
and contravenes the provisions of current resolutions,
including resolution 68/262 on the territorial integrity
of Ukraine.
On 25 November we witnessed a violation by
the Russian Federation of the Charter of the United
Nations in a deliberate armed attack by the Russian
armed forces against Ukraine in the neutral waters
of the Black Sea. The Russian Federation brutally
violated Ukraine’s right as a coastal State in Ukraine’s
territorial waters, infringed upon the freedom of
navigation and violated Ukraine’s right in its exclusive
economic zone. Furthermore, the Russian Federation
captured Ukrainian sailors and vessels and treated the
crew members as criminals.
Having said all that and in reaffirmation of the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine,
Georgia will vote against the draft amendment and
calls on other Member States to also vote against it.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The General Assembly will now take action on
draft resolution A/73/L.47, entitled “Problem of the
militarization of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as parts of
the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed on the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/73/L.47: Belgium, Greece, Hungary, Liechtenstein,
Malta, New Zealand, Slovakia, Spain and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
18-44309

17/12/2018

The Acting President: In connection with the draft
resolution, the General Assembly has before it draft
amendment A/73/L.68. In accordance with rule 90 of
the rules of procedure, the Assembly shall first take a
decision on the draft amendment. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi,
Cambodia, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kazakhstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Myanmar, Nauru, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Serbia, Singapore, South
Sudan, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Belize, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kiribati,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cameroon, Chile, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Guinea, India, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Liberia, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali,
Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab

A/73/PV.56

Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Yemen
Draft amendment A/73/L.68 was rejected by 64
votes to 25, with 60 abstentions.
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take action on draft resolution A/73/L.47, entitled
“Problem of the militarization of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine,
as well as parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Belize, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Maldives,
Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Burundi, Cambodia, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Serbia, South
Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Guinea,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Malawi,

18-4430919/26

A/73/PV.56

Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen
Draft resolution A/73/L.47 was adopted by 66 votes
to 19, with 72 abstentions (resolution 73/194).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of vote on the resolution just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We regret the results of the vote that has
just been held, but we are encouraged by the fact that
many States abstained and want nothing to do with this
pernicious Ukrainian enterprise. However, we have to
conclude that today we have seen the formation of a
group of Member States, mainly members of NATO
and the European Union (EU), that through both
their action and lack of action have encouraged their
Ukrainian protégés to commit new crimes and acts of
provocation in the region on behalf of Western political
ambitions. It is those States, in most cases guided by
their infamous bloc discipline, that feature on the list of
authors and sponsors of Ukraine’s undertaking.
Thanks to this, the Kyiv regime continues to get the
message that anything is permitted, all will be forgiven
and Russia will be blamed for all its sins and crimes
in advance and without exception. Thus it is Russia,
without any evidence, that is accused of being behind
the five-year fratricidal war in Donbas, despite the fact
that that the Kyiv regime has presented no evidence
for the alleged Russian aggression behind which it is
hiding, unless we count the fake stuff that Ukraine’s
President periodically likes to beguile the international
community with and that any expert can see is false.
On the other hand, there is plenty of proof that
Ukraine’s armed forces and various volunteer battalions
are waging war on their own citizens, shooting and
killing women, the elderly and children. That is not
something the Assembly wants to see, because it is
not convenient. It is members’ successors who will
20/26

17/12/2018

ultimately make judge the situation fairly, ashamed of
the hypocrisy and this unprincipled position, just as
ordinary Americans today are ashamed of America’s
dishonourable campaign in Viet Nam. Unfortunately,
there are many current situations of which future
United States citizens will be ashamed, with Ukraine
being one of the most vivid examples.
Instead of the United States bringing the Maidan
regime to its senses and making it listen to the voice
of its people, it is supplying it with weapons and all
kinds of support, including military support. Such
action suggests that Washington is not just trying to pit
two brother peoples against each other but to unleash
a full-scale war between them, while brainwashing its
NATO colleagues about the alleged Russian threat.
Incidentally, there is only one worldwide threat today,
the American threat, and that is becoming clearer and
clearer to many people.
One of the subjects of resolution 73/194 is Russian
Crimea. I want to emphasize that Crimea is Russian
because there has been no other Crimea for a long time.
This annexed, occupied, militarized territory exists only
in the draft resolutions of our Ukrainian colleagues,
who are apparently still experiencing phantom pains. It
is they themselves who lost Crimea and the Crimeans
when they began to threaten them in the wake of the
anti-constitutional coup. The Crimeans made a choice
in order to preserve their identity and be able to honour
the memory of those who freed their land from the
fascists and refused to collaborate with the occupiers.
Through their choice, the Crimeans saved themselves
from the war and destruction with which citizens of
eastern Ukraine just like them are paying a heavy price
for their attempts to claim those rights.
Many tourists visit Crimea today, including
hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians, who can see with
their own eyes that what the Maidan authorities say is
not true. No matter how many phoney resolutions they
and their Western sponsors and those who are afraid to
oppose them in the spirit of EU and NATO democracy,
that will change nothing in or around Crimea. The key to
solving all the regional problems that have arisen since
2014 lies in Kyiv, and more specifically in Washington,
from whence Kyiv is governed.
Incidentally, we should point out that the Ukrainian
delegation got entangled in lies even in its statement
today. Mr. Kyslytsya stated that the recent incident
occurred in neutral waters, if I correctly understood
18-44309

17/12/2018

his English. However, on 11 December right here in
this Hall, the representative of Ukraine stated that
the incident in question, which in her view involved
the capture of Ukrainian ships, occurred in Ukraine’s
exclusive economic zone (see A/73/PV.49). My advice
to Ukraine is that if it is going to lie, it should make
sure that the lies all match. That will improve its
believability.
As far as Russia and the Crimeans are concerned,
the issue of Crimea’s ownership has been resolved once
and for all. Crimea was, is and will be Russian. None
of Ukraine’s pitiful attempts at sanctions, resolutions or
provocations will change that. It is very disappointing
that Kyiv and its Western sponsors in the General
Assembly have submitted yet another highly politicized,
phoney and utterly false concoction. Such behaviour
clearly tarnishes the reputation of the Organization.
Mr. Tozik (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus
has carefully followed the events in Ukraine and the
developments in the situation in the eastern region
of our neighbour to the south. Peace and harmony in
Ukraine are of vital importance to Belarus. A peaceful
settlement of the conflict, an end to the violence, the
prevention of armed clashes and the compliance of
the parties to the Minsk agreements remain the only
true basis for effectively resolving the crisis. Belarus
intends to continue to provide all assistance necessary
to restore peace in Ukraine and to ensure the conditions
necessary for holding negotiations in Minsk in any
format, including at the highest level, as ws done in
February 2015.
Today we supported the submission by a group of
States of the draft amendments contained in document
A/73/L.68 to resolution 73/194, which are constructive
and balanced and could serve as a comprehensive
reflection of the situation. We did not vote for the
resolution as a whole in view of our consistent position
on that kind of document.
For example, the resolution contains references to
resolutions 68/262, 71/205 and 72/190 to which Belarus
objected It makes no reference to the Minsk agreements,
which is crucial, it is essentially confrontational
and narrows the possibilities for seeking a peaceful
solution to the situation. It has no provisions regarding
contributing to the maintenance of international peace
and security or preventing armed conflicts, and it
includes accusations against one country alone. No

A/73/PV.56

similar requirements are made of other States that are
building a military presence in the region.
Such documents should call for a preliminary
study within the framework of existing United Nations
procedures, including at the expert level, which was
not done in this case.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We are following
with deep concern the increasing tensions related to
Crimea and the developments in the area of the Black
Sea. Armenia shares a rich history of friendship with
the peoples of Russia and Ukraine. We hope that the
parties concerned will exercise the utmost restraint to
de-escalate the situation in order to open the way for
negotiations. We are confident that the solution to the
crisis can be achieved strictly through peaceful means,
based on the norms and principles of international law.
On a general note, Armenia reiterates its longstanding position that an enduring solution to the conflict
situation between the parties can be achieved only
through negotiations, in the established format and on
the basis of the implementation of relevant agreements.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Since the Russian
representative has problems understanding English, I
will say a few words in Russian.
(spoke in Russian)
It seems that everyone in this Hall — the more
than 40 sponsors and almost 70 countries supporting
resolution 73/194 — should be ashamed. Only the
Russian Federation is not ashamed. Throughout its
almost 28 years as a member of the Security Council,
the Russian Federation has violated the Charter of
the United Nations many times, including its most
fundamental provisions. In politics, and also in
psychology and psychiatry, such behaviour is called
aggressive mimicry. In this type of behaviour, the
aggressor tries to present itself as the victim and
behaves as if it were the victim. But in both politics
and psychology there are ways and means to fight that
aggressive mimicry.
(spoke in English)
It is with great appreciation that we note that
resolution 73/194 on the urgent and pressing issue of
armed aggression by the Russian Federation against
Ukraine has been adopted today, with its clear evidence
of total disregard by Russia of its obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as other bilateral

18-4430921/26

A/73/PV.56

and multilateral international treaties. It is evident that
the Russian Federation is certainly not a peace-loving
State. Today, with the adoption of the resolution on a
situation that is of genuine concern not only to Ukraine
but also to the international community as a whole,
we have passed a critical juncture in condemning the
pattern of destructive activity of the Russian Federation
in the region and beyond, thus reaffirming the ability of
the General Assembly to discharge its responsibilities
in the sphere of the maintenance of international peace
and security.
In that regard, we would like to express our deepest
and sincerest gratitude to all those who participated
in the negotiation of the draft resolution and all those
who, under unprecedented pressure by Russia, have
stayed courageous and remained committed to the
foundations of the Organization. Ukraine is absolutely
convinced that the issue of international peace and
security represents a core pillar of the Assembly’s
work. Therefore, my delegation will continue its
efforts to bring to the attention of the United Nations
the situation in the parts of the sovereign territory of
Ukraine that are occupied by the Russian Federation. I
take this opportunity to also call on all Member States
to actively participate in the Assembly’s consideration
of its newly introduced agenda item 67, “Situation in
the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine”, at a
meeting to be held in February 2019.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I am taking the floor
to explain my delegation’s vote in favour of both the
amendment contained in document A/73/L.68 and
resolution 73/194. As a small country, Singapore is
deeply committed to multilateralism and respect for
international law. Singapore opposes the annexation
of any country or territory, as it is a clear violation of
international law. We object to any unprovoked invasion
of a sovereign country under any pretext. Singapore
reaffirms the principles of respect for territorial
integrity, non-interference in the domestic affairs of
a sovereign State, respect for sovereignty and the rule
of law. Singapore therefore opposes the annexation
of Crimea.
In March 2014, Singapore expressed its opposition
to the annexation of Crimea by voting in favour
of resolution 68/262, entitled “Territorial integrity
of Ukraine” (see A/68/PV.80). In our view, the
resolution that we have just adopted (resolution
73/194) is intrinsically linked to resolution 68/262.
Unlike resolutions 71/205 and 72/190 on the human
22/26

17/12/2018

rights situation in Crimea and Sevastopol, the crux of
resolution 73/194 is related to the question of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Singapore also
reaffirms its consistent view that all countries must
adhere to international law and support the right to the
freedom of navigation, as provided for by the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Singapore
echoes the call of the Secretary-General to avoid any
risk of further escalation and we urge all parties to
exercise restraint, take immediate steps to de-escalate
tension and resolve the crisis peacefully, in accordance
with international law.
Mr. Chang (Republic of Korea): My delegation
voted against the amendment contained in document
A/73/L.68 and abstained in the voting on resolution
73/194.
While emphasizing the importance of peaceful
resolution through dialogue, my delegation would
like to note that today’s vote does not constitute a
departure from its position of 27 March 2014, when it
voted in favour of resolution 68/262 (see A/68/PV.80),
reaffirming its commitment to the sovereignty, political
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Let me start
by reaffirming our basic principle to respect and
support the territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. Indonesia’s
principled and consistent position respects the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and is
a fundamental principle of relations among nations.
Indonesia is therefore opposed to any action of
annexation against any sovereign country or territory,
as that would contravene the aforementioned principles
as well as international law.
With regard to the current situation in Crimea,
Indonesia stresses the importance of dialogue and
diplomacy among concerned States in order to
resolve the ongoing problems in Crimea and the city
of Sevastopol, as well as parts of the Black Sea and
the Sea of Azov. In so doing, Indonesia encourages the
States concerned to take the measures necessary to
de-escalate tensions. We are of the view that some of
the elements of resolution 73/194 may further escalate
tension among the concerned States and further
alienate them from initiating possible peaceful efforts,
including through direct political dialogue.
18-44309

17/12/2018

Based on those considerations, while in favour
of the amendment contained in document A/73/L.68,
which was proposed by several delegations, Indonesia
abstained in the voting on resolution 73/194. Indonesia
calls on all concerned parties to manage the crisis,
promote the peaceful settlement of the situation and
consistently uphold and respect international law.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
I now give the floor to the observer of the
European Union.
Mr. Dabouis (European Union): The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania; the European
Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member
of the European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.
The European Union (EU) reaffirms its full
support for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. The EU recalls that the illegal
annexation of the Crimean peninsula by Russia in 2014
remains a direct challenge to international security,
with grave implications for the international legal order
that protects the unity and sovereignty of all States. The
EU condemns that violation of international law and
underlines that it does not and will not recognize the
illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula by Russia.
The EU recalls that the construction of the Kerch bridge
constitutes a further violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
We refer to the declaration made by High
Representative Federica Mogherini on behalf of the
EU on the escalating tensions in the Azov Sea, issued
on 28 November, in which the EU expressed its utmost
concern about the dangerous increase of tensions in the
Azov Sea and the Kerch Strait, which had led to the
seizure of Ukrainian vessels and their crews by Russia,
with shots being fired at them, wounding several
Ukrainian servicemen. We underscore that the EU was
dismayed at that use of force by Russia, which, against
the backdrop of increasing militarization in the area,
is unacceptable.
The EU strongly calls on Russia to unconditionally
release the seized vessels and their crew and
equipment, without delay. The EU expects Russia to

A/73/PV.56

ensure unhindered and free passage through the Kerch
Strait to and from the Azov Sea, in accordance with
international law. We also recall the EU call for all
parties to exercise the utmost restraint to de-escalate
the tension.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 34.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(b) Election of members of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law
The Acting President: The 30 outgoing Member
States are as follows: Armenia, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Canada, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Denmark, Ecuador,
El Salvador, France, Germany, Greece, Honduras,
Hungary, Indonesia, Japan, Kuwait, Liberia, Malaysia,
Mauritania, Mexico, Namibia, Panama, the Republic of
Korea, the Russian Federation, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and Zambia. Those Member States
are eligible for immediate re-election.
I should like to inform members that the following
States will continue to be represented in the Commission
on International Trade Law: Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Belarus, Brazil, Burundi, Chile, Colombia,
the Czech Republic, India, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Israel, Italy, Kenya, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Mauritius, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland,
Romania, Spain, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda,
the United States of America and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. Those 30 States are therefore
not eligible for election.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of 30 members to replace those members whose
term of office will expire on 7 July 2019.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
the election shall be held by secret ballot. I should like
to recall, however, paragraph 16 of General Assembly
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard
unless delegations specifically request a vote on a
given election.

18-4430923/26

A/73/PV.56

In the absence of such a request, may I take it
that the Assembly decides to proceed to this election
on the basis of dispensing with the secret ballot,
where applicable?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: With regard to candidatures,
I should like to inform members of the following.
For the seven seats from among the African States,
the group has endorsed the following seven candidates:
Algeria, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali, South
Africa and Zimbabwe.
For the seven seats from among the Asia-Pacific
States, nine candidates have been communicated:
Bahrain, China, Indonesia, Iraq, Japan, Malaysia, the
Republic of Korea, Singapore and Viet Nam.
For the four seats from among the Eastern European
States, the group has endorsed the following four
candidates: Croatia, Hungary, the Russian Federation
and Ukraine.
For the five seats from among the Latin American
and Caribbean States, five candidates have been
communicated: the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Honduras, Mexico and Peru.
For the seven seats from among the Western
European and other States, eight candidates have been
communicated: Belgium, Canada, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Switzerland and the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Since the number of candidates from the African
States, the Eastern European States and the Latin
American and Caribbean States corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled by each group, may I take
it that the General Assembly wishes to declare those
candidates elected for a six-year term beginning on
8 July 2019?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: With regard to the AsiaPacific States and the Western European and other
States, the number of candidates exceeds the number
of vacancies allocated to those regions. Therefore, the
Assembly will now proceed to a vote by secret ballot
to elect seven members from among the Asia-Pacific
States and seven members from among the Western
European and other States.
24/26

17/12/2018

I should like to inform the Assembly that the
number of candidates not exceeding the number of
seats to be filled, receiving the greatest number of
votes and not less than the majority required, will be
declared elected.
In the case of a tie vote for a remaining seat, there
will be a restricted ballot limited to those candidates
that have obtained an equal number of votes. Consistent
with the practice of the General Assembly, if more than
the required number of Member States have obtained
the required majority of the same ballot, those Member
States that have obtained the largest number of votes
above the required majority will be considered elected
up to the number of seats to be filled. Moreover,
consistent with past practice, if, due to a tie vote, it
becomes necessary to determine one candidate to
be elected or that will proceed to the next round of
restricted balloting, there will be a special restricted
ballot limited to those candidates that have obtained an
equal number of votes.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
that procedure?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Before we begin the voting
process, I should like to remind members that, pursuant
to rule 88 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, no representative shall interrupt the voting
except on a point of order on the actual conduct of
the voting. In addition, ballot papers will be given
only to the representatives seated directly behind the
country’s nameplate.
We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballots have
been collected. I would like to remind members that, at
this stage, they are voting for seven seats for the AsiaPacific States and seven seats for the Western European
and other States.
Ballot papers marked “A” and “B” will now be
distributed and the voting has thus begun.
In accordance with resolution 71/323 of
8 September 2017, the names of the States that have
been communicated to the Secretariat at least 48 hours
prior to the election today have been printed on the
ballot papers for the two regional groups. Moreover,
additional blank lines corresponding to the number of
vacant seats to be filled for each of the regional groups
18-44309

17/12/2018

A/73/PV.56

have been provided on the ballot papers for inscribing
other States as necessary.
I request representatives to use only those ballot
papers that have been distributed. For ballot papers
marked “A” for Asia-Pacific States, members are
requested to put an “X” in the boxes next to the States
that they wish to vote for and/or write other eligible
names on the blank lines. For ballot papers marked “B”
for Western European and other States, members are
also requested to put an “X” in the boxes next to the
States on the ballot paper or write the name of another
eligible State on the blank line. The total number of
checked boxes and/or handwritten names should not
exceed the number of vacant seats to be filled, as
indicated on the ballot paper.
A ballot will be declared invalid if it contains
more names of Member States from the relevant region
than the number of seats assigned to it. Accordingly,
for ballot papers marked “A” for Asia-Pacific States,
the total number of checked boxes and/or handwritten
names should not exceed seven, and for ballot papers
marked “B” for Western European and other States,
the total number of checked boxes and/or handwritten
names should also not exceed seven. If a ballot paper
for a region contains the names of States that do not
belong to the region concerned, the ballot paper
remains valid but the vote for those Member States will
not be counted.
At the invitation of the Acting President,
Mr. Stankov (Bulgaria), Ms. Edwards (Guyana),
Mr. El Jallad (Lebanon), Ms. De Schot (New
Zealand), Mrs. Philips-Umezurike (Nigeria) and
Mr. Muhamedjanov (Tajikistan) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 5.45 p.m. and
resumed at 6.25 p.m.
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Group A — Asia-Pacific States (7 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required majority:
Number of votes obtained:

193
0
193
0
193
97

Singapore
180
Japan
167
Indonesia
160
China
159
Viet Nam
157
Republic of Korea
155
Malaysia
149
Bahrain
116
Iraq
57
Kuwait
1
Group B — Western European and other States
(7 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
193
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
193
Abstentions:
2
Number of members present and voting:
191
Required majority:
96
Number of votes obtained:
Germany
181
Finland
171
France
171
Belgium
166
United Kingdom
161
Switzerland
160
Canada
150
Greece
107
Having obtained the required majority and the
largest number of votes of the members of the
General Assembly, the following 14 States are
elected members of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law for a six-year term
beginning on 8 July 2019: Belgium, Canada, China,
Finland, France, Germany, Indonesia, Japan,
Malaysia, the Republic of Korea, Singapore,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: I congratulate the
following States, which have been elected members of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law for a six-year term beginning on 8 July 2019:
Algeria, Belgium, Cameroon, Canada, China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Honduras, Hungary,
Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Peru, the
Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation, Singapore,
South Africa, Switzerland, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Viet
Nam and Zimbabwe.

18-4430925/26

A/73/PV.56

17/12/2018

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 116.

delegation not to use such old tricks, which benefit
no one.

Before giving the floor to speakers in the exercise of
the right of reply, may I remind members that statements
in the exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10
minutes for the first intervention and five minutes for
the second and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arabic Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): An Arab proverb says “He who does
not possess something cannot give it away”. The
top scandal is that a Government such as that of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which is not party to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
submits a draft resolution on human rights. Like
Da’esh, it violates human rights in the country by still
beheading its people. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has
violated human rights in Yemen by killing thousands
of Yemeni children, and by supporting terrorist groups
in my country, Syria. Everyone knows that the Saudi
Arabia Government has for decades issued fatwas
calling for killing and terrorism throughout the world.
It is responsible for religious and sectarian hatred, in
contravention of religious and moral values and the
principle of coexistence among peoples of different
economic, social and political sytems. Saudi Arabia
is the country from which takfiri thought originated,
which destroyed the Buddhist statues in Bamiyan,
Afghanistan, and was responsible for the London and
Madrid underground explosions and the 9/11 attacks
in New York, while also murdering Syrians and Iraqis
with car bombs and suicide belts.

Mr. Khashaan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to exercise my right of reply following
the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic (see A/73/PV.55) about
my country.
We strongly reject the mendacious and baseless
allegations made by the Permanent Representative of
the Syrian delegation against my country. We are used to
his impoliteness, lies and mendacious accusations, and
are therefore not surprised that his country has violated
all international laws and norms, including moral and
humanitarian laws. We would like to remind the Syrian
representative, who has greatly enjoyed the centurieslong human rights involvement in his country, as well
as the General Assembly, of the heinous crimes that his
country has committed against the Syrian people, who
are suffering injustice, particularly through the use of
internationally banned weapons. That tragedy has led
to the external displacement of nearly 6 million people,
whereby hundreds of thousands of them are currently
hosted by my country, not to mention the internal
displacement of approximately 7 million people.
My country’s delegation would like to clarify that
the attempts of the Syrian delegation are nothing but
a means to cause uncertainty and hide the truth. That
same approach was used during the adoption of draft
resolution 73/181 in the Third Committee. All those
attempts have failed. We therefore ask the Syrian

26/26

What we heard from the representative of the Saudi
regime is affiliated with the Saudi pre-Islamic thought
that spread terrorism from Tora Bora Mountains
in Afghanistan to Iraq, Lebanon, Egypt, Libya,
Syria, the Sahel region in Africa, Europe and the
American continent.
The Acting President: I would like to express my
thanks to the interpreters for staying with us so late.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

18-44309
