General AHembly-Twenty-aeeond Sesaion

8. Further requests the Security Council to take all
appropriate measures to enable the United Nations
Council for South West Africa to discharge fully the
functions and responsibilities entrusted to it by the
General Assembly ;
9. Decides to maintain this item on its agenda.
1635th plenary meeting,
16 December 1967.

2326 (XXII). Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling its resolutions 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1810 (XVII) of 17 Decemher 1962, 1956
(XVIII) of 11 Der:ember 1963. 1970 (XVIII) of 16
December 1963. 2105 (XX) of 20 December 1965 and
2189 (XXI) of 13 December 1966,
Having considered the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Deda-ration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
covering its work on this item during 196711 and having adopted resolutions on specific Territories considered by that Committee,
Having considered also the relevant report of the
Special Committee12 and General Assembly resolution
2288 (XXII) of 7 December 1967 concerning the item
entitled "Activities of foreign economic and other
interests which are impeding the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in Southern Rhodesia,
South West Africa and Territories under Portuguese
domination and in all other Territories under colonial
d•1mination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Taking into account the report of the International
Seminar on Apartheid, Racial Discrimination and Colonialism in Southern Africa, held at Kitwe, Zambia,
from 25 July to 4 August 1967,13
Noting with grave concern that.seven years after the
adoption of the Declaration many Territories are still
under colonial domination,
Deploring the negative attitude of certain colonial
Powers which refuse to recognize the right of colonial
peoples to self-determination. freedom and independence
and, in particular, the intransigence of the Government of Portugal. which in defiance of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations persists in perpetuating its oppressive foreign domination, and of the
Government of South Africa, which flagrantly repudiates the validity of General Assembly resolutions 2145
(XXI) of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19
May 1967,
Concerned at the policy followed by colonial Powers
of promoting the systematic influx of foreign immigrants and displacing, deporting or transferring the
11 Ibid., addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6700/Rev.l), chapters I-XXIV.
12 Jbid., agenda item 24, documents A/6868 and Add.I.
1a A/6818 and Corr.I.

indigenous inhabitants in violation of the economic
and political as well as the basic human rights of these
people,
Becu-ing in mind that the continuation of colonialism
and its manifestations, including racism and apartheid,
and the attempts of some colonial Powers to suppress
national liberation movements by repressive activities
and the use of armed force against colonial peoples
are incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of H urnan Rights and
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Deploriny the attitude of certain States which, in
disregard of the pertinent resolutions of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Special Committee, continue to co-operate with the Governments
of Portugal and South Africa and with the illegal racist
minority regime of Southern Rhodesia, which are continuing to repress the African peoples,
. Comn'.nced that further dPlay in the speedy and effective implementation of the Declaration remains a source
of international conflicts and differences, which are
seriously impeding international co-operation and endangering world peace and security,
Recalling its resolution l3 (I) of 13 February 1946
concerning the public information activities of the
United Nations and the relevant provisions of its resolutions 2105 (XX) of 20 December 1965, 2189 (XXI)
of 13 December 1966, 2262 (XXII) of 3 November
1967, 2270 (XXII) of 17 November 1967 and 2288
(XXII) of 7 December 1967, stressing the need for
large-scale and continuous publicizing of the work of
the United Nations in the field of decolonization, of
the situation in the colonial Territories and of the continuing struggle for liberation being waged by the
colonial peoples,
Recalling its ronviction that the celebration in 1968
of the International Year for Human Rights, including
the holding of the- International Conference on Human
Rights, will contribute significantly to the promotion
of universal respect for and observance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as
to race. sex, language or religion,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 1514 (XV). 1654
(XVI), 1810 (XVII), 1956 (XVIII), 1970 (XVIII),
2105 (XX) and 2189 (XXI);
2. Notes with satisfaction the work accomplished by
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee
for its efforts to secure the complete and effective implementation of the Declaration;
3. Approves the report of the Special Committee
covering its work during 1967 and urges the administering Powers to give effect to the recommendations
contained therein and to take all other necessary steps
for the implementation of the Declaration and the
relevant United Nations resolutions;
4. Approves the programme of work envisaged hy
the Special Committee during 1968, including the sending of visiting missions. the studv of military activities
and arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories
under their administration which might he impeding
the implementation of the Declaration, and the review
of the list of Territories to which the Declaration
applies;

RNOlntiom adopted wlthont referenee to a Main Committee

S. Rrit,rat,s its declaration that the continuation of
colonial rule threatens international peace and security
and that the practice of apartheid and all forms of racial
discrimination constitute a crime against humanity ;
6. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the colonial peoples to exercise their right
to self-determination and independence and notes with
satisfaction the progress made in the colonial Territories by the national liberation movements, both
through their struggle and through reconstruction programmes, and urges all States to provide moral and
material assistance to them ;
7. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the specialized ~encies concerned and other international relief organizations for the help they have so far given, and requests
them to increase their· economic, social and humanitarian assistance to the refugees from Territories under
colonial domination ;
8. Requests all States, directly and through action
in the international institutions of which they are members, including the specialized agencies, to withhold
assistance of any kind from the Governments of Portugal and South Africa and from the illegal racist
minority regime of Southern Rhodesia until they renounce their policy of colonial domination and racial
discrimination ;
9. Draws the attention of all States to the grave
consequences of the development in southern Africa
of the entente between the Governments of South
Africa and Portugal and the illegal racist minority
regime of Southern Rhodesia, the activities of which
run counter to the interests of international peace and
security, and calls upon all States, particularly the
main trading partners of the entente, to withhold any
support or assistance to the members of the entente ;
10. Requests the colonial Powers to dismantle their
military bases and installations in colonial Territories
and to refrain from establishing new ones. and from
using those that still exist to interfere with the liberation of the peoples in colonial Territories in the exercise
of their legitimate rights to freedom and independence ;
11. Once again condemns the policies, pursued by
certain administering Powers in the Territories under
their domination, of imposing non-representative regimes and constitutions, strengthening the position of
foreign economic and other interests, misleading world
public opinion and encouraging the systematic influx
of foreign immigrants while displacing, deporting and
transferring the indigenous inhabitants to other areas,
and calls upon those Powers to desist from such
mancruvres ;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
perform its task and to seek suitable means for the
immediate and ,full implementation of the Declaration
in all Territories which have not yet attained independence;
13. Requests the Special Committee to make concrete suggestions with a view to assisting the Security
Council in considering appropriate measures under the
Charter of the United Nations with regard to developments in colonial Territor.ies which are likely to
threaten international peace and security, and recommends the Council to take such suggestions fully into
consideration ;
14. Imtes the Special Committee, whenever it considers it proper and appropriate, to recommend a deadline for the accession to independence of each Territory

I

in accordance with the wiahes of the people and the
provisions of the Declaration;
15. Requests the Special Committee, in the performance of its tasks, to take account of the special
activities envisaged in connexion with the International
Year for Human Rights and in particular to particii:-te,
as it considers appropriate, in the International Conference on Human Rights to be held at Teheran in
April 1968;
16. Requests the Special Committee to examine the
compliance of Member States with the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and other relevant resolutions on the question of decolonization, particularly those relating to
the Territories under Portuguese domination, Southern
Rhodesia and South West Africa, and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session;
17. Invites the Special Committee to pay particular
attention to the small Territories and to recommend
to the General Assembly the most appropriate methodt
and also the steps to be taken to enable the populations
of those Territories to exercise fully their right to selfdetermination and independence ;
18. Urges the administering Powers to co-operate
with the Special Committee by permitting access to the
colonial Territories ·by visiting missions, in accordance
with decisions previously taken by the General Assembly and by the Special Committee ;
19. Requests the Special Committee to consider and
submit recommendations to the General Assembly at
its twenty-third session regarding the holdini( early
in 1969 of a special conference of representatives of
colonial peoples for the purpose, inter alia, of considering the most effective means by which the international
community can intensify its assistance to them in their
efforts to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to take concrete
measures through all the media at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to give effect
to the provisions of its resolutions 2105 (XX), 2189
(XXI), 2262 (XXII), 2270 (XXII) and 2288
(XXII) concerning the widespread and continuous
publicizing of the work of the United Nations in the
field of decolonization, of the situation in the colonial
Territories and of the continuing struggle for liberation
being waged by the colonial peoples ;
21. Requests the administering Powers to co-operate
with the Secretary-General in promoting the large-acale
dissemination of information on the work of the United
Nations in the implementation of the Declaration;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
the finn~cing ;md facilities necessary for the implementation of the present resolution.
1636th plmary meetmg,
16 Decen1ber 196'!.
2345 (XXII), Agreement on the Reaeue of A•tronauts, the Retum of A1tronauta and Ille
Return of Object• Launched Into Oater
Space14
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 2260 (XXII) of 3
November 1967, which calls upon the Committee on the
it In accordance with a decision taken by the General Aasembly at its 1640th plenary meetinr, on 19 December 1967, the
