S/2020/329

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 April 2020
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
Thirty-first semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
1.
The present report is the thirty-first semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). It provides a
review and an assessment of the implementation of the resolution since the issuance
of my previous report on the subject, on 15 October 2019 ( S/2019/819), and covers
developments up to 7 April 2020.

I. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
2.
Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) by the Security Council on
2 September 2004, limited progress has been made in its implementation. A number
of provisions, including with respect to the existence and activities of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias, remain pending.
3.
During the reporting period, Lebanon, like many other countries, was affect ed
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which compounded issues that the
country had faced prior to the health emergency.

A.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence
of Lebanon
4.
Through the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council sought to
strengthen respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the G overnment
of Lebanon throughout the country, in accordance with the Taif Accords of 1989, to
which all the political parties in Lebanon had committed themselves. That objective
has remained the priority of my efforts.
5.
Large-scale peaceful protests began countrywide on 17 October, as a broad
cross-section of Lebanese society called for government change, just reforms, good
governance, accountability for corruption, better management of the economy, the
end of sectarian patronage and early parliamentary elections, as noted in my most
recent report on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2020/195). The announcement of a tax on Internet-based free phone services
appeared to spark the demonstrations, as noted in my report on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2019/889).

20-06046 (E)

300420

*2006046*

S/2020/329

6.
As noted in my most recent report on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006), in the context of the protests, the Prime Minister of Lebanon, Saad Hariri,
resigned on 29 October, and on 19 December, the President, Michel Aoun, designated
Hassan Diab, a former Minister for Education, as the next Prime Minister. During
formal binding Parliamentary consultations conducted by Mr. Aoun, Mr. Diab secured
69 of 128 votes with the support of the Amal Movement, the Free Patriotic Movement,
Hizbullah, the Marada Movement and their allies. The Future Movement, the Kata’ib
Party, the Lebanese Forces and the Progressive Socialist Party stated that they would
join the opposition.
7.
On 21 January, Mr. Aoun signed a decree establishing the Government of Prime
Minister-designate Diab, comprising 20 members, 6 (30 per cent) of whom were
women, including for the first time those occupying the key portfolios of Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Defence, as well as that of Minister for Justice. On
the same day, I welcomed the announcement of the formation of a new Government
of Lebanon and looked forward to working with Mr. Diab and the incoming Council
of Ministers, including in support of the country’s refor m agenda and to address the
pressing needs of its people. In a statement on 23 January, the International Support
Group for Lebanon urged the new Government “to swiftly adopt a ministerial
statement with the necessary substantial, credible and comprehensiv e policy package
of measures and reforms that can address the demands of the Lebanese people”. In
the same statement, the Group called upon “all Lebanese parties to implement a
tangible policy of disassociation from any external conflicts, as an important priority,
as spelled out in previous declarations, in particular the 2012 Baabda Declaration”.
The Group recalled “the importance of implementing relevant United Nations
Security Council resolutions and previous commitments which require the
disarmament of all armed groups in Lebanon so that there will be no weapons or
authority in Lebanon other than those of the Lebanese State” and “that the Lebanese
Armed Forces are the only legitimate armed forces of Lebanon, as enshrined in the
Lebanese constitution and in the Taif Agreement”.
8.
On 11 February, the new Government gained a vote of confidence in Parliament,
with 63 votes from the 84 parliamentarians present. There was one abstention and 20
votes of no confidence, and 44 parliamentarians were absent. In a ministerial
statement, the Government stated its commitment to addressing the needs of the
people, including through economic and judicial reforms, tackling corruption and
recognizing the right to peaceful protest.
9.
The provisions of the ministerial statement that were of particular relevance to
the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) were in line with earlier ministerial
statements. The Government reiterated its commitment to the disassociation policy
and the Taif Accords and to following the course of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
10. The Government also renewed its pledge to “strengthen the Lebanese Palestinian dialogue to spare the camps recurring tensions, which are not accepted by
the Lebanese, according to the Unified Lebanese Vision”, in line with the previous
statement.
11. In the statement, the Government affirmed “the right of the Lebanese people to
resist Israeli occupation […] and restore the occupied territories”. As was the case on
the occasion of the formation of the Government of Mr. Hariri in 2019, the
Government did not refer to its earlier commitment to developing a national defence
strategy. The most recent reference in a ministerial statement to a national defence
strategy had been in 2016.
12. It was noted in the ministerial statement that the Ministers vowed to have “a
non-sectarian vision that meets the principles of citizenship and social justice”,
pledged to protect freedom of expression and peaceful protest while maint aining
2/9

20-06046

S/2020/329

security and public order and pledged to work on reforming and amending the law on
parliamentary elections.
13. The Government pledged to work with all its components to execute the national
action plan on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security and to make progress towards gender equality by
abolishing all forms of discrimination against women and girls in Lebanese laws and
legislation.
14. Various groups in the protest movement released their own statement , offering
alternative solutions to the economic and financial crisis, proposing ways to fight
corruption and calling for early elections on the basis of a new electoral law. In the
statement, it was added that “the Lebanese system has generated several crises that
have become impossible to solve under this system [including] the issue of foreign
policy and the issue of arms outside the control of the State”. It was affirmed in the
same statement that “the government [should] also have deep faith in the State’s
inevitable ability to lead a confrontation, to place armed brigades in Lebanon under
the administration, authority, decision, and funding of the State, and to impose the
official and legitimate State authority on the entire Lebanese territory”.
15. On 12 February, the International Support Group for Lebanon called “on the
newly confirmed Government of Lebanon led by H.E. Hassan Diab to swiftly and
resolutely undertake timely, tangible, credible, and comprehensive set[s] of measures
and reforms to stop and reverse the deepening crises, to address the needs and
demands of the Lebanese people”. It also reiterated “the importance of Lebanon
implementing Security Council resolutions 1701 (2006), 1559 (2004) and other
relevant Security Council resolutions, as well as the Taif Accord and the Baabda
Declaration and its commitments made at the Brussels, Paris and Rome conferences”.
16. The release of a document entitled “Peace to Prosperity: A Vision to Improve
the Lives of the Palestinian and Israeli People” by the United States of America on
28 January triggered numerous reactions in Lebanon. President Aoun reportedly
“assured Palestinian President Abbas on 29 January of the importance of Arab unity
and stressed Lebanese adherence to the Arab peace initiative […] especially regarding
the Palestinian right of return to their lands and the establishme nt of a Palestinian
independent State, with Jerusalem as its capital”. The Minister of Foreign Affairs and
Emigrants, Nassif Hitti, similarly reiterated the commitment of Lebanon to the Arab
Peace Initiative on 25 February. On 29 January, the Speaker of Pa rliament, Nabih
Berri, mentioned the right of return of Palestinians, and on 8 February, in his address
at the 30th emergency session of the Arab Inter-Parliamentary Union, announced “on
behalf of the Parliament […] our rejection and condemnation of this d eal, and our
refusal to resettle the Palestinians in their places”. The Lebanese and Palestinian
working groups on Palestinian refugee affairs in Lebanon held a joint meeting on
19 February, in which they “firmly rejected the plan. On 29 January, Palestine
refugees demonstrated against the proposed plan in camps across the country. All
installations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) closed for the day.
17. In a speech on 16 February, the Secretary-General of Hizbullah, Hassan
Nasrallah, stated that “this new phase requires from us, people of the resistance, to
divert our attention to the main confrontation. The main confrontation is
unavoidable […]. We are headed to a confrontation with the mother of all wars,
crimes, oppressions, and corruptions”. He added that “the plan offered the Shab‘a
Farms, Kfar Shuba Hills, the Lebanese part of the village of Ghajar as well as the
entire Golan Heights to Israel. Mr. Nasrallah noted that “concerning the naturalization
of Palestinians, there have been several encouraging initial reactions against the
plan”.
20-06046

3/9

S/2020/329

18. UNRWA continued to deliver essential services with regard to health, education,
improvement of the camps, relief and social services to Palestine refugees in Lebanon
in the face of a serious Agency-wide funding shortfall, which currently stands at
$422 million for the programme budget. In addition, the spread of COVID -19 in
Lebanon led to concerns that the disease could enter the ov ercrowded Palestinian
refugee camps with potentially devastating effects, while refugees would face
challenges in gaining access to medical treatment. The closure of businesses and
restrictions on movement affected Palestine refugees considerably, and in t hat
context, UNRWA received increasingly desperate appeals for additional assistance.
19. As at 31 January, 910,256 refugees and asylum seekers were registered with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Lebanon.
Competition for access to resources, combined with fears that COVID-19 could
spread particularly quickly in refugee settlements, could lead to increased tensions
between refugees, both Syrian and Palestinian, and Lebanese communities.
20. In its resolution 1680 (2006), the Security Council strongly encouraged the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond positively to the request made
by the Government of Lebanon to delineate their common border. Such delineat ion
remains critical to enable proper border control and management, including the
movement of people and the potential movement of arms.
21. The delineation and demarcation of the boundaries of Lebanon remain essential
to guaranteeing national sovereignty and territorial integrity. While border delineation
is a bilateral matter, progress on the issue remains an obligation for Lebanon and the
Syrian Arab Republic, in accordance with resolution 1680 (2006).
22. Israel continued to occupy the northern part of the village of Ghajar and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line, in violation of the sovereignty of Lebanon and
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
23. There was no progress on the issue of the Shab‘a Farms area. Furthermore,
neither the Syrian Arab Republic nor Israel responded to the provisional definition of
the area contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) of 30 October 2007 (S/2007/641).
24. Uncrewed aerial vehicles and fixed-wing aircraft, including fighter jets, of the
Israel Defense Forces continued to make near daily overflights above Lebanon during
the reporting period, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and resolutions 1559 (2004)
and 1701 (2006). In identical letters dated 11 March addressed to the President of the
Security Council and me (A/74/749-S/2020/199), the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations, on behalf of her Government, stated that “on 5 March
2020, four Israeli enemy warplanes entered Lebanese airspace”, two of which went
on “to attack points in the Syrian Governorate of Qunaytirah” a nd that two others also
headed for Syrian territory. She added, “The fact that Israel has repeatedly violated
Lebanese airspace and used it in order to attack Syrian territory poses a direct threat
to civil aviation and could end in disaster”. In identical letters dated 3 April addressed
to the President of the Council and me, the Permanent Representative of Lebanon said
that “on 31 March […] three Israeli enemy warplanes flying at low altitude violated
Lebanese airspace and fired missiles from above Lebanese territory at Syrian
territory” and that “Israel not only violated Lebanese airspace by its actions, it could
also have endangered civilians and Lebanese territory had fire been opened on the
source of the missiles”, adding that “this act of aggression comes at a time when all
international efforts must be directed towards combating the pandemic […]”.
25. As I noted in my most recent report on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations, in identical
letters dated 24 January addressed to the President of the Security Council and me
4/9

20-06046

S/2020/329

(A/74/665-S/2020/71), condemned what she called a “violation of [Lebanon’s]
exclusive economic zone” and constituted a “flagrant violation of the sovereignty of
Lebanon, the Charter of the United Nations, the provisions of international law and
international resolutions, in particular Security Council re solution 1701 (2006)” by a
Panamanian-flagged hydrographic survey vessel hailing from the Israeli port of
Haifa. The Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations, in a note verbale dated
5 February addressed to me, stated that “Israel rejects the claims that the vessel has
at any point violated any Lebanese rights”.
26. In identical letters dated 26 February addressed to the President of the Security
Council and me (A/74/725-S/2020/154), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon,
on behalf of her Government, said that a “on 6 February, a security patrol from the
Jazzin security station came across a suspicious object in the town of “Surayri, Jazzin
district”. She added that “on 8 February, an engineering team […] determined that it
was a recently manufactured, Israeli-made MK83 guided bomb” and that it was
“equipped with a SPICE-1000 guidance device, which is made in Israel and currently
used by the Israeli army”. The Permanent Representative called upon the Council “to
condemn this act in the strongest possible terms and compel Israel to bring an end to
its violations of Lebanese sovereignty by air, sea and land”.
27. The Special Tribunal for Lebanon continued its proceedings in Prosecutor
v. Ayyash et al. On 5 February, the Tribunal issued a decision to proceed with another
trial in absentia against Salim Jamil Ayyash, who was charged with several crimes in
relation to attacks on Marwan Hamadeh, Georges Hawi and Elias El-Murr that were
carried out in Lebanon on 1 October 2004, 21 June 2005 and 12 July 2005,
respectively. On 5 March, the Trial Chamber provided notice that it would deliver its
judgment in the case in a public session in mid-May 2020.

B.

Extension of control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory
28. The Government of Lebanon continued its efforts to extend the authority of the
State throughout all the Lebanese territory, as called for in the Taif Accords and in
resolution 1559 (2004). The Lebanese Armed Forces stepped up their operations to
maintain security and stability in the country during the reporting period in response
to developments that included both the protests from October onwards and the
enforcement of restrictions on movement associated with COVID -19.
29. On 5 November, the Lebanese Armed Forces stated that they had arrested a
prominent suspect involved in the 2013 terrorist attack on one of their patr ols in Arsal,
which had killed an officer and a soldier.
30. On 9 February, three military personnel were reportedly killed in the town of
Mashrafah, Hirmil district, after their military vehicle was subjected to an ambush.
Mr. Diab then stated that “[…] every aggression against the Lebanese Armed Forces
is an attack against the Lebanese in all their categories and regions”.
31. As reported in (S/2020/195), coordination among the Lebanese Armed Forces,
the Internal Security Forces and General Security was established soon after the
protests began, with the Lebanese Armed Forces assuming a significant portion of the
security response, especially the reopening of roads, while the Internal Security
Forces operated in central Beirut, in particular at banks. On 12 November, as a group
of demonstrators attempted to block a road in Khaldah, south of Beirut, one
demonstrator was fatally shot by a member of the Lebanese Armed Forces. The
Lebanese Armed Forces released a statement that night indicating that the accused

20-06046

5/9

S/2020/329

soldier had been arrested. On 21 November, a military prosecutor indicted the soldier
and his superior officer for murder.
32. In the context of the pandemic, Mr. Aoun addressed the nation on 15 March,
declaring a national health emergency. Mr. Diab declared a state of “general
mobilization”, requesting citizens and residents to remain at home, except for
essential movement. The mobilization included a prohibition of gatherings and the
closure of Rafic Hariri International Airport and all air, sea and land ports as at
18 March. In addition, most public institutions were closed, with the exception of
critical ministries and institutions, as was the private sector, except for banks and
essential businesses.
33. On 26 March, the Government extended the state of health emergency until
12 April, expanded its scope to include the shutdown of all institutions and stores
except essential ones, such as bakeries and pharmacies, and introduced a curfew from
7 p.m. to 5 a.m. The Lebanese Armed Forces and the Internal Security Forces
monitored the compliance of businesses with the directives, imposing fines on
violators, closing shops, dispersing public gatherings and sending warnings to
municipalities to abide by the instructions of the general mobilization. Small groups
of protesters in north Lebanon and Beirut defied curfew measures, which they said
imposed too many hardships on them, compounding the pre-existing economic
situation. Clashes with security forces followed the reopening of some shops and the
blocking of roads.
34. Various security agencies implemented the Government’s decision of 15 March
to close air, land and sea borders, including all five land border crossings with the
Syrian Arab Republic, with the Lebanese Armed Forces carrying out patrols along the
border to enforce that decision. In a speech on 20 March, Mr. Nasrallah stated that
“regarding returnees from Iran and Hizbullah militants who are present on the front
lines in Syria and travel back and forth between Beirut and Damascus, they have all
been appropriately examined because we don’t want to spread the virus either in
Lebanon or in Syria”.
35. In addition to the State-managed measures to prevent and mitigate COVID-19,
a number of political parties reportedly offered health services to their constituencies
in various parts of Lebanon. In a speech on 21 March, Mr. Nasrallah said that “our
health workers, medical personnel, cadres, nurses, volunteers, civil defence teams are
ready to serve in all regions. Our personnel exceed 20,000, and their activity is
restricted to regions where we have a certain presence. We did not expand our
presence elsewhere to avoid negative reactions, but we are ready to extend our
services to the entire Lebanese soil and to refugee camps in all”.
36. On 6 April, the International Support Group for Lebanon held a meeting in
Beirut, attended by Mr. Aoun and Mr. Diab, that was focused on the economic
situation and the pandemic.

C.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias
37. In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council called for the disbanding and
disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, a key provision of the
resolution that has yet to be implemented. The provision reflects and reaffirms a
decision to which all Lebanese committed themselves in the Taif Accords.
38. Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias within the country continued to operate
outside the control of the Government, in violation of resolution 1559 (2004). While

6/9

20-06046

S/2020/329

several groups across the political spectrum in Lebanon possess weapons outside
government control, Hizbullah is the most heavily armed militia in the country.
39. There has been no tangible progress towards the disbanding and disarming of
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, as called for in the Taif Accords and resolution
1559 (2004). Since the adoption of that resolution, no specific steps have been taken
to tackle that crucial issue, which lies at the heart of the sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon. The maintenance by Hizbullah of a military arsenal outside
a legal framework and its involvement in the Syrian Arab Republic continued to be
denounced by a number of voices in Lebanon, who consider those issues to be
destabilizing factors in the country and ones that undermine democracy. In a speech
on 19 February, Mr. Hariri stressed “the necessity to call for a dialogue table to discuss
the defence strategy and restore the decision of war and peace to the Lebanese State”.
Many Lebanese see the continued presence of arms outside State control as an implicit
threat that the weapons could be used within Lebanon for political reasons.
40. In a speech on 5 January, following the announcement on 3 January by the
United States of the death of General Qasem Soleimani, Commander of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps of Iran, Mr. Nasrallah stated that “Qassem Soleimani is
not solely an Iranian matter, he is the entire axis of the resistance […]”. He said that
“all resistance forces across the region must seek fair punishment”, which he
explained was “the expulsion of all American troops in the Middle East”, adding that
“once the Americans are expelled, the Zionists will directly follow them, and we
might not even need a battle to liberate Palestine”. He noted that “we, of course, will
not target the entire American people. We do not in tend to target United States
citizens, journalists, or medical workers because that will help Trump’s intentions”.
On 8 January, Mr. Aoun expressed his hope that “the recent developments in the
region will not lead to any repercussions on the Lebanese scen e”.
41. The self-acknowledged maintenance of arms by Hizbullah and other groups and
the alleged increase by Hizbullah of its arsenal pose a serious challenge to the State’s
ability to exercise full sovereignty and authority over its territory. In a speech on
11 November, Mr. Nasrallah denied that Hizbullah needed to use the Albu Kamal
crossing between Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic to transfer weapons into
Lebanon, adding, “we have more missiles than we need and we don’t know where to
put them”.
42. In identical letters dated 7 April to the President of the Security Council and to
me (S/2020/281), the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations said
that on 26 March, Hizbullah had “launched a tactical remotely-piloted aerial vehicle
from southern Lebanon into Israel’s airspace. The Israel Defense Forces shot down
the aerial vehicle”. The Permanent Representative reiterated that “it is Lebanon’s
responsibility to abide by Security Council resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006),
calling for the dismantling of Hizbullah and the removal of its presence in Lebanon,
and for the Lebanese Government’s assertion of its effective sovereignty over all of
the Lebanese territory”.
43. The participation of Hizbullah and other Lebanese parties in the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic continued to breach the policy of disassociation and the
principles of the Baabda Declaration. In identical letters dated 5 March to
the President of the Security Council and me (S/2020/180), the Permanent
Representative of Israel noted “the worsening situation in south -western Syria, where
armed groups affiliated with the Iranian regime, such as Hizbullah, have continued to
destabilize the region. The presence of such groups, coupled with the growing sphere
of Iranian influence, poses an imminent threat not only to Israel’s security, but to
international peace and security”. He stressed “the need for […] the total withdrawal
of Iran and the Iranian Command Forces from Syria”.
20-06046

7/9

S/2020/329

44. The presence of Palestinian armed groups outside camps continued.
Notwithstanding the decision taken in 2006 in the context of the national dialogue
and confirmed at subsequent sessions to disarm Palestinian militias outside the camps
within a six-month period, no progress was made during the reporting period with
regard to dismantling the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada in the country.

II. Observations
45. I reiterate my message on the need for the Government of Lebanon to move the
country’s reform agenda forward and address the pressing needs of its people. As the
dire economic and financial situation in Lebanon is now compounded by the adverse
impact of COVID-19 on the country’s economy, it is all the more urgent that the
country’s leaders develop and implement the required reforms. Measures to prevent,
limit and mitigate the impact of the pandemic have to be taken in parallel to the
provision of financial and food support to the rapidly increasing numbers of the most
vulnerable groups of the population facing dire poverty.
46. The Lebanese State should increase its efforts to achieve a monopoly over the
possession of weapons and the use of force throughout its territory. I continue to urge
the Government and the armed forces of Lebanon to take all measures necessary to
prohibit Hizbullah and other armed groups from acquiring weapons and building
paramilitary capacity outside the authority of the State, in violation of resolutions
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
47. The continued involvement of Hizbullah in the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic is not only a breach of the disassociation policy and the principles of the
Baabda Declaration. In addition, because the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic is
characterized by confrontations among regional actors, it carries the risk of entangling
Lebanon in regional conflicts and undermining the stability of Lebanon and the
region. Furthermore, it demonstrates the failure of Hizbullah to disa rm and its refusal
to be accountable to the very State institutions that the implementation of resolution
1559 (2004) was intended to strengthen.
48. The reported involvement of Hizbullah, as well as that of other Lebanese
elements, in fighting elsewhere in the region remains of serious concern. I call upon
the countries that maintain close ties with Hizbullah to encourage the transformation
of the group into a solely civilian political party, as well as its disarmament, in
accordance with the requirements of the Taif Accords and resolution 1559 (2004). It
is critical that the Accords be preserved and implemented by all to avoid the spectre
of a renewed confrontation among Lebanese citizens and to strengthen the institutions
of the State. Hizbullah’s involvement in the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic is
continuing, as demonstrated in the acknowledgement by Mr. Nasrallah that “returnees
from Iran and Hizbullah militants […] are present on the front lines in Syria and travel
back and forth between Beirut and Damascus”. Such involvement by Hizbullah is in
breach of the disassociation policy and the principles of the Baabda Declaration.
49. Hizbullah’s renewed admission that it possesses missiles is also of concern. I
note the continuous calls by political leaders for the development of a national
defence strategy through a Lebanese-led, Lebanese-owned process in line with the
country’s international obligations. As stated in many of my previous reports, it is
important that such a dialogue address the need to achieve a State monopoly over the
possession and use of weapons and the use of force, a crucial issue that stands at the
heart of the sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon.

8/9

20-06046

S/2020/329

50. I have repeatedly condemned all violations of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon. I reiterate that such violations, by air and ground, run the risk
of triggering an escalation and could jeopardize stability in Lebanon, Israel and
beyond. They undermine the credibility of the Lebanese security and State institutions
and generate anxiety among the civilian population. The alleged use of Lebanese
airspace by the Israel Defense Forces to strike targets in the Syrian Arab Republic is
deeply concerning. I renew my call for Israel to adhere to its obligations under
relevant Security Council resolutions and immediately cease its overflights above
Lebanese airspace. Similarly, I urge Israel to withdraw its forces from the northern
part of the village of Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line without
further delay.
51. The renewed commitment by the Government of Lebanon in its ministerial
statement to strengthen the Lebanese-Palestinian dialogue in order to prevent tensions
in Palestinian refugee camps is positive. It is critical that the maintenance of weapons
by non-Lebanese militias be addressed and that the earlier decisions emanating from
the national dialogue be implemented. This includes following up on the efforts of
the Government of Lebanon to deal with “quality-of-life, social and humanitarian
issues with regard to Palestine refugees living inside and outside refugee camps”, as
decided at the National Dialogue Conference of 2006 and called for in the document
entitled “A unified Lebanese vision for the Palestinian refugees affairs in Lebanon”.
52. The pledge by the Government of Lebanon to implement the national action
plan on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) is a positive step towards increasing
the role and participation of women in decision-making at all levels and involving
women effectively in conflict prevention and resolution. I commend Lebanon for its
progress towards improving the representation of women in the political domain,
including through its designation of six female ministers, among them the first female
Minister for Defence in the Arab world. The United Nations stands ready to support
Lebanon in the implementation of the action plan.
53. As the Special Tribunal for Lebanon moves forward in its proceedings, I
reiterate that it is in the interest of Lebanon and in line with its obligations under
international law to ensure that those behind terrorist acts, including political
assassinations, are held accountable and that violence is not committed with impunity.
I welcome the Government’s commitment to establishing the truth in that connection,
as expressed in its ministerial statement.
54. As in the past, I renew my calls to donors to support the State institutions of
Lebanon, including the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Internal Security Forces,
because they are at the forefront of maintaining national security in the country.
55. Furthermore, I encourage donors to provide funding to UNRWA, including in
support of its request for cash assistance to address the deteriorating e conomic
situation in Palestinian refugee camps, exacerbated by the COVID -19 crisis, so that
it can continue to perform its essential role and deliver services, which are vital to the
dignity and security of Palestinian refugees. Such efforts are without pr ejudice to the
need for the just resolution of the Palestinian refugee question in the context of a
comprehensive settlement in the region.
56. I am counting on the continued commitment of the Government of Lebanon to
its international obligations and call upon all parties and actors to fully abide by
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). The United Nations will
continue its efforts towards the full implementation of those and all other resolutions
pertaining to Lebanon.

20-06046

9/9
