80

General Aa-bly-Twenty-eeeond Seuion

5. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with
future sessions of the International Law Commission,
other seminars might be organized, which should continue to ensure the participation of a reasonable numher of nationals of developing countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission the records of the discussions at the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly on the report of the Commission.
1615th plenary meeting,
1 December 1967.

2273 (XXII). Special miYions
The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter II of the report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its nineteenth session,8 which contains final draft articles and
commentaries on special missions,
Recalling that in its resolutions 1687 (XVI) of
18 December 1961, 1902 (XVIII) of 18 November
1963 and 2045 (XX) of 8 December 1965 it recommended that the International Law Commission
should continue the work of codification and progressive
development of the topic of special missions, taking
into account the views expressed in the General Assembly and the comments submitted by Governments,
and that in its resolution 2167 (XXI) of 5 December
1966 it recommended that a final draft on special
missions should be submitted to the Assembly by the
Commission in its report on the work of its nineteenth
1ession,
Noting further that at its eighteenth and nineteenth
sessions, in 1966 and 1967, the International Law
Commission, in the light of the observations and comments submitted by Governments and taking into account the relevant resolutions and debates of the General Assembly, revised the provisional draft articles
on special missions prepared at its sixteenth and
seventeenth sessions and that at its nineteenth session
the Commission finally adopted the draft articles,
Recalling that, as stated in paragraph 33 of the report
of the International Law Commission on the work of
its nineteenth session, the Commission decided to
recommend to the General Assembly that appropriate
measures be taken for the conclusion of a convention
on special missions,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1 a, of the Charter
of the United Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive. development of international law and its
codification,
Believing that the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations4 and the Vienna Convention on Consular
Relationsli have contributed to the fostering of friendly
relations among nations, irrespective of their differing
constitutional and social systems, and that they should
be completed by a convention on special missions and
the privileges and immunities of such missions,
a Ibid., Supplement No. 9 ( A/6709/Rev .1 and Corr.1).
"United Nations Conference on Diplomatic Intercourse and
Immunities, 1961, Official Records. voL II (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: 62.X.l), p. 82.
& United Nations Conference on Consµlar Relations, 1963,
Official Records, vol. II (United Nations publication, Sales
No.: 64.X.l), p. 175.

1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its valuable work on special missions and to the Special Rapporteur for his contribution
to this work ;
2. Invites Member States to submit, not later than
1 July 1968, their written comments and observations
on the final draft articles on special missions prepared
by the International Law Commission;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
comments submitted by Member States on the subject,
so as to facilitate its consideration by the General
Assembly at its twenty-third session in the light of
those comments;
4. Decides to include an item entitled "Draft -Convention on Special Missions" in the provisional agenda
of the twenty-third session, with a view to the adoption
of such a convention by the General Assembly ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the
presence of the Special Rapporteur on special missions
as an expert during the debates on the topic at the
twenty-third session of the General Assembly and to
submit at that session all relevant documentation ;
6. Invites Member States to include as far as possible in their delegations to the twenty-third session
of the General Assembly experts competent in the
field to be considered.
1615th plenary meeting,
1 December 1967.

2287 (XXII). United Nations Conference on the
Law of Treaties
The General Assenc.bly,
Recalling that by its resolution 2166 (XXI) of
5 December 1966 it decided that an international conference of plenipotentiaries should be convened at
Geneva or at any other suitable place, the first session
early in 1968 and the second early in 1969, to consider
the law of treaties and to embody the results of its
work in an international convention and such other
instruments as it might deem appropriate,
Recalling also its request that the Secretary-General
convoke that conference,
Recalling further that it decided to refer to the conference the draft articles contained in chapter II of the
report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its eighteenth session8 as the basic proposal for
consideration .by the conference,
Having considered the item entitled "Law of treaties"
at its twenty-second session,
Recognizing that the exchange of views and the
written comments of Governments on the draft articles
on the law of treaties prepared by the International
Law Commission at its eighteenth session may facilitate
the work at the international conference,
Noting that an invitation has been extended by the
Austrian Government to hold at Vienna both sessions
of the conference on the law of treaties convened by
the General Assembly in resolution 2166 (XXI),
1. Decides that the first session of the United
Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties referred
to in General Assembly resolution 2166 (XXI), to be
held in 1968, shall be convened at Vienna in March
1968;
6 Official Records of the GtKtral Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Supplefflfflt No. 9 (A/6309/Rev.l), part II.
