United Nations

S/PV.6143

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6143rd meeting
Monday, 15 June 2009, 6.05 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr İlkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Georgia
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1808
(2008), 1839 (2008) and 1866 (2009) (S/2009/254)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-37028 (E)

*0937028*

S/PV.6143

The meeting was called to order at 6.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Georgia
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 1808 (2008), 1839
(2008) and 1866 (2009) (S/2009/254)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Georgia and Germany, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lomaia
(Georgia), took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Matussek (Germany) took the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/310, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Austria, Croatia, France,
Germany, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2009/254, containing the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1808 (2008), 1839 (2008) and 1866 (2009).
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to the photocopies of two letters dated 10 June 2009
from the Permanent Representative of Georgia
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
which will be issued as documents S/2009/305 and
S/2009/306, respectively.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.

2

Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the
voting.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The members of the Security Council will
recall that, when we received the report of the
Secretary-General in May, the Russian delegation
expressed its willingness to work constructively with
partners on agreeing to a substantive draft resolution of
the Council on the future mandate of a United Nations
presence in the region of the Abkhaz/Georgian border.
We therefore stated that the corrected parameters for a
temporary security regime and mission mandate
proposed by the Secretary-General could be taken as
the basis of a mandate for the new United Nations
stabilization mission proposed in the report.
The mandate of the current United Nations
presence in the region will expire in a few hours. Over
the past two weeks, the Group of Friends has held
intensive consultations for the purpose of agreeing to a
draft resolution on this issue. The positions of Russia
and the Republic of Abkhazia in support of maintaining
the useful role of the United Nations observers in the
Caucasus is well known.
In fact, the earlier mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) ceased to
exist, owing to the Georgian aggression against South
Ossetia in August last year and Georgia’s subsequent
secession from the Moscow Agreement on a Ceasefire
and Separation of Forces of 14 May 1994. There is no
point in extending it since it is built on old realities.
Guaranteeing Georgia’s neighbours that there would be
no attack from Georgia, and boosting support for the
stability and security in that region, can only be done
with a new security regime on the Georgian-Abkhaz
border.
In that context, it is very obvious that, bearing in
mind the new political and legal conditions, the
majority of old terms and terminology used in the
international documents cannot be applied. The
international community must clearly understand all
consequences of the wanton attack on peaceful
Tskhinvali on 8 August 2008. The Saakashvili regime
ended the territorial integrity of its country itself, and

09-37028

S/PV.6143

two new States emerged on the world map — the
Republic of Abkhazia and the Republic of South
Ossetia.

are convinced that the time has come for appropriate
reflection in international documents of the new
military and political position of States in the region.

However, we suggested that in the current
realities such a draft Council resolution would have
established a new security regime with politically
incorrect provisions and old, contradictory terms. In
fact, it was aimed at affirming the territorial integrity
of Georgia and at denying the existence of Abkhazia as
a State. Obviously, the Russian side could not agree to
that.

Nevertheless, once again demonstrating our
constructive approach, the Russian delegation
expressed its willingness for a new technical extension
of the Mission for a month, in the first instance, to
continue in-depth dialogue. That decision, however,
was to be taken without advance political implications.
However, our partners preferred poison to medicine.
We can only regret that.

During the work in the Group of Friends of
Georgia, we gave our partners a compromise draft
resolution with a number of concrete measures to
ensure security and support for stability on the border
of Georgia and Abkhazia, including impartial
monitoring by UNOMIG. Our proposals were part of
the latest recommendations of the Secretary-General on
the matter. Thus, the Russian draft resolution could
have become a realistic basis for continuing
constructive international interaction on the basis of a
United Nations presence in the region.

With regard to the draft resolution on the
Council’s table, the Russian delegation cannot support
it and allow its adoption, for the reasons that we have
indicated. It is difficult to say what the sponsors were
thinking of in putting to the vote a draft resolution that
is clearly unacceptable. They were not thinking of the
interests of strengthening stability in Transcaucasia.

Based on the European Union Monitoring
Mission in Georgia, which was agreed within the
Geneva discussions of the joint mechanisms to prevent
and react to incidents, developing a new mission
mandate would have allowed us to arrange the practical
cooperation of all interested parties to strengthen
security and to restore trust in this turbulent region in
the Transcaucasia.
However,
our
Western
partners
were
unfortunately not able to accept that approach. They
tried to pursue a political chimera. How could anyone
seriously expect that the new mission would be called
an observer mission in Georgia, since it would operate
in both Georgia and in Abkhazia? There was stubborn
insistence on including a reference to resolution 1808
(2008), which was adopted in April 2008 even before
the Georgian aggression that changed the political
landscape in Transcaucasia.
On 14 June, a number of Council members, who
refused to adopt Russia’s pragmatic solution, said that
they wanted a new technical extension of the old
Mission mandate and once again wanted to insert a
reference to the old resolution 1808 (2008). In that
regard, it should be recalled that the Mission’s mandate
has been rolled over for periods of four months on two
occasions — in October 2008 and February 2009. We

09-37028

The main sponsors of Georgian aggression
against South Ossetia have gone from the political
scene, but their shadows still loom large among us. We
really must get rid of that apparition. Political wisdom
is not to be found in blind adherence to the vestiges of
past thinking, but in showing restrained approaches,
bearing in mind current realities. Thus, full
responsibility for bringing to an end the United Nations
presence in Transcaucasia lies with our partners.
For our part, the Russian Federation will continue
to undertake efforts aimed at ensuring the steadfast
security of the new young States in Transcaucasia and
the socio-economic development of their peoples.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution contained in document S/2009/310.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Croatia,
France, Japan, Mexico, Turkey, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Against:
Russian Federation
Abstaining:
China, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Uganda, Viet Nam
The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 10 votes in favour, 1 against and 4 abstaining.

3

S/PV.6143

The draft resolution has not been adopted, owing to the
negative vote of a permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): In
resolution 1866 (2009), which we adopted and
co-sponsored unanimously, we expressed our intention
to decide on the future of the United Nations presence
on the basis of the Secretary-General’s report. That
report, entitled “Report ... pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1808 (2008), 1839 (2008) and 1866 (2009)”
(S/2009/254), received broad support within the
Council when it was presented. On that basis,
therefore, intensive talks and negotiations took place in
the Group of Friends of Georgia.
Several draft resolutions were discussed. On
Friday, the Group met for more than six hours. On
Saturday, we met again. Many gestures were agreed
with regard to the security regime. We were not far
from an agreement. It is true that, throughout, Russia
tried to use that process to get Council members to
change their minds on Georgia’s territorial integrity
and sovereignty. That is why all the Russian proposals
included references to “the Republic of Abkhazia” and
its borders — provocative terms obviously
unacceptable to a majority of the Council members.
Strangely, Russia also refused any reference to a
conflict and, what is of even greater concern, any
reference to a political process. However, progress was
made. We felt that those negotiations should be given
every chance of success. That is why France, in a
constructive spirit, together with Germany, Austria,
Croatia, the United States, the United Kingdom and
Turkey, yesterday put into blue the draft resolution
(S/2009/310) that we have just voted on. That text
proposed a technical rollover for the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) in order to give some oxygen to the
negotiations.
The text was in line with the previous UNOMIG
technical rollover resolutions, 1838 (2008) and 1866
(2009). Both those resolutions came into effect after
the August conflict and after Russia recognized the
separatist entities. And, as Council members will
remember, Russia voted for both those resolutions, in
unanimity with the Council. Russia even co-sponsored
resolution 1866 (2009). One of the key elements that

4

made it possible to adopt these resolutions and for
them to be accepted by the host country, Georgia, was
the reference to resolution 1808 (2008). That reference
did not prevent Russia from voting for them.
Russia asked us to remove that reference in the
current draft. That proposal was unacceptable to us and
to a majority of the members of the Security Council
for several reasons: first, because France, like the
European Union, is fundamentally attached to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders;
then, because nothing has happened since the vote on
resolution 1866 (2009) in February that would justify
the Council changing its position; and finally, because
removing that reference would clearly have prejudged
the outcome of future negotiations, rather than
reorienting the current order in order to enable those
negotiations to take place. Under those conditions, it is
inexplicable to us that Russia has put an end to this
Mission because of a reference to resolution 1808
(2008).
Russia assumed a heavy burden by imposing its
veto on the draft text. The draft resolution would have
been adopted by a wide majority without that veto, and
with good reason. Russia has put an end to 15 years of
the stabilizing presence of the United Nations in the
area. The local population, which must be assured of
security and external monitoring to prevent
provocation and arbitrary acts, will be the first victim
of that decision. The veto also leaves a situation on the
ground that remains very fragile and unstable, with
unresolved hatred, artificial barriers and no peace
process underway. The Security Council cannot
distance itself from that situation.
Once again, France deeply regrets the Russian
veto. The most important thing now is peace and
stability in the region. France calls on all parties with
forces in the area to strictly respect the August and
September 2008 agreements. Finally, we reiterate our
unreserved support for sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council was unable to adopt a draft resolution
on a technical rollover of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia, to the deep regret of the Chinese
delegation. In fact, the Council was only six hours

09-37028

S/PV.6143

away from the deadline. We should have made further
efforts. This is not the result we had hoped for.
Over the past two weeks, the Group of Friends
undertook painstaking consultations on the extension
of the United Nations mission and achieved some
degree of agreement. The Chinese delegation
consistently expected the Group of Friends to reach an
agreement to avoid a forced vote. However and
unfortunately, the consultations were locked in an
impasse. We were unable to reach a consensus on a
technical rollover.
Under those circumstances, the Chinese
delegation abstained in the voting on the draft
resolution. We urge the Group of Friends to assess the
situation, show maximum flexibility and a constructive
attitude, and conduct further consultations in order to
arrive at a compromise plan as soon as possible.
China has always maintained that all States
should abide by the United Nations Charter and the
norms of international law. Our position on the
principle of national sovereignty and territorial
integrity has been consistent and clear. We have always
maintained that safeguarding peace and stability in the
South Caucasus and beyond is in the interests of all
sides. We hope that the parties concerned will remain
calm, engage in dialogue in good faith, adhere to
peaceful means to solve their disputes and make joint
efforts to advance the well-being of the countries and
peoples of the region.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States deeply regrets the outcome of today’s
vote on the draft resolution to extend the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). The
draft resolution would have given the Council time to
reach agreement on a new mandate for the United
Nations presence on the basis of the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations — recommendations that
most Council members have supported. Extending the
mandate would have allowed the United Nations to
continue to carry out its role in monitoring the
ceasefire, addressing security and humanitarian
concerns on the ground and helping create conditions
for the return of refugees and displaced persons.
We believe that a United Nations presence in
Georgia is important. For that reason, the United
States, along with other members of the Group of
Friends of the Secretary-General for Georgia, have
tried over the past two weeks to engage in good faith

09-37028

negotiations. Regrettably, the Russian Federation could
not agree to language in this technical rollover —
language that reflects a well-balanced compromise that
the Council had reached in its two previous resolutions
on the issue. That language served to bridge the
differing views among us on the situation in Georgia.
Despite our good-faith efforts, UNOMIG’s
mandate expires today. We will now need to consider
measures to address a Georgia without a United
Nations presence. We will continue to work closely
with the leadership of the European Union monitoring
mission and with the co-Chairs of the Geneva talks. In
the meantime, it is the civilian population that suffers
by facing a tenuous security environment without an
international presence in Abkhazia, Georgia.
The United States would like to reaffirm once
again in this Chamber its commitment to the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders. Today’s vote
demonstrates that the majority of Council members
agree. The United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia has accomplished a great deal since its
deployment in 1993. We thank the many members of
the Mission over the years for their hard work. We also
thank the Secretary-General, the Secretariat and Johan
Verbeke, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for all their efforts to help resolve the conflict
in Georgia.
Finally, we believe that the Council should
remain seized of the matter and in this regard we look
forward to working with other members of the Council
in the future.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): Viet Nam
consistently supports resolving conflicts and disputes
by means of peaceful negotiations, in accordance with
international law. As we desire a realistic solution
based upon consideration of the legitimate interests of
all of the parties concerned, the draft technical
extension resolution, as contained in document
S/2009/310, did not have the support of even the most
concerned parties within the Group of Friends, and
therefore did not have the consensus of the Council.
In that circumstance, Viet Nam abstained in order
to leave options open for negotiations. I would like to
reaffirm Viet Nam’s support for the mission’s
continued operation under a mandate that reflects the
new realities. We look forward to participating in and

5

S/PV.6143

contributing to the process of negotiations, on terms set
forth in a revised mandate.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom regrets Russia’s decision to block a new
mandate for the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia. We continue to believe that a continuing
United Nations presence in Georgia is a vital tool for
diffusing tensions and maintaining security in Georgia
and in the wider South Caucasus. We have made every
possible effort to negotiate a new substantive draft
resolution.
As we made clear during consultations on
27 May, we fully endorsed the Secretary-General’s
recommendations, as set out in his report of 18 May
(S/2009/254), for a new security regime and mandate.
The Secretary-General’s report provided us with a
strong basis, building on previous Security Council
resolutions. We would have preferred a stronger
security regime, but in the spirit of compromise we and
others were ready to adopt a mandate along those lines.
Along with the whole of the international
community — apart from Russia, which is a party to
this conflict, and one other State — the United
Kingdom continues to recognize the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders. It is therefore regrettable that
Russia, through its continued insistence on removing
all references to Georgia’s territorial integrity in the
draft resolution, including previously agreed references
to Security Council resolution 1808 (2008), should
have sought to force the Security Council to change its
agreed position on the territorial integrity of a Member
State.
Russia itself voted for a whole series of Security
Council resolutions upholding Georgia’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty, including as recently as
February 2009. We regret that Russia refuses to stand
by those resolutions, particularly as the situation on the
ground has not materially changed since February.
With today’s veto, Russia has effectively
removed a key component of the international
community’s ability to promote stability and address
the needs of vulnerable civilian populations living in
the conflict area. We understand that the Abkhaz de
facto authorities were keen to see the Mission
maintained, making Russia the only party to this
conflict that has sought to end the role of the United
Nations in Georgia.

6

Despite Russia’s decision, we call on all parties
to the unresolved conflict in Georgia, including Russia,
that are parties to that unresolved conflict to engage in
dialogue and cooperation aimed at increasing stability
and addressing the needs of civilians on both sides of
the administrative borderline.
Furthermore, the United Kingdom would like to
reiterate the importance of all parties to this conflict
abiding by their existing commitments, as was made
clear in resolution 1866 (2009), other resolutions, and
the agreements of 12 August and 8 September 2008.
We also would like the Council to remain seized of the
matter.
Finally, I would like to conclude by paying
tribute to the men and women who have served with
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia since
1993 for their efforts, despite difficult circumstances,
to promote peace and security.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): Japan supports a peaceful
resolution of the issues of Abkhazia and South Ossetia
based on the principle of the territorial integrity of
Georgia. It is essential for all parties concerned to
ensure peace and security in Georgia and its region.
There is also an urgent need to improve the
humanitarian conditions of internally displaced persons
and refugees. To accomplish these tasks, we need to
maintain a United Nations presence in the Abkhazia
region and enhance the mandate of the United Nations
Mission.
Japan views positively the recommendation made
by the Secretary-General on the new mandate of the
United
Nations
Mission.
We
support
his
recommendation as a good basis for a new mandate. It
is therefore disappointing that no agreement has been
reached within the Group of Friends of the SecretaryGeneral, despite intensive negotiations. What is most
important for the international community is the
maintenance of peace and security in Georgia and its
region.
Our belief was that this goal could be achieved
most effectively through a continuous United Nations
presence. It is for this reason that Japan supported the
draft resolution, which extended the mandate of the
current Mission to allow further negotiations on the
substantive draft resolution to be completed during the
period of two weeks.

09-37028

S/PV.6143

Japan also supports the reference to resolution
1808 (2008) and the commitment to the principles of
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Georgia within its internationally recognized border.
After the event of August 2008, two resolutions were
unanimously adopted by the Security Council in
October 2008 and February 2009 with a reference to
resolution 1808 (2008). There is no reason why we
should drop it at this time.

agreement on a substantive new resolution for the
Mission there. We share the concerns of the SecretaryGeneral that the overall fragility of the situation could
further deteriorate as a result of the erosion of the
ceasefire regime. On this basis, we have advocated for
a resolution with an enhanced mandate for United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) in
line with the proposal in paragraphs 65 and 66 of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/254).

Regrettably, the extension of the Mission was not
adopted by the Council. I would like to encourage the
international community, particularly those members of
the Council concerned, to make further efforts to
ensure peace and security in Georgia and its region and
to reach an agreement as soon as possible. I also take
this opportunity to express our thanks to the men and
women who have been serving in the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia for their dedication and
good work.

We believe that an agreement on a revised
security regime applicable to all forces on the ground
is crucial to the long-term stabilization of the country
and a viable United Nations role in Georgia. In
addition, we would have liked to see the creation of
conditions conducive to the swift and safe return of all
refugees and internally displaced persons.

Mr. Ebner (Austria): Austria regrets that the
Council was not able to agree today on the draft
technical rollover resolution before us. We firmly
believe that the United Nations Mission monitoring
and verifying a security regime continues to be crucial
for stability in the region and therefore is in
everybody’s interest. The Mission has played a key
role in improving the situation of the internally
displaced and refugee population in the area. We
therefore attach great important to a continued United
Nations presence.
We supported and continue to support the concept
of a rollover resolution so as to give the Council the
extra time necessary for negotiations. We affirm our
commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders.
The last two technical rollover resolutions —
resolutions 1839 (2008) and 1866 (2009), which
enjoyed consensus on the Council — both made
explicit reference to resolution 1808 (2008). Austria
believes that there have been no major changes in the
situation over the past three months that would justify
the deletion of such a reference in the draft resolution
before us.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): My delegation has been
engaged over the past two weeks in negotiations within
the framework of the Group of Friends of the
Secretary-General on Georgia in an effort to reach

09-37028

However, the Group of Friends was not able to
reach a compromise. There has been some progress on
a number of issues regarding the possible new regime,
but we felt that we needed more time to iron out the
outstanding points. Taking into account the differing
positions regarding the status issue, we have showed
willingness to accommodate Russian concerns, but we
were not ready to trade away the principles of
territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Therefore, we, together with other sponsors,
decided to submit a draft resolution that would extend
the mandate for two weeks so as to allow us more time
to finalize our discussions. We regret the Russian
Federation’s decision to veto this technical rollover
resolution and bring to an end the United Nations
operation in the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict zone,
especially as it may have adverse effects for both the
people on the ground and the security situation in the
region.
As the United Nations presence in Georgia draws
to a close, we continue to urge the participants in the
Geneva talks, co-chaired by the United Nations, the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, to strengthen their discussions
and to engage constructively with the aim of yielding
concrete results. We also express our gratitude to all
UNOMIG personnel who, since the establishment of
the Mission in 1993, have performed their duties
admirably in difficult conditions. In particular, we
remember those who gave their lives while serving
under the United Nations flag.

7

S/PV.6143

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
Croatia supports the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders and is aligned with the European
Union foreign policy towards Georgia.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): From the outset, we have
called for a unanimous decision of the Council on this
important matter and have encouraged all parties
concerned to resolve any differences in order to ensure
that there is a United Nations presence on the ground.
Uganda remains convinced that an international
monitoring presence in the region is vital. The situation
in the Mission’s area of responsibility has remained
fragile for some time. We have supported and still
support the continued presence of a United Nations
mission to consolidate and build upon the
achievements in peace and security in the region.
We are disappointed by the apparent lack of
progress in reaching a consensus on the draft resolution
before us today, which in essence will lead to the
eventual closure of the United Nations Mission.
Uganda abstained in the voting because it was quite
clear that, whether we voted for or against the draft
resolution, the future of the United Nations Mission
would still be in jeopardy — a scenario that we would
not have wished for. We regret that the curtain will
close on the United Nations Mission, but call on all the
parties in the region to exercise restraint and engage in
confidence-building measures as they seek a lasting
solution to the conflict.
Finally, we commend the United Nations staff,
who have served in the Mission since 1993, for their
tireless efforts in promoting a more stable situation and
their commitment in contributing to peace and security
in the region.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica voted in favour of the draft resolution
presented by the Group of Friends in order to allow
more time for negotiation. We did so because, as I
stated during the informal consultations, there is
consensus among the members of the Council about
the positive role that the United Nations has played in
Georgia and a need for the presence of a United
Nations force in the future, as recommended by the
Secretary-General. Such a presence would provide
guarantees to the parties to the conflict and contribute
to creating the conditions for reconciliation and
cohabitation in Georgia.

8

Unfortunately, these fundamental agreements
were not sufficient to lead to a consensus making it
possible to extend the mandate of the mission in
Georgia. Costa Rica trusts that this disagreement will
not be an obstacle to the international community
maintaining its focus on Georgia and that it can prevent
the consolidation of the situation in Abkhazia and
Ossetia through measures that run counter to
international law.
As I have stated on other occasions, Costa Rica
takes as its guide the principles of international law,
the application of which is the only guarantee for our
own security. Our vote in favour of the draft resolution
also expresses our absolute opposition to any efforts to
ignore international law and our unconditional respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Georgia, as affirmed in all previous
resolutions of the Security Council.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
voted in favour of the resolution that was submitted to
the Council today because we believe that it is
indispensable to maintain the presence of the United
Nations mission in Georgia in order to preserve peace
in the region and the security of its inhabitants, while
bearing in mind the complexity of the overall situation.
Likewise, in previous consultations, we also
expressed our support for the proposal contained in the
Secretary-General’s report to establish a new security
regime, which would enable us to prevent outbreaks of
violence and the use of force in the region. Given the
lack of agreement within the Group of Friends of
Georgia on the establishment of this new mandate, we
today supported the extension of the current Mission,
which, if it had been approved, would have enabled us
to continue with negotiations to bring about an
agreement acceptable to all parties and which would
have benefited the civilian population affected by this
conflict.
We regret that this technical extension of the
mandate was not approved by the Council, and we
continue to be available to participate in the forming of
agreements that can help us achieve the objectives
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, which
have been supported by all members of the Council.
What is in play in Georgia are the fundamental
principles of our Organization, such as the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States and
respect for the rights of minorities. We will continue to

09-37028

S/PV.6143

strive for dialogue and a peaceful solution to the
conflict in the region.

presence in the region on the basis of the report of the
Secretary-General.

Finally, we reiterate our call upon all the parties
to not have recourse to force, in conformity with the
1994 Moscow Agreement on a Ceasefire and
Separation of Forces and the peace agreements of
12 August and 8 September 2008. We call for a
solution to the conflict exclusively through peaceful
means in the framework of the pertinent resolutions of
the Council and in respect for international law.

In conclusion, we call on all parties to exercise
restraint in order to give priority to the peaceful
settlement of differences in the region.

Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): We followed closely the consultations that
took place over the past few days in the Group of
Friends of Georgia, and we regret that these
consultations were not able to lead to a formula that
took into consideration the positions of all parties. This
prevented the Security Council from adopting this draft
resolution.
We think that it is vital to have a peacekeeping
mission in the region, but any activity on the part of
the United Nations must have the agreement of all
parties of the United Nations. This presence must be
one of credibility and must help promote peace and
security. Since there was no agreement among the
parties concerned, my delegation abstained on the vote.
Despite all that, my delegation reaffirms here that
we appreciate the role that has been played by the
personnel and blue helmets of the United Nations in
the region, and in the end, we would call on all parties
concerned not to increase tensions and to focus all
necessary efforts on maintaining peace and security in
the region, whether or not there is a United Nations
presence there.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): The delegation of Burkina Faso voted in
favour of the draft resolution submitted to us because
we wanted, at this stage, for the United Nations to be
able to maintain a presence in the region without the
mission finding itself in legal limbo. The parties would
then have had an opportunity to pursue negotiations on
questions of substance. We regret that the Council was
unable to approve this technical renewal of the
mandate for a few extra weeks.
In spite of it all, my delegation would like to
believe in the will of all parties to overcome their
current differences, however deep-seated they may be,
in order to allow the United Nations to maintain a

09-37028

The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Turkey.
Turkey believes in the necessity of the United
Nations presence in Georgia. It is for that reason that
we awaited with great expectation a positive outcome
to the negotiations within the Group of Friends.
Unfortunately, the Group was unable to come to an
understanding on the issue until last night. In order not
to cause an abrupt termination of the United Nations
presence, we agreed to co-sponsor a simple technical
rollover that would have extended the present mandate
by two more weeks. That could have provided
additional time to conduct further consultations on the
issue. Unfortunately, that was not possible. So we are
where we are now.
This should not be seen as Turkey’s giving up the
efforts to provide a United Nations presence in
Georgia. There is definitely a need for a safety valve.
On the other hand, Turkey will continue to support the
unity and territorial integrity of Georgia.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
our sincere thanks to the men and women of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia for their
professionalism and dedicated service since 1993.
I now resume my functions as the President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Representative
of Georgia.
Mr. Lomaia (Georgia): The Government of
Georgia deeply regrets the termination of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) due
to the unconstructive position of the Russian
Government. The Mission has long played an
important role in bringing a level of security and
stability to the Abkhazia region of Georgia. The fact
that it is being terminated by virtue of a single
country’s opposition is of great concern to my
Government and should weigh heavily on this
institution.
It is important to keep in mind that Russia’s
rejection of this Mission is not an isolated act, but

9

S/PV.6143

rather a part of a larger strategy — one that began even
before Russia’s invasion last summer. It seems
determined to roll back the international community’s
presence in Georgia. Just last month, Russia also
vetoed the continuation of the mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
I would like to express my gratitude to the men
and women of UNOMIG for their hard work in
protecting the human rights of the remaining
population of the occupied region of Georgia. Their
good work has consistently been undermined by
Russian military forces and Moscow’s proxy
administration on the ground. On behalf of my
Government, I would also like to thank those countries
friends of Georgia, in the Council and beyond, that
have worked hard to continue the Mission. We are
grateful for their determined efforts and for their
support of our sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
will continue to work with them to ensure security
throughout the country. The role of the European
Union monitoring mission in that respect is very
important.
The bottom line with respect to the termination of
UNOMIG is this: There will be fewer opportunities to
provide unbiased information on either the security
situation or human rights violations. The termination of
UNOMIG also means that it will be more difficult to
witness or document any build-up or movement of
Russian troops in the region. It also should be noted
that the Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/254) of
18 May 2009 clearly confirmed that Russia is in
complete violation of resolution 1866 (2009). It is
evident that Russia does not wish to have any witnesses
who can confirm its disrespect and breach of
international obligations. Through that non-constructive
behaviour, Russia continues to breach the ceasefire
agreement of 12 August 2008, as well as the diplomatic
measures of 8 September 2008 moderated by the then
French presidency of the European Union.
The facts are clear. Russia is not honouring the
commitments it undertook under legally binding
international agreements. Russia has gone further into
self-imposed isolation on the fundamental issues of
respecting other countries’ sovereignty and territorial
integrity, thus widening the gap between itself and the
rest of the world.
Today, 400,000 men, women and children — the
survivors of several waves of ethnic cleansing, those

10

whose right to return to their homes has been
stubbornly denied by Russia and its proxies — are
looking to the international community with hope.
They do not expect the international community to give
up on its efforts to restore a measure of justice. What
they expect are new and even more energetic efforts on
the part of the whole international community that
would eventually result in their dignified and secure
return to their homes.
The President: The Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make
an additional statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I must draw attention to a procedural flaw in
today’s meeting, which of course has a serious political
subtext and is one of the reasons that we are today
seeing the end of the work of the United Nations
Mission in the Abkhaz-Russian border region.
We have been very patient for many years now
although, like today, it has been very difficult to be
patient while hearing very non-objective words, to put
it mildly, on the part of Georgia’s representative. We
have, however, listened patiently. Throughout these
years, Abkhaz representatives have not been given an
opportunity to inform Council members of their
position during a conflict that has existed for many
years in the Abkhaz Georgian region, which culminated
in the tragic events of August 2008.
I could, of course, be very critical of the
statement made by the Georgian representative, but I
will not do so. There simply is not enough time. But I
would agree on one thing, namely, that we have a
genuinely positive view of the work of those who have
worked in the United Nations Mission throughout the
years. The Georgian representative is wrong, however,
in saying that that work has been hindered by the
Russian military. I recall that all reports of the
Secretary-General give a positive assessment of
cooperation between the United Nations Mission and
peacekeepers of the Commonwealth of Independent
States, which mainly include Russian military
personnel, and of the contribution of our peacekeepers
in support of stability in the region, which was violated
by Georgia’s aggression against South Ossetia.
I must also call attention to two or three
references with which I did not agree. Statements by
some of our colleagues have included erroneous
interpretations of our position, which we must correct.

09-37028

S/PV.6143

In particular, the Permanent Representative of
France said that our proposed draft resolution on a
possible future mission of the United Nations in the
Abkhaz-Georgian border region included certain terms
that would be politically difficult for Western
colleagues to agree with. Let us say that is so. Many
such terms were included in the draft put forward by
our Western partners. But we are not discussing today
why our efforts on a major resolution to establish a
new United Nations mission in the Abkhaz conflict
zone failed. We are talking about a draft technical
rollover resolution that was introduced by the Group of
Friends. Russia also proposed a draft for a possible
extension, although in principle we believed that it was
time for more substantive measures.
I shall now read from the short draft resolution
that we proposed. Under the draft, which refers to all
the relevant resolutions and takes into consideration
the 18 May 2009 report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/254), the Security Council would “decide to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission
under consideration in the report to a new deadline of
15 July”. Thus, we were ready to include two
additional weeks.
What is politically unacceptable in that? Is it
Russia that has thrown a political spanner in our work
to extend the United Nations Mission, or those who

09-37028

hastened to submit today’s draft, with its politicized
technical roll-over proposal, to the Council? I would
urge us not to give ourselves a big headache over this.
I have one final comment. Many, or at least some
of our colleagues referred to territorial integrity. That is
a very important principle, but there is one interesting
twist to it. I do not recall how many meetings of the
Council have been held following the events of August
2008, but have those who claim to support territorial
integrity condemned even once Georgia’s aggression
against South Ossetia? No one raised that issue in the
statements that were made today. That omission is one
of the reasons why, unfortunately, our work on
developing a draft resolution that would have
mandated new, useful functions to the United Nations
in that region ended in failure. There has been a lack of
objective analysis. I do not even call for a self-critical
analysis, but merely for an objective analysis of what
happened and how the outcome of those events should
be viewed today.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.05 p.m.

11
