59

V, Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3.
4.
5.

General debate.
Processes and causes of desertification.
Plan of action to combat desertification.

6.

Credentials of representatives to the Conference: report
of the Credentials Committee.
Adoption of the report of the Conference.

7.

31/109.

Habitat: United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3001 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, 3128 (XXVIII) of 13 December 1973,
3325 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974 and 3438 (XXX)
of 9 December 1975 on the preparations for Habitat:
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements,
Considering that solutions to human settlements problems around the world are urgently required,
Bearing in mind the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order1 G and the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States 16 and the importance for the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade of improving human
settlements around the world as a major component
in improving the quality of life,
Noting that Habitat: United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements was held at Vancouver from 31
May to 11 June 1976:
(a) To stimulate innovation, serve as a means
for the exchange of experience and ensure the widest
possible dissemination of new ideas and technologies
in the field of human settlements,
(b) To formulate and make recommendations for
an international programme in this field which will
assist Governments,

( c) To stimulate interest in developing appropriate
financial systems and institutions for human settlements among those making financial resources available and those in a position to use such resources, considering that the most appropriate and effective action
for dealing with human settlements problems is action at
the national level, but that such action will require
assistance and co-operation between and among all
States,
1. Expresses its appreciation and thanks to the
Government of Canada for the excellent organization,
facilities and generous hospitality provided for Habitat:
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements;

2. Expresses appreciation to the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme for the
guidance as well as the generous support it provided
for the Conference;
3. Takes note of the report of the Conference, including the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements, 1976, 17 the recommendations for national acrn Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI); see also resolution 3362 (S-VII) entitled "Development and international
economic co-operation".
16 Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
17 Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7
and corrigendum), chap. I.

18

tion
and the resolutions for international co-operation ;19
4. Commends the Secretary-General of the Conference on the successful preparation and organization
of the Conference;
5. Urges the Goverments of all Member States to
consider, on a priority basis, the recommendations for
national action contained in the report and to take
those recommendations into account when reviewing
their existing policies and strategies in the field of
human settlements;
6. Calls upon the regional commissions and urges
all other international organizations within and outside
the United Nations system to take intensified and sustained action in support of national efforts, including
exchanges of information and assistance, at the request
of Governments, in the formulation, design, implementation and evaluation of projects to improve human
settlements;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to convene regional meetings, as appropriate, within the framework
of the regional commissions, to establish guidelines for
the co-ordination, within each region, of action to be
taken in order to deal with human settlements and to
report to the General Assembly on the results of their
deliberations no later than at the thirty-second session;
8. Takes note of the notes by the Secretary-General
transmitting reports on the regional meetings already held within the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Economic Commission for Europe.20

101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976

31/II0.

Living conditions of the Palestinian
people

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human
Settlements, 197 6, 21 and the recommendations for national action 22 adopted by Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements, held at Vancouver
from 31 May to 11 June 1976,
Recalling also resolution 3 of the Conference28 on
living conditions of the Palestinians in occupied territories, and Economic and Social Council resolution
2026 (LXI) of 4 August 1976,
Recalling further the recommendation adopted at the
Regional Preparatory Conference for Asia and the Pacific, held at Teheran from 14 to 19 June 1975,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the relevant United Nations organs and specialized
agencies, to prepare and submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session a report on the living
conditions of the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories;
tS Ibid., chap. II.
10 Ibid., chap. III.
20 A/C.2/31/5, A/C.2/31/9.
2 1 Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human

Settlements (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7
and corrigendum), chap. I.
22 Ibid., chap. II.
2 3 ibid., chap. Ill.
