PLENARY MUTING

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

Thur,day, 14 December 1950,",8 p.m.

FIFTH SESSION
OfJicialRecords

Flushing Meadow, New York

I

I!

325th

United Nations

l.

CONTENTS
Page

Announcement by the President .••...••...••••.•...••.•.••••.......••• 665
Report of the Economic and Social Council (chapters V, VI and VII):
report of the Third Committee (Ajl689) ..•.•.••.••.••••...•.•.••.• 666
Freedom of information: reports of the Third Committee (A/1630) and
the FnthCommittee (A/1667) ••.•••••.••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 666
Complaint of failure on the part of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
to repatriate or otherwise account for prildWers of war detained in
Soviet territory: reports of the Third Committee (A/1690) and the
Fifth Committee (A/1718) .•••••••.•.•.•••••••••.••.•...•••.•...• 668
Refugees and stateless persons: reports of the Third Committee (A/I682)
and the FHth Committee (A/I684 and A/1719) and note by the Secretary-General (A/1716) ••••••......••• .. • •. • . • • • • • • • • •. . • • . . •. .. 669
Former Italian colonies: election of the United Nations C1Jmmissioner in
Eritrea: report of the Special Committee (A/1715) ••••••••••••••••• 674
Statement by two delegations concerning the voting on agenda item 76. • • • •. 675
Recognition by the United Nations of the representation of a Member State:
report of the Ad Hoc Political Committee (A/1578 and Add.!) •
675
0 •

•

• •

••

Palestine: (c) repatriation of Palestine refugees and payment of compensation due to them; implementation of General Assembly resolutions
regarding this question; and (d) report of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine: reports of the. Ad Hoc Political
Committee (A/l646) and the Fifth Committee (A/1678) •••••••••••• 677
Report of the Security Council: report of the Ad Hoc Political Committee
(A/1679) •.•.••••••....•.•.•••••• "............................. 680
The appropriate adjustment of the frontiers between Egypt and the former
Italian colony of Libya, with particular reference to paragraphs 2 and 3
c: annex XI of the Treaty of Peace with Italy: report of the :Ad Hoc
Poluical Conrnrrnttee (~1720) .•••••••••••••••••••••••..••••.••.•• 681
President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM: (Iran).

Announcement by the PreeIdent

Fm.ornicongad~Pted[Aa/d17ra1f7t]resoluti<!n stbubmpitte<!-dbY !}le

lI'St
mnuttee
requesting .e reslent to
constitute a group of three persons, including himself,
fore resuming the consideration of our agenda, I should
to determine the basis on which a satisfactory cease-fire
h"ke to draw attentior" to the fact that the Assembly this66:n Korea can be arranged".

! 1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : Be-

,

rA/PV.325 .

I

666_~:.:=--

---

-=G:..:e....
n:..:..el'_al_A.:....:...88.:...e_m_b_l.::..y__-F_if-th_ _S_e_88_i_OD_.-_ _P_I_e_D_IU'. .;Y;.. . ._M_e_e_t_io...;g;.....8

2. I am happy to announce that Sir Benegal Rau and
Mr. Pearson have acceded to my l'~quest and~ together
with myself, will constitute this committee.

Report of the Eeoaomie and Sootal Councll
(ehapters V, VI and VD): report 0:( the Third
Committee (A/16a9)
[Agenda ite:-n 12]
3. The PRESIDENT (translated from, F1'enc4): I
put the draft resnlution contained in the report of the
Third Committee [Aj1689] to the vote.
The draft resolution was adotted by 47 votes to none,

with 5 abstentions.

Freed()lm of information: reports of the Third
C~mmittee (A/1630) and the Fifth Committee

(A/1667)

[Agenda item 30]
4. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
shall put draft resolutions A, Band C contained in the
report of the Third Committee [AI1630] to the vote in
tun::..
Draft resolution A was adopted by 49 votes to 5.
5. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) ~ I
call upon the r€ryresentative of the Soviet Union, who
wishes to explain his vote.
6. Mr. SOLDATOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian) : The USSR delegation voted against the draft resolution approved by the
Third Committee on the question of "interference with
radio signals".
7. As was pointed out by the representative of the
f,o"\!iet Union in the Third Committee,1 those who submitted that question to the General Assembly di~ so
because they sought to take advantage of the Umted
Nations and its proclaimed principles of freedom. of
information in order to conduct unlimited "psychological
warfare". Such warfare has been undertaken by the
ruling circles of the United States and the United
Kingdom against the nation~ and democratic movement
. in Asia and elsewhere and also against a number of
States, including the USSR, the peoples' democracies
and the Chinese People's Republic.
8. It was only to be expected that the countries against
which such "psychological warfare" was conducted
should take measures to counteract it in order to paralyse
the aggressor, to defend their peoples fr?m the consequences of that type of attack and to nulllfy and render
ineffective a weapon of aggression which was formerly
used only in time of war. The States against which
llpsychological warfare" has been directed have, in f!lct,
taken measures to counteract that type of aggressIOn.
There can be no doubt regarding the legality and justice
of those counter-measures against aggression by radio.
9. In 1947, the GeneraJ Assembly adopted a resolution
on l'Measures to be taken against propaganda and thf~
inciters of a new wae' [resolution 110 (II)] and ,q,
re...(t()lution on "False or distorted reports" [resolution
127 (11)]; its aim was to prevent the enjoyment of
1 For the dii:lCllssion on this subject in the Third Committee,
see. Official R.ecorcls of the General A.ssem~ly, F,ifth Session,
Third Comm~ttee, 317th to 324th meetmgs mcluslVe.

,

freedom of information at the expense of peace and
international security or of the development of cooperation and friendly relations among nations. The
first of thDse resolutions provides that the General
Assembly "condemns all forms of propaganda, in whatsoever country conducted, which is either designed or
L~ely to nrovoke or encourage any threat to the peace,
breach ofthe peace, or act of aggression".
10. The USSR delegation considers that the draft
resolution on i=~tetierence with radio sir",nals, which was
approved in the Third Committee and has just been
ad::;pted by the General Assembly, and which condemns
such interference and invites all Members of the United
Nations to refrain from such practices, is contrary to the
purposes and principles of the Organization. .
11. The task of the United Nations is, of course, to
maintain international peace and security, to develop
friendly relations among nations and to take the necessary steps to strengthen world peace. But the draft
resolution which was submitted to the General Assembly
and has now been adopt.ed is not intended to further
those aims; it is intended to encourage only the kind of
action which belligerents take against each other in war,
action which is inadmissible in time of peace and when
relations among States are normal.
12. It is clear that the provisions of this resolution are
unfavourable to the maintenance of peace; they are in
flagrant conflict with the United Nations Charter and
with the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
against propaganda and incitement to war, and also
against the dissemination of false or distorted reports.
13. In the USSR delegation's view, the resolution on
interference with radio signals is an attempt by the
ruling circles of the United States, under cover of a
distorted and false interpretation of the principle of
freedom of information, to justify the conduct of
"psychological radio warfare" and also to make it
difficult for States which are subjected to such aggression to exercise their right to defend themselves against
hostile, lying and slanderous reports.
14. The Soviet Un!On considers that any State which
desires the maintenance and strengthening of international peace and security llnd the development of international co-operation and friendly relations among
people$, should take all possible measures to encourage
the dissemination of correct and objective reports, reports which are not dictated by publishing trusts and
syndicates and which are designed to further the maintenance and strengthening of interpational peace and
security. The USSR therefore considers that each State
should take measures to ~nsttre that freedom of speech
and of the Press is v~t used for war prr.paganda, for
arousing hostility among nations, for racial discrimination or for the dis~emination of slanderous rumours.
15. The rE'~'}lution which has just been adopted and
which denies States the right to interfere with hostile
radio propaganda conducted against them as part of a
campaign of "psychological warfare", is injurious to the
vital interests 'Of peoples and, as I have already pointed
out, is in conflict with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. The USSR delegation considers that
the adoption of such a resolution is solely in the interests
of those who have started and are striving to extend and
intensify the cold war and the widespread use of all
means of "psychological radio warfare".

325th Meetlng-14
December 1950
,
16. The delegation of the Soviet Union considers that
States which desire the maintenance and strengthening
of peace and the development of friendly relations among
nations, should not raise the question of interference
with radio signals, which is a reply to hostile propaganda
and a means of. defence against aggression by radio;
the question they should raise is that of the cessation.of
the "psychologkal warfare" which is being carried on on
a large scale by the GovernMent of the United States,
with the support of the United Kingdom and some other
countries, and of the dissemination of hostile propaganda
directed against certain States, against which Vlashington and London have been carrying on an extensive
campaign of "cold warfare" for the past few years. The
essential question to be raised is that of the cessation of
propaganda which is either designed or likely to provoke
or encourage any threat to the peace, breach of the
peace, or act of aggression.

17. It is essential that measures should be taken to
facilitate and extend the dissemination in all countries
of infonnation likely to improve mutual understanding
among peoples and to ensure friendly relations among
them; it is essential, also, that measures should be taken
to comb-at the dissemination of false or distorted reports,
which may impair friendly relations among States.
18. For all these reasons, the USSR delegation voted
against the draft resolution on "interference with radio
signals".

19. Mr. HAJDU (Czechoslovakia) : The Czechoslovak
delegation voted against the draft resolution concerning
interference with radio. signals because we gather that
the intention of its sponsors was primarily to divert the
attention of the Assembly from an organized campaign
of radio propaganda which constitutes a direct threat to
peace, is based on misinterpretation, misinformation and
distortion of facts, and is beamed daily for ten full hours
to my country.

20. The Third Committee. took cognizance of facts
brDught before it by some delegations concerning inter..
ference with the internal ·affairs of States by means of
broadcasts from official, semi-official· or unofficial radio
stations. Such broadcasts not only spread untruth and
deliberately seek to harm the economic relations between
my country and other countries, but they are made from
stations which lend their time and wave-lengths to
deserten and traitors to my country and to people who
have been condemned or are being sought by the penal
courts of the Czechoslovak Republic.

21. The re.;olution which condemns interference with
radio signals does not condemn these very serious infractions of the provisions of the Charter which are committed daily by United State.'s, British and other stations
in Europe and western G,~rmany by instigating the
citizens of one of the Member States of the United
Nations against their legal 2\\ud freely elected government.

22. This biased attitude had to be repudiated,' and the
Czechoslovak delegation therefore found it necessary to
vote against the draft resolution.

23., The PRESIDENT (translated from French)': I
shall now put draft resolutions Band C of the Third
Cotnmittee [4./1630] to the vote.

Draft resolution B was adopted by 41 'Votes to 5, with
2 abstentions.
D1,-'Jt resolution C was adopted by 44 votes to none,
with 12 abstentions.
24. The PRESIDENT \ translated from French): I
call UpOl1 the representative of Mexico, who wishes to
explain his vote.
25. Mr. NORIEGA (Mexico) (translated from
Spanish): It is at times of crisis that human beings,
peoples and governments are able to demonstrate the
full value of the individual virtues or the institutions
characteristic of nations. It is at times of crisis that the
finest spiritual qualities have an opportunity of conquering fear and showing the strength and sincerity of
conviction.
26. The· drama of our age has been 'presented most
forcefully from the rostrum of this Assembly and the
controversy has been all the more tragic because what
is at st~ke is peace and the lives of millions of human
beings.
27. It is essential that int~rnational problems should
not be examined solely from the point of view of political
or economic domination, for in that course would lie the
risk of adopting a hostile or indifferent attitude towards
all that can be regarded as important to the liberation
of the spirit.
28. As though we were living at the beginnh'lg of a new
mediaeval era, the shadow of negativism is spreading
threateningly over us, and freedom is repudiated or
despised under the pretext of defending democracy. The
most immediate manifestation of this threat is censorship
and the denial of academic freedom.
29. The United Nations, whose Assembly has been
callerl. the world parliament, cannot be a party to this
decline, which would have terrible and immeasurable
consequences for our civilization and our culture. Now,
more than ever, it is essential that the United Nations
should act firmly to protect fundamental human rights
and freedoms. The resolutions adopted today concerning freedom of information are a step in that direction.
30. There is no ne~cl for me to demonstrate a. fact
which is common knowledge, namely, that freedom. to
impart and to receive information and opinions is the
basis, the mainspring, of all other rights and freedoms.
31. We should be joining in a shabby farce if, while
supporting certain postulates and principles which make
it possible for men and women to live under conditions
worthy of their personality in our democratic worldand that is the aim of the convention on human. rights-we concurred in the destruction or weakening of freedom
of speech on the pretext that we feared certain dangers.
It would also be unworthy if, on grounds of having to
deal with an emergency, or on grounds of so-called
higher preoccupations or of duties claimed to be urgent,
we were to refuse to afford full protection to freedom of
information which, if based on facts, forms the. con-.
science of the world.
32. .That is why the Mexican delegation, acting on the
iustructioris of its government, made it clear that it was
prepared to study the draft convention on freedom of
information at tlie current session. The agenda of the
Third· Committee, however, was excessively heavy;

1668

!

Genere1 Auembly-Fifth Sen1on-l'lenary reetinga

henc:e a draft resolution was fiIIally approved which

provided that a conference of plenipotentiaries should
asswlle responsibility for drafting atld approving the
cortvention next year.
!
33. Yet scarcely twentyMfour hours after that draft
, resolution had been approved in the Third Committee,
I
critical and discouraging voices were already engaged in
tarnishing our hopes for the future.
M. Despite this pessimistic note, the Mexican delegation is confident that the fundamental aim of the convention which is to b~ adopted will be, not to restrict
freedom of information but, in the first place, to protect
it. Furthermore, the text must not be so ambitious or so
complicated as to be as useless as a ship would be if it
were too big for the sea.
35. Those who think that the destiny of our peoples
will be decided on the field of battle seem to be unaware
of the lessons of history. The sword l'.eas never been
mightier than the pen, and it has never been less strOllg
. than when the pen ha.s been firmly wielded in defence
of the truth. But even among those who wield the pen
there are battles. It is to be hoped-for the good name of
our peoples, for the protection of journalists and as a
proof of the honourable intentions of our governmentsthat of all the battles which may be fought in the preparatory committee of the conference, the last will be
won by freedom of information. It is also to be hoped
that that victory will be secured and safeguarded by
an instrument-the first of its kind in international
history-which will be operative in all parts of the world
as a bulwark for the defence of the other human rights
and freedoms which constitute the lifeblood of our
peoples and as a shield to serve i'ankind in its march
towards a future free from fear.
t
~

I
[

Complaint of fallure on the part of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics to repatriate or
otherwise aecount for pris6ners of war detained in Soviet territory: re~rt8 of the ThIrd
Committee (Aj1690) and the Fifth Committee
(Aj1718)
[Agenda item 67]
36. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put the draft resolution contained in the report of the
Third Committee [A/16901 to the vote.
The draft resolution was adopted by 43 'Ootes to 51
with 6 abst,entions.
.
37. Mr. PODTSEROB (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : The delegation
. of the Soviet Union. deems it necessary to explain its
vote on the draft resolution submitted by the Third
Committee on Japanese and German prisoners of war.
38. The raising of this question in the General Assembly an'!! the adoption of any decisions on it are contrary'
to tl!~ Charter of the United Nations, Article 107 of
wmth precludes the discussion of such questions by
organs of the United Nations, as the USSR delegation
explained in detail in the Third Committee.
39. At the same time the delegation. of the Soviet
Union stated that the repatriation of prisoners of war
ftem that country had long been completed, a. fact that
had been announced in the Press. Thus the question of
the repatriation of prisoners of war from the USSR is
-

t~'

completely closed. To raise this CJ.uestion in the General
Assembly and to adopt a resQlution on it is contrary to
the Charter and serves no useful purpose.
40. On the other hand, when the question was discussed in the Third Committee," the Soviet Union
delegation cited wellMestablished facts proving that the
Governments of the United States, France: and Austrd,1ia had failed to carry out their obligations to
repatriate German and Japanese prisoners of war,
hundreds of thousands of whom had not yet been returned to their homes. Those facts were never refuted
during the meetings of the Committee.
41. For these t"easons, the USSR delegation voted
ag-cl.inst the aforementioned draft resolution.
42. Mr. DEVINAT (France) (translated from
French) : The repatriation of prisoners of war, and the
solution proposed by the Third Committee which we
have just adopted, are not, in our view, political questions. We are thinking exclusively of the anguish of all
those wives and mothers, of all those families who, so
long after the end of hostilities, are still awaiting news
of their missing ones and wondering whether they wiU
ever return.
43. There have been contradictory statements regarding the existence of non-repatriated prisoners in certain
territories; those very contradictions help to keep alive
the hopes of many families. How can one be absolutely
certain that despite investigation no individual cases
have been overlooked in some place? That is why the
resolution requests. all governments to undertake new
investigations and that is also why, in an effort to achieve
a strictly humanitarian solution acceptable to all, it
establishes a completely impartial commission to settle
this very poignant problem.
44. France has particular reason to take an interest in
this problem owing to the fact that a number of its
nationals from Alsace and Lorraine, who were impressed
against their will into the service of the former enemy
armies, have not yet returned to their homes, nor has it
been possible to establish what has happened to them.
We have sought to settle this problem, which concerns
my own country, by the method of diplomatic negotiations, a method in which we wish to continue to place
our fullest trust. The resolution also seeks, by other
means, a humanitarian solution. We therefore supported
it with our vote.
45. Mr. DROHOJOWSKI (Poland): I should not
have explained the vote of my delegation if I had not
heard some words which to my delegation seemed not to
represent the true spirit of the resolution. I shall not
reply, as it is not my right to do so at this time. I just
wanted to state the reasons why my delegation voted
against the draft resolution.
46. The item was introduced into our agenda as a sort
of propaganda weapon against the Soviet Union. It was
most certainly not brought forward for humanitarian
reaSOns only. It is clear to evr·.ryone who has read the
Cb~rter that this matter does not fall within the competence of the United Nations. I should like to read
Article 107 of the Charter:.
.
2 See OfJicial Records of the General Assembl~1 Pifth Session, Third Committee, 338th to MOth and 342nd to 345th
meetings inclusive.

S25th Meeling-l4- Deeembe... 1950
United Nations? The delegation of the Bye10russian
SSR considers that there is no such need nor can there
be such need. All that is required is that the Governments
of the United States, the United Kingdom and France
should implement the resolutions on the question of
refugees and displaced persons adopted by the General
Assembly at its first and second sessions [resolutions
8 (I), 62 (I) and 136 (11)]; the problem will then
cease to exist.
54. In view of these facts, the delegation of the Bye1orussian SSR is opposed to, and will vote against, the
draft resolutions on refugees and stateless persons
approved by the Third Committee.
'
55. The policy'of the United States, the United King-dom and France is unjustifiable and has rightly been
condemned. That policy, which is deliberately to refrain
from implementing United Nations resolutions and
thereby to undermine the very foundations of this
Organization, constrains us to hold the view that the
resolution should clearly state that the General Assembly notes the failure of the Governments of the United
States, the United Kingdom, France and other countries
to
implement its resolution 8 (I) of 12 February 1946,
Refugees and stateless persons: .reports of the
in
which the Assembly recommended that displaced
Third Committee (A/I682) and the Fifth Compersons
should be encouraged and assisted to return to
mittee (A/1684 and A/1719) and note by the
their countries of origin as soon as possible.
Secretary-General (AJ1716)
56. The General Assembly should further recommend
[Agenda item 32]
to the governments of the afore-mentioned countries,
49. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : We
and to the governments of other countries in whose
shall now consider the question of refugees and stateless . territories there are still refugees and displaced persons,
persons. The report of the Third Committee [A/168Z]
that they should take the necessary steps to complete
contains four draft resolutions.
the repatriation of those displaced persons and refugees
during 1951. We feel that the time limit of one year is
50. Mr. KISELEV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
more than adequate to complete repatriation and to
Republic) (translated ff'om Russian) : The delegation
close
the problem once and for all.
of the Byelorussian SSR deems it essential to give a
brief explanation of its votes on the draft resolutions
57. It is essential, in ord~r to ensure repatriation, to
approved by the majority in the Third Committee.
inclUde in the resolution a paragraph proposing to the
governments of Member States of the United Nations
51. The debate in the Third Committee on the question
8
in whose territories. there are refugees and ~splaced
of refugees and displaced persons confirmed our convicpersons that they should submit to the United Nations
tion that the Governments of the United States, the
Secretariat full information regarding the refug~s in
United Kingdom and France, as well as the administratheir
territories.
.
tion of the International Refugee Organization, are
directly to blame for the fact that displaced persons are
58. All these provisions are to be found in the draft
not being repatriated. They are making every effort to
resolution submitted by the delegation of the Byelokeep the refugees and displaced persons in a state of
russian SSR [A/1683]. The delegation of the Bye1obondage and to place on Member States of the United
russian SSR considers that steps must be taken to
Nations the burden of expenditure which will be inrepatriate ail displaced per~ons during 1951.
volved in the appointment of a High Commissioner
59. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
for refugees and the establishment of a High Comshall now put draft resolution A of the Third Committee
missioner's Office for refugees.
to the vote. Before doing so, however, I would ask the
52. That is why the General Assembly, instead of
Assembly to note the fact that the Australian delegation
being called upon to consider the question of returning
requests a separate vote, by division, on sub-paragraph
refugees and stateless persons to their countries of origin
(iv) of paragraph 7 of chapter 11 of the nnnex· to the
as rapidly as possible, has had thrust upon it the task of
draft. resolution.
formulating provisions fo.\' the functioning of the High
60. I put the first part of sub-paragraph (Iv) to the
Commissioner's Office for refugees and preparing a
vote, as far as the words "treaties of extradition".
convention relating to the status of refugees. That is also
A vote was taken by J:how of hands.
why it has been sought to evolve a definition of.the term
"refugee" which may be used to prevent displaced per61. The. PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
sons from returning to their countries.
do not think th~ Assembly has understood me correctly.
It seems amazmg that a draft resolution which was
53. Is there any need, however; to set up a High
approved
by so large a majority:n the Committee sho1dd
Commissioner's Office within the fratnework of the
receive only two votes here. I repeat that I am first going
a·Ibid., 324th to 338th, 34Ist and 344th meetings.
to put the first part of the suo"paragraph to the vote.
.

·'Nothing in the present Charter shall invalidate or
preclude action, in relation to any State which during
the Second World War has been an enemy of any
signatory to the present Charter, taken or authorized
as a result of that war by the governments' having
responsibility for such action."
47. This question falls withir~ the exclusive competence
of the Council of Foreign Minib'ters, the Allied Control
Council and certain other orgal1.S, as provided for by
the Potsaal:l agreement.
.
48. Provocative anti-Soviet accusations were made by
certain delegations in connexion with the discussion of
this question, but nothing substantial was produced nor
was any evidence produced. No good service to peace or
to the United Nations will be rendered by using such a
resolution for purposes. of a. purely propagandisnc nature.
The resolution intends to pecpetuate the old problem,
contrary to the Charter and to the Potsdam agreement.
I wish to state most emphatically that this is not the first
time that this Assembly's authority is being used to
infringe upon international agreements.

670

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings
·

,

the return Qf displaced persons to their countries of
origin.
71. As early as 1945, the G.overnment of the USSR
concluded agreements with the Governments of the
United States, the United Kingdom and France, providing for the immediate repatriation of all Soviet citizens
and the prohibition of the dissemination of anti-Soviet
propaganda among such persons, and laying down the
conditions for their accommodation in camps until such
time'as they were handed over to the appropriate Soviet
authorities.. Later, on 12 February 1946, the General
Assembly adopted a resolution in which it was also
pointed out that "the main task concerning displaced
persons is to encourage and assist in every way possible
their early return to their countries of origin".
The remainder of sub-paragraph (iv) was adopted by
72. The USSR Government has carried out its obligations under these agreements and under the General
24 votes to 8, with 14 abstentions.
Assembly resolution in full, and has long since com64. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
pleted
the repatriation of nationals of the United Kingnow put draft resolution A, together with its annex, to
dom,
the
United States, and France and other countries
tlve vote.
who were liberated by Soviet forces during the Second
Draft resolution A was adopted by 36 votes to 5, with
World War. The same cannot be said of the Govern11 abstentions.
ments of the United States, the United Kingdom and
France. Despite the General Assembly decision that
65. The¥ PRESIDENT (translated from French):
displaced
persons should be encouraged and assisted to
Some delegations wish to explain their votes.
return to their countries of origin, the United States,
66. Lord MACDONALD (United Kingdom): My
British and French authorities are preventing their
intervention will be very brief. We as a delegation feel
repatriation in every possible way and are illegally and
that we ought to explain very shortly why the United
forcibly detaining tens of thousands of displaced persons
Kingdom abstained on the resolution establishing the . -nationals of the USSR, Poland, Czechoslovakia and
statute of the United Nations High Commissioner's
other countries-in the western zones of Germany and
Office for refugees. We <::onsider that the definition of
Austria and elsewhere.
the term "refugee" in the~ statute is unsatisfactory. We
73. The International Refugee Organization also sysconsider it unsatisfactory for two reasons.
tematicalljt violated General Assembly resolution 8 (I)
67. In the first place, th~ paragraph excluding from the
on the repatriation of displaced persons; it hampered
competence of the High Commissioner persons who are
repatriation in every possible way, becoming, in effect,
guilty of war crimes or of acts contrary to the purposes
an office for the recruitment· of refugees and displaced
and principles of tb~United Nations gives to the
persons whom it settled under duress in various coun~
executive organs ot governn";nts a power to take what
tries as a labour force to perform onerous tasks under
are essentially judicial decisions. We consider that it :1s
conditions of slavery.
dangerous to entrust such a power to the executive
74. It is clear from the foregoing that the Governments
organ of a government. Secondly, we consider that the
of
the United States, the United Kingdom and France,
present drafting of paragraphs 6, 7 and 8 of the t~tatute
as
well as the International Refugee Organization,. are
of the High Commissioner's Office is unsatisfact01:y.
responsible for the failure to carry out various decisions
68. Having stated those two reasons very briefly, let
and agreements adopted with regard to displaced
me make it perfectly plain that, despite our ab~tentionr persons.
the United Kingdom Government will give wholehearted
75. It is now proposed that we should establish a sosupport to the High Commissioner in his important task.
caJl1ed
High Commissioner's Office for refugees. This
We are convinced that the appointment of a United
mleasure
is intended to prevent the repatriation of
Nations High Commissioner isa practical and useful
refugees
and
to keep them in the countries to which
step, although we do fear that he may have difficulty in
they were forcibly sent. It is intended to perpetuate the
practice in determining the persons whom he is combondage of refugees and displaced persons and to doom
petent to protect. Whoever the Commissioner may be,
them
to hunger and the privation of rights.
however, he may rest assured that the United Kingdom
Government will give him its full support.
76. In that connexion, something should be said about
the definition of the term "refugee" approved by the
69. Mr. SOLDATOV (Union of Soviet Socialist ReThird
Committee in considering the statute of the High
publics) (translated from Russian) : I should like briefly
Commissioner's Office for refugees. According to this
to explain the reasons for the USSR delegation's vote on
definition,
a r~fugee is to be any person who, as a result
the Third Committee's draft resolutions concerning the
of
events
occurring
before 1 January 1951 and owing
statute of the High Commissioner's Office for refugees
to
well-founded
fear
of being persecuted for reasons of
and the definition of the term "refugee".
race, religion, nationality or political opinion, is outside
70. It is well known that there are a number of inter- the country of his nationality and is unable to avail
national agreements, and a special resolution of the
himself of the protection of the government of that
General Assembly [resolution 8 (I)], on the question of
country. Thus the General Assembly is now invited to

A vote in favour of the first part does not mean a vote
in iavour of the second part; if a delegation wishes to
vote in favour of, the sub~pat'agraph as a whole, it must
vote for each part.
62. I put the first part of sub~paragraph (iv) to the
vote. It reads as follows: "In respect of whom there are
serious reasons for considering that he has committed a
crime covered by ~he provisions of treaties of extradi~
tion".
The first part of sub-paragraph (iv) was adopted by
37 votes to 6, 'l,C,-ith 9 ab.'itentions.
63. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
now put the remainder of sub-paragraph (~v) to the
vote.

325th Meeting-14 December 1950
regard as refugees all persons who are outside their own
countries as a result of events occurring before 1 January
1951. It is quite obvious that this refers to such events
as the liquidation of fascist and anti-democratic regimes
in a number of European countries. Th~re are persons
now outside their .own countries who opposed the
liquidation of such regimes and are hostile to the
democratic governments of these countries.
77. It is impossible to agree that persons unwilling to
avail themselves of the protectiqn of the country of their
nationality should be regarded as "refugees". The United
Nations should. not concern itself with these people since
they refuse to accept assistance from the government of
the country of which they are nationals and refuse to
co-operate with their own people in the reconstruction
of their country on :qew and democratic foundations.
78. It must be r~cognized that under this draft resolution even traitors and war criminals will fall into the
category of refugees and be accorded the aid andprotection of the United Nations.
79. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
You have been speaking for ten minutes now.
80. Mr. SOLDATOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated front Russian): I am about to
finish, Mr. President.
8!. The USSR delegation considers that persons who
collaborated in any way with the enemies of the
democratic countries should not be regarded as refugees
or enjoy the protection of the United Nations.· It considers it essential to exclude from the category of persons
who receive Uniteq. Nations assistance not only those
who, during the war, fought actively on the side of the
enemy against the people and government of their
country, but all those other traitors who are refusing to
return home to serve their country together with their
fellow citizens.
..
82. The delegation of the Soviet Union therefore voted
against the draft statute of the High Commissioner's
Office for refugees and the definition of the term
"refugee" it contains.
83. The USSR delegation considers that the only
correct solution to the question of refugees and displaced
persons is the unconditional fulfilment by the :Members
of the United Nations-and first and foremost by the
Governments of the United States, the United I{ingdom
and. France-of the terms of the General Assembly
resolution concerning the early return of displaced persons to their countries of origin, as well as the fulfilment
by those governments of the agreements existing on
this matter.
84. The delegation of the Soviet Union:will therefore
vote in favour of the draft resolution subnntted by the
delegation of the Byelorussian SSR I AJ1683] ; under
that resolution, the General Assembly would note the
failure of the Governments of the United States, the
United Kingdom, France and other countries to implement its resolution t)n encouraging and assisting the early
return of displaced persons to their countries of origin;
would recotntnend to the governments of the aforementioned countries that they should take steps to
implement the above-mentioned resolution so as to
complete th<:repatriation of the displaced persons and
refug'ees dutmg 19$1, and would propose to the govern..

671

ments of the States Members of the United Nations that
they should submit to the Secretariat of the Unit~d
Nations information regarding the refugees and dISplaced persons in their territories.
85. The delegation of the Soviet Union considers that
the adoption of this draft resolution and the implementa..
tion of its provisions would ensure an equitable solution
of the question of refugees and displaced perfJons.
86. Mr. ROCHEFORT (France) (translated from
French) : During the debate in the Committee, serious
charges were brought against our country by the Soviet
delegations. My delegation lI."eserved the right to reply to
them in plenary illeeting; it was prepared to reply and
it regrets that it does not have time to do so. Its reply
will therefore be brief.
87. The initiative taken by the French delegation. in
19494 to establish a High Commissioner's Office for
refugees is adequate proof of its good faith. It hoped that
a High Commissioner for refugees elected. not by
eighteen governments but by sixty. nations would be,as
it were, the eyes and the unbiased conscience of the
world, protecting refugees on behalf of their countries
of origin as well as of the countries which received them.
The fact that some delegations voted against a Yugoslav
amendment which recognized the purely social and
humanitarian nature of the functions of the High Commissioner does not alter the fact that those functions are
primarily humanitarian and social in character and that
politics does not enter into them at all. It was in order
to ensure that the High Commissioner would be an
impartial arbiter that the Third Committee decided to
neal with the refugee problem exhaustively, in a comprehensive and conciliatory spirit.
88. ConfJ::onted with two contradictory conceptions of
the High Commissioner's Office, one primarily political,
the other primarily social, the Committee did not feel
that the settlement -af this matter, which is understand..
ably of grave concern to countries which, like ours, have
to cope with serious refugee problems, should be allowed
tO'depend on a chance vote or two in favour of one or
other of the two conceptions. The Committee sought to
deal with the problem exhaustively, in an effort to
reconcile differences; its aim was to withdraw the
question completely from the sphere of political contrco..
versy and to view it solely in a social and humanitarian
context. It felt that the statute of the High Commis...
sioner's Office should he accepted not by the largest
number but by a very large number, so as to ensure
that the Commissioner enjoyed all the Q.L1thority he
needed for successful co,-operation with governments.
89. It is our fervent hope that the understanding and
sense of responsibility displayed in the Committee will
be kept alive, so that, under skilful and firm guidance,
this new ark, which bears. the hopes of so many refugees throughout the world, may wt:ather wind and
storm and flood-should they occur-and sail through
to better times-should they return. Whether we call
this ark the International Refugee Organization, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Pales,..
tine refugees, or the High Commissioner's Office for
refugees, it is still only the instrument of that interna4, See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, Third Committee, Annex, docun1ents A/C.3/529 and

A/G3/L.26.

tional solidarity without whiclt the beat solutions are

vain and man is powerless.

90. Mr. DEMCHENKO (Ukrainian Soviet SoclaUst
Republic) (lranslated f.,on~ Russian): The delegation
of the Ukrainian SSR wishes to make its position clear

words t'Decldes to convene.••" in paragraph 1 of the
operative part of the draft resolution. I put it to the
vote.

less persons.

The amendment 'Was adopted by 29 votes to 7, with
14 abstentions. •
.
97. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
now put draft r-esolution B, as amended, to the vote.
Draft resolution B, as amended, was adopted by 41
votes to 5, with 10 abstentions.
98. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
An amendment to draft resolution C has been submitted

1() abstentions.

The amendment 'Was adopted by 88 votes to 6, with
.
96. The PRESIDENT (translated trom Fr8nch):

with 10 abstentions.
106. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I shall now put the second paragraph to the vote. If I

The other amendment to draft resolution B has been
submitted by the Venezuelan dele~r, n[A/1125] •.It
calls for the insertion of the words 'in ;," ~!1eva" after the

understood the representati\Te of Pakistan rightly, he
asked for a separate vote on this paragraph because he
wished to propose the deletion of the words "of the

on the vote it cast on the ~~£t ret«'Jlution submitted to

the General Assembly concermag refugees and state-

.
91. When this question was being considered in the
Third Conunittee, the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR
pointed out that the real reason for the establishment
of a so-called United Nations High Commissioner'.
by the Venezuelan delegation [A/1725]. In my opinionll
Office for refugees was to p\"event the repat":ation of
however,
that amendment is not in order. It calls for
refugees. and displaced persons and to comPel them
the
deletion
of the draft resolution. Those· who were in
to remain in the countries to which they bad been forci..
favour of that amendment would vote against the draft.
bly removed. The establishment of the High CommisA proposal for deletion does not constitute an amendsioner's Office for refugees is therefore a violation of
ment.
the General Assembly resolution of 12 February 1946,
which expressly states that th(; main task concerning
99. The representative of Venezuela asks for an opdisplaced persons is to encourage and assist in ever1
portunity to explain why he believes that draft resoluway possible their early return to thl~ir countries of
tion C has become useless and should be deleted. For
origin. Moreover, by the establislunent: of the High
two reasons, however, I am unfortunately unable to
Commissioner's .Office for refugees, the Governments. give him the floor for such an explanation, although it
of the United State.s, the United. Ki.·ngdom and France
may be simple and desirable. In the first place, a proare seeking to place upon the United Nations the reposal for the deletion of a draft resolution is not an
sponsibility for their own failure to repatriate refugees
amendment. In the second place, according to the rules
and displaced persons.
of procedure the proposer of an amendment or a pro92. The definition given to the term t'refugee" in the posal is not entitled to explain his vc40, •
draft resolution submitted by the Third COmmittee is
100. The representative of Venezuela feels that, in
so arbitrary that traitors and war criminals are included
view of the fact that his amendment to resolution B has
in this category, so that such persons must also be
been adopted and that the words "in Geneva" have
given protection and assistance by the United Nations.
beel1 included in the first paragraph of the operative part
93. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR therefore of that resolution, draft resolution C has become mean";
ingless. The Assembly will take that observation into
'Voted against the. Graft resolution providing for the
account
when it votes.
.
establishment of a High Comrl.nsslOner's Office for
refugees; it will also v()te again,;t the draft iesolutions
101. I put draft resolution C to the vote.
on a draft convention !'elating trJ the status of refugees
Draft resolution C was not adopted, having obtained
and on problems of assistance to refugees.
only 2 votes.
.
94. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR consider&
102. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
that tb.e draft resolution submitted by the dele~ation of
.
I put to the vote draft resolution D. No amendment has
the Bye10russian SSR provides the only satisfactory
beeh submitted.
solution t~ th.e. problem o~ refugees and Qisplaced persons. For 1f this problem :lS to be settled, all the MemDraft resolution D was adopted b-y 40 votes to 5,
hers of the United Nations, particularly the Governwith 7 abstentions.
.
ments of the United States, the United Kingdom and
103. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
France, must scrupulously and honestly carry out the
Since draft resolution C has been deleted, resolution D,
provisions of the resolution. adopted by the General
which the Assembly has just adopted, will become
Assembly, which recommends toot refugees and disresolution C.
placed persons should be encouraged and assisted to
104. A draft ,....solution has been submitted by the
return to their cotmtries of origin as soon as possible.
delegation of the Byelorussian SSR [A/1683]. The
The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR will therefore
delegation of Pakistan has requested that it should be
vote in favour of that dlaft resolution.
voteCl upon in parts. Accordingly, if there is no objec95. The PRESIDENT (tra1i)slated from French): tion, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote paraTwo amendments have been (;~hmitted to draft resolu- graph by paragraph.
tioD; B. One of them [A/1685] has been suh:'.nitted by
105. I put the first paragraph to the vnte.
the delegations of France, the United Kingdom ana
the United States. I put it to the vote.
The first paragraph 'WQ.s rejected by 37 votes to 5,

325th Meeting-14 December 1950

673

-,-------_._-_._-------=:::..-_-~-------------------

above~mentioned countr:\es". I intended to proceed in

that manner, but since the first paragraph has been rejected, tha,t becomes impossible. Therefore, if there is
no objectiun, I shall put the second paragraph 'to the
vote.
The second paragraph was rejected by 38 'Votes to
S, with 10 abstentions.
, The third, paragraph was rejected by 32 'Votes to 7.,
with 11 abstentions.
107. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Since the three paragraphs of the draft resolution have
been rejected, there is no need to take a vote on the
draft resolution as a whole.
108. I call upon the: Polish representative, who wishes
to explain his vote.
109. Mr. DROHOJOWSKI (Poland): The dele~
ga;tion of Poland voted against the draft resolutions
contained in the report of the Third Committee, and
voted for the draft resolution submitted by the delega~
tion of the Byelorussian SSR.
110. The position of my delegation on this subject is
very clear; it has not changed since the problem arose
at the end of the war. To put it very briefly we have
always advocated the repatriation of refugees to their
homes. This position, which is a matter of principle, was
adopted by the General A~sembly at its first session,
and reaffirmed at its second session.
'
111. Four years have elapsed since then-ample time
to complete the task bf repatria.tirl.~ all the refugees, or
at least the overwhelming majority of them. However,
the decisions of the Assembly have nevet' been implemented. Certain governments, and particularly those
of the United States and the United Kingdom, with
specific political and economic interests of their own in
view, have made continuous attempts to block the way
for the repatriation of hundreds· of thousand~ of victims
of the war. The acquisition of cheap labour has
obviously been the principal aim of those policies, which
prevent a proper and speedy solution of the problem.
112. This is no contribution to peace. On the contrary,
it has become a source of continuous friction. What is
more, it is intended that many of the victims of Hitler's
slave labour camps should form mercenary armies at
the service of the western Powers.
113. In the course of debates in the Third Commit~
tee, we stressed how unscrupulously the interests of the
refugees themselves have been disregarded, and how
thousands of them are being lured or virtually forced to
settle in far-away countries under conditions only too
often below the dignity .of a human being.
114. Although the principal purpose of the International Refugee Organization. was to encourage and
assist the return of displaced persons to their' homelands, the figures of those repatriated and, in fact, the
whole record of' its activity are a clear proof of the
organization's failure in the fulfilment of its basic tasks.
Instead, by carrying out the so-called resettlement programmes, the International Refugee Organization has
become a tool of the Powers interested in transf01ming
it into a political instrument and a sort of labour
exchange. Thus the organization carries, in our opinion,
a major share of responsibility for what has been done
in this field, and above all for what has not been'done.
I

115. The Polish delegation opposed the adoption of
resolution 319 (IV) at the last session, and it opposes
the proposals submitted at this session which go further
in the same direction. We oppose the creation of the
High Commissioner's Office, ~nd we reject the definition of refugees submitted to the Assembly for its
approval. We oppose and reject them for the simple
reason that instead of accelerating repatriation, they
tend to perpetuate the existing situation. We· particularly oppose the new definition o.f a refugee which introduces dangerous and entirely unacceptable criteria, and
offers international protection and assistance to all sorts
of deserters, criminals, traitors and enemies of their
own countries.
116. We attach th~ greatest importance to the solution
of th~ tragic problem now before us, and we sincerely
desire to give real help to thousands of human beings
in thdr plight. Although time has been badly wasted
and Cl great deal of harm has been done, it is still not too
late. The proposals submitted by the delegation of the
Byelorussian SSR offered the right way and the only
way for positive, constructive action in the spirit of the
decIJions of the United Nations. It also pointed out the
real '.::auses of the present deplorable situation.
117. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :. I
call upon the representative of El Salvador who wishes
to speak on a point of order concerning the three resolutions which we have just adopted.
118. Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador) (translated from
Spanish) : The point which I am going to raise concerns, in particular, resolution B, which has just been
adopted and which provides for the convening ofa
conference of plenipotentiaries to complete the drafting
of the convention relating to the status of refugees and
the protocol relating to the status of stateless persons"
and to. sign these instruments.
119. When the matter was being discussed in' the
Third Committee, and when the Committee was examining the draft resolution whereby the Secr~tary-Gen­
eral was to invite the governments of all interested
States, whether Members or non-members of the
United Nations, to attend a confer~nce of p!enipotentiaries to complete the drafting of the convetition relating to the status of refugees, tl..c Chairman of tbe
Committee suggested that the word {{interested" should
be deleted. The United Kingdom representativeaccepted that suggestion, with the result· that it was
decided to extend the invitation to all States, wh~ther
Members or non-members of the United Nations.
120. The representative of Mexico, Mr. Noriega, tlle.u
asked whether the deletion of the word "interestelj!'
would mean that the Government of Franco Spain
would be able to attend the proposed conference~ The
.
reply of the Secretariat was as follows: 1I
{{At the request of the Chairman, Mr. Schachter
(Secretariat) explained that the resolution on relations of Members of the United Nations w~th Spain
(A/1487) .recently adopted by the General Assembly
did not affect the relevant recommendation in the
earlier resolution 39 (I), under which the Franco
Gov~rntnent of Spain was debarred from participating in conferences or other activities which might be
arranged by the United Nations.
G See Official Records of the General AS$embly, Fifth Session, Third Committee, 330th meeting, paragrap!is 54 and 55.

674

.

General Assembly-Fifth ·Session-PIenary Meetings

---------the
in-

UThat interpretation was in accord with statements
relationship between this
not quite understand
terpretation and the subject which we have just dismade by certain sponsors of the resolution in the
Ad Hoc Political C,.ommittee."
cussed. I .believe that our colleague was referrin, to
.discussions
which took place in the Third Conumttee
121. I should like ~orcfer particularly to the last part
and
not
in
the
Assembly.
of Mr. Schachter's statement. I should like to place it on
128. We come now to the election of the High Comrecord that the eight delegations which sponsored the
missioner for refugees. The names of two candidates for
draft resolution on Spain had never intended that Spain
the office of High Commissioner' for refugees have been
should be prevented from participating in those consubmitted by the Secretary-General.
ferences which cat7.ile within the purview of the specialized agencies. The resolution, which the General' As129. We shall vote' by secret ballot. I call your atten..
sembly adopted by 38 vot(~S [304th meeting], makes it
tion to the fact that each ballot paper may contain only
. possible for Spain to be accepted as a member of the
one name; those. containing more than one will be
speciali2;ed agencies. It is therefore natural that if a
considered invalid.
co,nference is convened and. concerns the particular field
A vote was taken by secret ballot. '
()£ a specialized Bgency, Spain should be able toparticipate, if it has been accepted as a member by that parAt the invitation of the President, Mr. Zeineddift8
ticular specialized agenq.
(Syria) and Mr. Jordaan (Union of South Africa),
acted as tellers.·
,
122. For example, let us suppose that the Universal
Postal Union convenes a technical conference and that
Number of ballot papers:
60
Spain has been admitted as a member of the Union, or
Invalid ballots:
0
that the United Nations convenes a technical conference
Number of valid ballots:
60
which is of special interest to the Universal Postal
Abstentions:
5
Union, to which Spain has been admitted; it is obvious
Number of valid votes cast:
55
that if Spain has been accepted as a member by that
specialized agency; the conference will in fact be an
Required majority:
28
activity of the agency and Spain will be able to take
Number of votes obtained:
part in it.
Mr. G. J. van He~tven Goedhart (Neth123. Of course, I should like to say that with reference
erlands) ..'. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . • . 30
to this question of refugees, it was never thought at any
Mr. Donald Kingsley (United Stat.es of
time that Spain should be invited to participate in the
America) ..... . • • • ••-•••••••
24
-discussion of a matter which is of a political nature and
114r. va:n Heuven Goedhart (Nethlurlands), having
comes under the Economic and Social Council, the
the required ·mtzjori,lfy of the ,/11embers present
obtained
-organ of the United Nations which is in fact proposing
and voting, was elected Jligk Commissioner for
that the conference should be held.
Refugees.
124. However, what I should like to place 011 record
particularly, and I do so on behalf of the eight delegaFormer Italian colonies: election of the United
tions which proposed· the draft resolution on Spain, ·is
Nations Commissioner in Eritrea: report of the
that Spain may participate in conferences convened by
Special Committee (A/1715)
the specialized agencies, or by the United 'Nations,
which fall within the particular field of those specialized
[Agenda item 21 (d) and (e)]
agencies subject, of course, to the condition that Spain
130. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
has been admitted as a member by the specialized agency
It will be recalled that the General Assembly instructed
concerned.
[316t,h meeting] a committee composed of five persons
125. That is the statement I wished to make and
to propose candidates for the' post of United Nations
which I was obliged to make in reply to the general
Commissioner in Eritrea. The committee has nominated
statement of Mr. Schachter, to the effect t.1mt Spain
three candidates and has asked me to inform the Genwould not be able to participate in any conference coneral Assembly that' each of the three is eminently
vened by the United Nations. If Spain is admitt~ed as
qualified for ilie post.
a. member of a speciali7ed agency, it can take pari in
131. ~vVe shall take a vote by secret ballot. I call your
those activities of the specialized agencies which fall
attention
to the fact that each ballot paper many contain
within the field of action of. that particular agency.
only one name; those containing more than one will be
126. I believe that the other delegations which sponconsidered invalid.
.
sored the· draft resolution will be in full agreement with
A vote 'ivas taken by secret ballot.
me in my interpretation of this point. If any of them
At'the in'Vita;ion of the President, Mr. Zeineddinl
do not accept. this'interpretation, I hope they wffi say so.
(Syria)
and lrfr. JonJaan (Union of South Africa),
I. have consulted the eight s~nsoring delegationswith the exception of the Philippine delegation, which I
acted as tellers.
was unable to reach-and all are in complete agreement
Numb'er of ballot papers: · 6 0
with my intel-pretation. I am sure it will prove acceptInvalid ballots:
0
able to the Philippine delegation as well.
Number of valid ballots:
60
127. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Abstentions:
7
The statement just made by the representative of El
Number of valid votes cast:
53
Salvador will appear in the verbatim record like any
Required majorit,·
21
other statement made before t~e Assembly. But I do
'11 •

•

•

•

•

S2Sth M(~ting-I4 December 1950
. Number 0/ votes obtained:
Mr. Anze Matlenzo (Bolivia) ••••••••
" Justice Aung Khine (BuroJa) ••••••••
Mr. Victor:tloo (China) ••••••••••••

28

18
7

Mr. Eduardo Anse Matienso (Bolivia), having obtained the required tnajorit:l of theMembers present
and voting, 'Was elected Unded Nations Commission".
in Eritrea.

Statements by two delegations concerning the
voting on agenda item 76
132. Mr. - BELAUNDE (Peru) (translated from
Spanish) : This moming the General Assembly voted
on the draft resolution concerning a cease-fire in Korea.
My delegation was absent at the time, as is stated in the
record.
133. I wish to state that when the text of that resolution was put to the vote in the First Committee, the
Peruvian delegation supported it. It supported it as
enthusiastically as it will support any other resolutions
aimed at establishing peace.
134. I shQuld like it to be recorded that the Peruvian
delegation joins wiL~ the fifty-two nations which voted
in £avolxr of the resolution calling for a cease-fire in
Korea.
135. I want to tell the Assembly why my delegation
was unable to be present. As the President of the General Assembly kno:ws, I was obliged to preside over
an emergency meeting of the Ad Ifoc Political Committee which was to enable us to conclude our work, and
the remaining members of the Peruvian delegation bad
,
a previous engagement.
136. I wish to take this opportunity of making lmOWD
the enthusiastic and determined support of Peru for the
policy which is reflected in United Nations action in
Korea and for any activity on behalf of peace, which
is the primary purpose- of this family of nations..
137. Mr. SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua) (translated from Spanish) : I take the floor simply to place it
on record that the Nicaraguan delegation is completely
and unreservedly in favour of t.l:te resolution submitted
to us by the First Committee concerning the cease--fu'e
in Korea.
138. Owing to an. unavoidable delay, my delegation
was unable to be present this morning to give itt, pubil\~
support to the resolution,. as it did yesterday in the)
Firs.: Committee.
.
139. This is an that I have to say, and I wotl1d re·,
spectfuUy request the President to see that it is duly
indicated in the record of the meeting that the delegation of Nicaragua fully. supported and cast its vote In
favour of the afore-mentione« resolution.
140. The PRESIDENT (translatecl fro"" French):
These two statements will appear in the record. It is nOl:
. within my power to change a. vote which has been cast,
but the statements will
recorded; they. wUI be proof
of the wishes of b;'e delegations of Peru and Nicaragua.

be

615

Recognition by the United Nations of the ~:re­
sentation of a Member Stt.tte: report nf the
A.d Hoc Politieal CoDDJJi'ttee (A/IS?S and
Add.I)
[Agenda item. 61]
141. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Regarding the question of the rccogn!tion by the United
Nations of the representation of a. Member State, we
have a report from the Ad Hoc Political Committee
[A/1578 and Add.l]. Furthermore, the delegation of
Egypt has submitted an ~endment (A/158Z]' to the
draft resolution of the Ad Hoc Political Cotnmittee; the
amendment calls for the insertion of the. following text
between paragraphs 1 and 2 of the operative part of the
draft resolution:
((2. Recommends that when any such question
arises, it should be considered by the General Assembly, or by the Interim Committee if the General
Assembly is not in session".
142. I put the amendment to the vote.
The amendment was adopted by 25 votes 10 101 wl~1f
10 abstentions. .
143. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put to the vote the amended draft resolution, the
operative part of which now consis~ of fivepatag"tapbs..
The draft resolution, ;::s amended, was ~pfed .by
36 votes to 6, with 9 abstentions.
144. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon the representative of the Soviet Union, who
wishes to explain his vote.
145. Mr. 'TSARAPKIN (Union. of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The so-called
question or the recognition by the United Nations of
the representation of a ~J:ember State was inc1udedin
the agenda of the Gene?! Ass~bIJ! as a result of
manceuvres by the delegations which G\ppose the testoration to the People's Republic of China of its legal right,
as a Member of the Organization, to take its legitimate
place in United Nation.s organs, .and which thU~Li~;
vent the legal representatives of China from· "
part in the work of the Organization.
146. Everyone knows that the United States is .~.
to prevent the admission of the representatives of Chin8.
to the United Nations, and that to achieve its ends it is
exerting every kind of pressure and making use of the
govemments of other Member States of the United
Nations which are subservient to its wishes.
147. It was for that self~e reason that the. delegation of Cuba submitted to the Ad Hoc Political COmrrJttee a draft resolution entitled "Recognition by the
United Nations of the representation of a Member
State".
148. It is no secret that the establishment of criteria
to guide the United Nations in deciding questions
concerning the tecognition of the representation bf
Member States, criteria which it is deSIred to foist on
the United Nations, is only a. pretext;· in fact it is a
deliberate attempt tocompiicateand confuse the issue
so as to make it possible, whtttl the question of the
recognition of the representation of a given Member
State of the United Nations arises, to make partieular
demands upon that State.

676

Gene!l"al Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

lish criteria or any special procedure. If such a case
149. When the draft resolutions submitted by Cuba
were to arise in the future l each organ of the United
and by Sub~Committee 2 were discussed in the Ad Hoc
Nations should apply its own rules of procedure and
Political Committeel many delegations pointed out that
should recognize t~e credentials ordy of those reprethe establishment of any criteria whatsoever would open
sentatives of Member States of the United Nations whothe way to abuses; for were the question to be discussed
are appointed by the goverllments which hold de facto
on the basis of such criterial there would be no protecpower in those States.
tion against abuses or against the interpretation of such
criteria in a manner prejudicial to the Member State
155. The real problem, and not the artificial anm
of the Organization to which they were being applied.
imaginary problem" with which the United Nations is.
150. It was also pointed out, most cogentlYI that the
confronted, is not to settle an abstract question such
use of such criteria would inevitably lead to arbitrary
as that of the recognition of the representation of Memand discrimin&tory measures in respect of certain Member States of the United Nations in general, but theber States. The establishment and application of such
concrete question of recognizing the representation of
criteria are obviously intended to deprive a :Member
the People's Republic of China. That is the duty inState of the leg~tinClate rights th~t it enjoys ucder the
cumbent on the United Nations.
Charter, to prevent it from carrying out the obliga156. The USSR delegation considers that the resolutions incumbent upon, it under the Charter and to
tion
which has just been adopted by the General Asdeprive it Of an opportunity of taking an active part in
sembly is unacceptable. It also considers that such probthe life and activities of the United Nations. This would
lems should be decided by each organ of the United
",mount to the illegal expulsion of the Member State
Nations independently, in accordance with its own
concerned frerLl the Organization or1 at best, would
"'rules
of procedure, and that only those credentials whichentail a temporary loss of its rights as a Member of the
have been issued to representatives by the governOrganization.
ment which exercises effective power in a given State
151. It is Q,bvious to everyone that the clamour conshould be recognized.
cerning the question of the re,:ognition of the repre157. It was for these reasons that the delegation of
sentation of a Member State o~ the Organization has
the
Soviet Union voted agai.nst the draft resolution subnot arisen spontaneously. It is quite plain that this
mitted
by the Ad Hoc Political Committee.
manreuvre is mainly directed against the ~eople's Republic of China and is designed to prevent China from
158. Mr. HOFFMEISTER (Czechoslovakia): r
taking part in the activities of the United Nations.
wish to make a short statement in order to explain thepoint of view of the Czechoslovak delegation with:
152. The discussion of this question in the Ad Hoc
6
regard to the resolution which has just been adopted..
Political Committee showed that many delegations
realized that the establishment of any criteria whatso159. The resolution provides that the General Assemever would lead to arbitrary dealings in the United
bly -should make recommendations with respect to a
Nations and would open the way to interference in the
certain kind of procedure in deciding on a certain kind:
internal affairs of Member States of the Organizationl
of question. To whom are these recommendations to
in violation of one of the fundamental principles of the
be made? To the United Nations. That means, in the
Charter~ .That considera.tion caused most delegations to
first placel to the General Assembly itself. What sort
act carefully in the matter, with the result that the
of recommendations has the General Assembly to make·
criteria included by the Sub-Committee in its draft
to itself under this resolution? It is to recommend that
resolution at the insistence of the Uoited States, were
the question before the United Nations should be conseverely criticized and most of them were deleted.
sidered in the light of the purposes and principles of the'
Charter. Here I draw your attention to the interesting153. The draft resolution of the Ad Hac Political
fact that the words "purposes and principles" are
Conunittee, which has just been adopted, still includes
written with initial capital letters. Unless this is some'
a number of provisions which are unacceptable to the
sort of Masonic symbolic orthography which gives to the
USSR delegation. The purpose of the preamble of the
words a different and even contrary meaning, it would'
resolution is to prove that it is p.ssential to establisJ;t a
be normally explained as ail expression of an extraorcertain uniformity of procedure in the recognition of
the representation of a Member State of- the Organiza- .. dinary respect on the part of the authors of the text for
tion and that this procedure sh~t1ld be established by
the purposes and principles of the Charter. Imagine theGeneral Assembly requesting itself to '~espect the purthe General- Assembly alone.
poses and principles of the Charter and recommending'
154. The delegation of the Soviet Union considers that
to other organs of the TJnited Nations that they take"
there is no need for the establishment of any criteria
into
account its decisions! It savours somewhat of thewhatsoever or for any uniformity in procedure. In fact,
ridiculous.
the question of the recognition of the representation
of a Member -State arises very seldom in the histo:ry of
160. At its inception, 'the text was much more robust,.
the OrganizatJon. This is the first timel in the five years
and _the early amendments to it gave rise to much
of its existence, that the United Nations is faced with
greater expectations. As everybody here knows, the·
such a problem, and the fact that the problem has arisen
original purpose of the text was to procure at least
is due entirely'to the United States, which is illegally
some semblance of a legal basis for the United Statesobstructing the admission of the representative of China
insp:ted and United States-enforced policy of the mato the United Nations. Thus it is u~wecessary to estabjority in this Organization towards the Peoplel s RepUblic of China, a policy which has denied and still denies.
6 See Official Records of the Genera/. Assembly, Fifth Sesthat great nation-one of the founders of the Organiza-·
sion, Ad Hoc Political Committee, 18th to 24th and 57th to
tion
and a permanent member of the Security Council60th meetings inc1w';'v'e.
>,

325th Meeting-14 Deeember 1950

677

its rightful place among the :Members cf the United
167. The case of China called for a solution whirl" was
clear. In the future, all similar problems shoulo. also
Nations.
be solved in that manner. This resolution is not only
161. But to give such a policy a semblance of legality
unnecessary, but it is harmful and damaging, as events
was, of course, utterly impossible. Members of the
have
proved, and that is why we opposed it.
United Nations are realizing more and more that this
168. Mr. LIU CHIEH (China): The Chinese delepolicy is as unjustifiable legally as it is unsound and
nefarious politically. The original draft resolution was
gation feels that the resolution just adopted falls somewhat short of the original draft resolution submitted by
amended by the deletion of various paragraphs. NeverCuba in the Ad Hoc Political Committee and also of
theless, some of the original poison has been left in the
the draft submitted by Sub-Committee 2. Nevertheless,
hidden sting of the resolution. The General Assembly is
to take into consideration v~\rious political questions,
we- find that the resolution gives primary importance to
and also to take its decision in the light of ~~the cirthe principles and purposes of the Charter as guiding
considerations in the determination of the question of
cumstances of each case".
.
representation. We find t11:'" "lie criteria or factors
162. Why is such a ridiculously obvious recommendawhich
were spelled out in the drafts rof the Cuban deletion to be made to the General Assembly? To put it in
gation and of the Sub-Committee are, by analogy and
plain English, the word ucircUlttlstances" merely refers
implication, included in the provisions of the Charter.
to the good pleasure of the United States Government.
Indeed, it was argued in Committee that it was difficult
If you make, this substitution, the whole resolution imto
draw up an exhaustive list of criteria to fit all cases,
mediately becomes perfectly dear. It means that the
and that in any case the most important factors, such
representative of a State is to b~ recognized as such by
_as
the suppression of aggression, were already implied
the United Nations if it is agreeable to the Government
in
the
Charter itself.
of the United States. This was the original meaning of
169. The omission of specific cdteri~ ~rom the resoluthe proposal. If the resolution as it has been adopted
tion has, in my understanding of the views of the
here does not say that in so many words, it is because
various representatives in the Committee, in no way
the first draft proved to be unacceptable even to the synimpaired the cogency and relevancy of those principles
chro1"ized majority in the Committee. The Czechoslovak
which found expression in the original drafts. The resodelegation was against the final text of the draft resolulution has at least establishe,d an appropriate machinery
tion as it was approved in the Committee and that
for the determination of such questions. For these reais why it voted against the draft !il the A3sp.mbly.
sons the Chinese delegation was able to vote in favour
163. Mr. DROHOJOWSKI (Poland): The Polish
.
of the resolution.
delegation voted against the draft resolution for reasons
of principle.
Palestine: (c) repatriation of Palestine refugees
164. The whole discussion in the Committee showed
and payment of compensation due to .them;
that the item had been put on the agenda for the obvious
implementation o( General Assembly resolu.·
purpose of creating artificial barriers to the admission
lions reg~rding this question; and (d) report
of the delegation of the People's Republic of China in
of the United Nalio.ns Conciliation Commission
our· midst. It was claimed that the problem should be
for Palestine: reports of the A.d Hoc Political
considered in the abstract. But it was clear throughout
Committee (A/I646) and th~ Fifth Committee
the debate,S that China was the real issue.. .
(A/1678)
165. We held that no resolution was necessary, that
[Agenda it~m 20)
the Charter contained ample provisions indicating how
-170. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
matters like these were to be solved. If there is a govThe Assembly has two draft resolutions before it,
ernment in power, if it controls the bulk of the territory
one
submitted by the Ad Hoc Political Committee
of a State, it has the indisputable right to represent the
[A/1646]
and the other by the Soviet Union [A/1659].
State it controls. No additional criteria are required or .
called for-·neither those borrowed from Article 4 of
171. Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist.
the Charter, nor those practised in cases of recognition.
Republics) (translated from Russian) : The delegation
The whole affair is a thinly veiled manceuvre to hide
oftbe Soviet Union requests that the draft resolution
the policy of the United States, which seeks to maintain
which it has submitted should be put to the vote first.
the fictitious representation of the 'Kuomintang and to
172. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
prevent the only spokesmen of the Chinese people
Usually I put to the vote first the dratt resolution
from sitting here.
submitted by the. Committee and then any other draft
166. The events in Korea and elsewhere have shown
resolutions. On this occasion, however, in view of the
clearly how nonsensical it is to bar the representatives
nature of the Soviet Union draft resolution, which calls
of a nation of nearly 500 million people from giving its
for the termination of the Conciliation Commission, I
views and coun.sel here. My delegation insists that no
think: that that draft should be put to the vote before
juridical subterfuges can possibly alter the situation.
that of the Committee. If there are no objections, we
The dear. duty which has faced the Assembly from the
shall follow that procedure. I ask the Assembly to vote
very beginning is to admit the representatives of the
first on the USSR draft resolution [A/1659], which
-Central People's Government of China to the United
reads as follows:
Nations as the representatives of China. The majority
uThe General Assembly~
in the Assembly has refused t6 draw the necessary conclusions from the unalterable historical facts. It has
"'Considering that, as experience has shown,the
tried to evade the issue. We wish to be no party to this.
United Nations Conciliation Commission for Pales-

678

General Assemhly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

tine has failed to carry out its task of settling disputes
between the parties in Palestine,
"Resolves to terminate the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine."
The draft resolutl:on was rejected by 48 votes to 5,
with 1 abstention.
173. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
We now come to the draft resolution submitted by the
Ad Hoc Political Conunittee [A/1646].
174. The Soviet Union delegation proposes two amendments [A/1680] , the first of which calls for the substitution, in paragraph 1 of the operative part, of the words
"by direct negotiations" for the words "by negotiations
conducted either with the Conciliation Commission or
directly".
175. I put this amendment to the vote.
The amendment was "ejected by 46 votes to 6, with
2 abstentions.
176. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The second USSR amendment being for the deletion of
paragraph 2, I suggest that I should put to the vote first
the beginning of the draft resolution submitted by the Ad
Hoc Political Committee, to the end of the first paragraph of the operative part. I shall then put paragraph
2 to the vote.
The first pm't of the draft resolution was adopted by
48 votes to 5, with 3 abstentions.
Paragraph 2 'was adopted by 48 votes to 11One, with
5 abstentions.
177. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I now put the draft resolution to the vote as a whole.
The draft resolution was adopted by 48 votes to 5,
with 4 abstentions,
178. Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics): The President did not put the second
Soviet Union amendment to the vote.
179. The PRESIDENT: The USSR amendment
called for the deletion of paragraph 2. I therefore put
paragraph 2 to the vote separately, which comes to the
same thing.
180. Mr. SHARETT (Israel): The views of the
delegation of Israel 011 the draft resolution were exhaustively stated in the Ad Hoc Political Committee. 1
181. The Government of Israel has consistently declared its readiness to enter into direct negotiations with
its neighbours for the peaceful settlement of all outstanding questions. It is the firm conviction of my government that peace can be attained only by direct negotiations, with or without international assistance. This
elementary procedure of direct negotiations has been
emphatically rejected by the Arab governments concerned. We, for our part, have found it impossible to
conceive that a government which refuses to talk to its
neighbour, even to sit with him at one table, should be
in a mood to reach a peace settlement with him. Needless to say, the mere adoption of a procedure of direct
negotiations does not, in itself, guarantee success.
7 For

the discussion on this subject in the Ad Hoc Polit-

ic~l Committee, see Official Records of the General Assembly

FJfth Session, Ad Hoc Political Committee 31st to 36th and
61st to 72nd meetings inclusive,
'

Negotiations
may prove futile', yet the absence of
. .
negottattons, nay, the expressed refusal to negotiate,
certainly predetermines failure.
182. The method of indirect negotiations or of me
. d o?~ >yithout success for the
re
conCl'1"mtton has been tne
past two years. Th~ Concl!latton C~mmission itself
came to the concluslOn that the contmuation of thi
method would be of no avail. In its sU'pplementa~
repOI:t .to. the Gelle~al. Assembly [A/1637/ Add.l], the
CotlCl1l.3.tlo,n CommlsslOn reco1?mended the placing of
a~l obh.gatlOn. upon both parbes to enter into direct
dlscusslons, elther under the Commission's auspices or
indep.endent1y, wit,h a view to the settlement of all
questlOns outstandmg between them. Had that recommendation of the Conciliation Commission been put to
the vote here, we should have been happy to vote for it.
183. To our regret, however, a formulation was
adopted by the majority in the Ad Hoc Political Committee wl.lich has set ?irect negotiations as only one of
the posslble alternatlVe methods of reaching peace
leaving it open to the parties to seek settlement
negotiating, according to the wording of the resolution
just adopted, with the Conciliation Commission-as if
the conflict were between each of the parties and the
Conciliation Commission-and not between the parties
themselves, Such ambiguity, in my submission invites
deadlock. Each party can choose the method' it likes
better and claim to be acting in accordance with the
resolution of the General Assembly.
184. In these circumstances, the delegation of Israel
could not possibly accept responsibility for the resolution, and it therefore abstained from the vote.
185. At the same time, my delegation voted for the
Soviet Union amendment which proposed the rewording of a paragraph in such a way that the Assembly
would urge the parties to enter into direct negotiations.
186. I should like to take this opportunity of reiterating the continued readiness of my government to enter
into direct negotiations with each of the States with
which we have armistice agreements, either independently-and we prefer the negotiations to be conducted
independently-or, if agreeable, in the presence, with
the assistance and under the auspices of the Conciliation
Conunission.
187. Mr. AL-JAMALI (Iraq): My delegation abstained from voting on the draft resolution, and the
reason for our abstention is quite simple.
188. My delegation believes that the Arabs' rights to
their own homes and possessions in Palestine and their
right to return to those homes are not disputable and
must be considered as inviolable. This right is a natural
right, it is a human right and it is a sacred right. ~his
right cannot be tied to any condition or to any political
or other considerations, It is one of the most elementary
rights which every individual in every country must
enjoy.
189. This resolution complicates matters. It makes that
right go side by side with political negotiations for
peace. Political negotiations for peace are very good,
provided you know that human rights are going to .be
respected when you negotiate. But when ~he Je~sh
people take the homes of the Arabs in Palestme, leavmg
them homeless, and then do not recognize the rights of
the Arabs to their own homes, no one can have any

b;

basis for discussie
tainly would like 1
justice and on h
arguments that ]
neglected and obli
190, Once the ri!
the right to ownc
their rights to the
will be a chance
negotiations. But
honourably and si!
tions. There is no
are not based on t1
Arabs to Palestine
191. Attempts w(
the basis of U nitel
decisions with reg;
able to the Arab ca
as a basis for neg
. both parties in Lat
that negotiations :
resolutions of the
party immediately
start direct discuss]
ambitions, and ne
resolutions. This c;
this should in no
refugees to go back
]92. That is wlr
this resolution and"

193. Mr. TSARi
Republics) (transl
tion that has just b(
tile Conciliation C
leading part in :
Palestine.
]94. It is clear th
the problems of P
fortunately, has not
In the opinion of"
methods which the
problems cannot I,
issues in Palestine
the peoples who it
the Soviet Union (
larly warranted sin I
of the whole probJ
for Palestine.
195. As we know,
fulfil the task of
entrusted to it. Ind
in a noticeable agg:
parties concerned :
mission was suppa
final settlement on
more interest in co
on economic and 0
Middle and Near
mention the establi
sion of an economil
mission had no au'
B See Official Recor
sio1l, Ad Hoc P oliticl

-

e of
tiate,

nere
. the

itself

this

ltary

the
g of

irect
s or
:a1I
:om·
It to

tit.

was
om·
e of
ace,

by

tion
s if
the
ties
ites
ikes

the

rae1
lluthe

,rd·

,bly

IOS.

'at-

Iter

'ith
en·

ted

ith
ion

lbthe
to

eir
.nd
ral
bis
ca!

lry

1st

mt
:or

ld,
be

sh
ng
of

ny

325th Meeting-14 December 1950
basis for discussions for peace. The Arab people certainly would like to have peace-but a peace ~ased on
justice and 011 human rights. ''''le cannot listen to
arguments that 'peace is desired while rights are
neglected and obliterated.
190. Once the rig-hts of the Arabs are recognized and
the right to ownership of property is granted, once
their riCThts to their homes are recognized, then there
will be b a chance for peace and a chance for direct
negotiations. But unless this is granted, no one can
honourahly and sincerely enter into any direct negotiations. There is no use having any negotiations which
are not based on the full recognition of the rights of the
Arabs to Palestine and to their own homes therein.
191. Attempts were made to enter into negotiations on
the basis of United Nations decisions. United Nations
decisions with regard to Palestine, although unfavourable to the Arab cause, still Wl'!'(' accepted hy the Arabs
as a basis for negotia t iuns.•\ protucol \\'as sig-ned by
both parties in Lausanne on 12 l\Iay 1949 9 to the effect
that negotiations should proceed on the basis of the
resolutions of the Ge1H~ral Assembly. But the other
party immediately repudiated that basis and wanted to
start direct discnssion on the basis of its own desires and
ambitions, and 1Iot on the basis of United Nations
resolutions. This cannot lead to direct negotiations, and
this should in 110 way whittle away the rights of the
refugees to go back to their own homes in Palestine.
192. That is why my delegation could not support
this resolution and regretfully had to ahstain.
193. l\Ir. TSAHAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (tratlsllltcd from Russian) : In the resolution that has just hCl;'n adopted by the General Assembly,
the Conciliation Commission for Palestine is given a
leading part in settling all outstanding issues in
Palestine.
194. It is clear that the time has at last come to settle
the problems of Palestine, the numher of which, unfortunately, has not decreased, hut continues to increase.
In the opinion of the USSR delegation, however, the
methods which the resolution provides for settling those
problems cannot lead to a settlement of outstanding
issues in Palestine which would be in the interests of
the peoples who inhahit that country. The douhts of
the Soviet Union delegation on this score are particularly warranted since the resolution entrusts the solution
of the whole problem to the Conciliation Commission
for Palestine.

679

send missions of investigation to other States. The fact
tha! the chairman of that mission was appointed by the
Umted States Government, and not by the United
Nations, shows all too clearly in whose interests the
mission was established.
196. The Commission adopted working methods which
indicated that in reality it was not a body which sought
to bring about conciliation, but a body which endeavoured to dictate conditions to the parties concerned
while reserving to itself all right of final decision. The
Commission has not been guided in its activities by the
wishes of the parties which it was called upon to assist
in their direct negotiations, but by quite different considerations. That is no way to conciliate two parties,
rather is it a method of imposing arbitrary solutions on
them. It was in that spirit that the Commission attempted to make the parties concur in the establishment
of joint committees, presided over by a representative
of the Commission, to discuss outstanding issues. As it
states in chapter IV of its report [A/1367 and Corr.l],
the Commission has not concerned itself with conciliating the parties, but has in fact opposed them. It has not
promoted direct negotiations between the parties, but
has concentrated in its own hands the settlement of the
whole problem of Palestine and, as we all know,
achieved nothing.
197. Both the general progress report and the supplementary report of the Commission are full of admissions
of its failures. Its new proposal concerning procedure
was rejected by the parties, and its proposal for the
estahlishment of so-called joint committees was also
considered unacceptable. Moreover, the Commission
was unable to settle the problem of the Palestine
refugees. Thus, thanks to the activities of the Com"
mission, not only has no progress been made in achiev~
ing a peacefnl settlement of the Palestine question, but
that question has been further complicated by the creation of new problems. The number of controversial
issues in Palestine has not decreased but, on the
contrary, has increased.
198. The Palestine question has again appeared on the
agenda of the Security Council,9 which has recently had
to consider a series of complaints from Egypt, Transjordan and Israel.
199. Thus the Commission has failed to settle any of
the questions it had to deal with; it admits this itself in
its reports, both in the general report and in the supplementary report. It must be recognized that t~e
Commission has failed to fulfil the tasks entrusted to It.

195. As we know, that Commission has been unable to
fulfil the task of conciliating the parties which was
entrusted to it. Indeed, its activities have even resulted
in a noticeable aggravation of the relations between the
parties concerned in the Palestine dispute. The Commission was supposed to assist the parties to reach a
final settlement on outstanding issues, but it has shown
more interest in collecting various kinds of information
on economic and other matters in the countries of the
Middle and Near East. In this connexion, I should
n;ention the estahlishment by the Conciliation CommisSlOn of an economic survey mission, a1thou~h the Commission had no authority from the 'United Nations to

that to call upon the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine once again to undertake t~e task
of reconciling the parties concerne~ an;! setthng all
outstanding issues between those parties, IS not the way
to ensure progress as regards this question or, indeed,
to break the present deadlock.

8S ee Official Records of tlw Getreral Assembly, Fourth Session, Ad Hoc Politicol Committee, Annex, Vol. Il, page 9.

No. 53.

200. In these circumstances, the USSR de1egat!on
submitted to the General Assembly a draft resolution
[Aj1659] calling for the abolition of ~he United Nations
Conciliation Commission for Pa1estme; unfortunately,
the General Assembly rejected that draft.

201. The delegation of the Soviet Union considers

9 See

Official Records of the Security Council, Fifth Year,

680

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

202. Those are the reasons why the U?SR delegation
voted against the draft resolution submitted by the Ad
H QC Political Committee.
203. Mr. ZEINEDDINE (Syria): The amendment
submitted by the delegation of the Soviet Union was
not devoid of justification. .
204. In the view of the Syrian delegation, the re.cord
of the Conciliation Commission is not one of achievement. The Commission was instructed to carry out ~he
duty of facilitating the repatriation of the Palestme
refugees and the payment of c:0mpens~tion to those who
preferred not to return; the CommiSSion was entrusted
with that duty.
.
205. But the Commission was not able to repatriate
many refugees. In fact, the number was exceedingly
limited-.less than one thousand. The number of refugees who had to leave th~ix: homes during the p~riod of
operation of the Com.mlsslon was about ten t~mes as
great as the number of those who were repatrtated.
206. . As to compensation, prac~i~al!y nothing .w~s done
at all in that respect. The Concibatlon Commission, on
the other hand, showed a marked tendency at time? to
substitute the views of its members for the resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly. This is a very
dangerous tendency which I hope will not be continued
in the future.
207. These reasons should have induced my delegation
to vote for the USSR amendment, but it voted agai'1st
it. The reason is that we want the Conciliation Commission to be kept in being as a matter of necessity, for
the only way to pursue the effort begun by the Co~­
mission is to accept it as it now stands. That necessity
made it practically obligatory for us to. ~ccept the .~raft
resolution approved by the Ad Hoc Pobtlcal Committee.
208. Certain remarks were made here which I cal!'n~t
answer in exnlaining my vote. Therefore I would bmlt
myself to saying that we supported a solutio~ w}1ich
affords a possibility .of cond~cting dix:ect or 1l}dl~ect
negotiations because In our view the fallure to achieve
any just settlement of the Palestine problem is not at
all due to the fOimalities of negotiations but to much
!nore fundamental reasons. Those r.easons are mainly
the defiance shown by certain authorities of the resolu;.
tions of the General Assembly and the readiness of
some great Powers to support that defiance and to give
a helping hand to those authorities in continuing their
present policy, a policy which is contrary ~o the resolutions of the General Assembly, whether m respect of
the refugees, Jerusalem, or other questions.
209. W econsider that a settlement can be achieved
Only in an atmosphere of confidence. And that atmos"
phere can }y~ created only if the human rights of the
refugees are observed, if certain provisions of the
General Assembly resolutio~s on other aspects. a! the
question are respected, and If some agreed prehmmary
basis for discussion, such as was referred to by the
representative of Iraq, is arrived at.
210. Having thJs in view, we thought that rno~e efforts
could be made in order to attain the stage where there
would be a real possibility of success, and direct negotiations could then be thought of.
211. The Syrian delegation voted for t~e resolution
which has just been adopted because it allows for the

possibility of negotiation in more than one way and
also because-and I should emphasize and stress this--it
stresses and emphasizes the right of the refugees to
return to their homes, a right which is in no way
dependent upon the decisions that we may take but
which is a natural and human right that can only be
endorsed by this Assembly, as it has been.

Report of the Security Council: report of the
A.d Iloc Political Committee (A/1679)
[Ag;enda item 11]
. 212. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The Ad Hoc Po'litical Committee has submitted a
report [A/1679] which contains a draft resolution
providing that the General Assembly takes note of the
t'eport of the Security Council.10
213. lVIr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The Security
Council's report to the General Assembly tovers the
period 16 July.l.949 to 15 July 1950. That rep?rt
includes the deCISions that were taken by the Secunty
Council at a time when it was iilegally constituted
because of the absence of two of its permanent members,
the USSR and China, and because of the illegal participation at Council meetings of the representative ~f the
Kuomintang group, a groqp which had been strtpped
by the Central People's Government of the People's
. Republic of China of all rights and authority to represent China in the United Nations.
214. I should mcmtion, in particular, such illegal decisions as the resolutions on the Korean question adopted
on 25 and 27 June and 7 July 1950 respectively.l1
215. Those illegal decisions of the Security Council
were taken under pressure from the United States
Government, which tried and is still trying to justify
and mask its armed intervention in Korea by referring
to those same Security Council resolutions. In accordance
with Article 27 of the United Nations Charter, all
decisions of the Security Council on important questions
must be made by an affirmative vote of not less than
seven members, including the concurring votes of the
five permanent members. Yet the resolt:'tion of 27 June
was adopted by only six votes, the seventh vote recorded
having. been that of the representative of the Kuomintang group, who illegally occupied China's seat in the
Security Council. Furthennore, the resolution was
adopted' in the absence of two permanent members of
the Security Council, namely, the Soviet Union ana
China.
216. All this deprives the Security Council resolution
of 27 JU:le of any legal force.
217. By adopting that resolution, the Security Council
also violated another highly important principle of the
United Nations Charter, the principle which forbids
the United Nations to interfere in the internal affairs
of any State when there is an internal diTute between
two groups of one arid the same State au\.l people. The
adoption by the Security Council of the.resolution of
7 July, under which armed forc~es and other resources
were placed at the disposal of the so-called Unified
10 See' Oflicial Records of the Gm.eral Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 2.
11 See Official Records of the Sec·urity Council, fifth year,

Nos. 15, 16 and 18.

681

325th Meeting-14 December 1950
Command, under the leadership of the United States,
was an equally flagrant violation of the Charter.
218. It should also be noted that all the Security
Council resolutions on the Korean question were adopted in flagrant violation or Article 32 of the Charter,
which provides that a party to a dispute under consideration by the Security Council must be invited to
participate, without vote, in the discussion relating to
the dispute. The representative of the Syngman Rhee
clique was invited to the meetings of the Security Council, but the proposal that the representative of the
People's Democratic Republic of Korea should be invited was rejected. The Security Council adopted all its
resolutions on the Korean question on the basis solely
of the unilateral information supplied by the United
States delegation and by Syngman Rhee's agent.
219. The illegal resnlutions on the Korean question
adopted by the Security Council under direct pressure
by the United States Government show that the Security Council was not acting in this matter as the
body which is primarily responsible for the maintenance
of peace, but as a tool of the ruling circles of the United
States for unleashing war.
220. Vihen this draft report was considered in the
Security Coundl,12 the USSR delegation pressed for
the deletion from it of the decisions taken by the
Council at a time when it was illegally constituted.
The delegation of the Soviet Union was therefore
unable to vote for the proposal that the Security Council's report should be approved as it stood and abstained
from voting.
221. The USSR delegation considers that it is impossible to take note of the report submitted by the Security
Council unless the decisions adopted at a time when
the Council was illegally constituted are deleted from
the report. The delegation of the Soviet Union will
therefore abstain from voting on the draft resolution
12

Ibid., Nos. 33, 40 and 42.

Printed in U.S.A.

of the Ad Hoc Political Committee regarding the report of the Security Council.
222. I would ask the President to put this draft resoluto the vote.
223. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put to the vote the draft resolution submitted by the
Ad :lioc Political Committee [Aj1679].
The draft resolution was adopted by 45 votes to none,
with 6 abstentions.

The appropriate adjustment of the· frontiers between Egypt and the former Italian colony of
Libya, with particular reference to Jiaragraphs
2 and 3 of annex XI of the Treaty of Peace
with Italy: report of ~~Lle Ad Hoc Political Committee (A/1720)
[Agenda item 59]
224. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
In its report [Aj1720], the Ad Hoc Political Com·.
mitt~ ...; recommends that the General Assembly should
retain this item on the agenda and consider it at the
sixth session. Since the Ad Hoc Political Conunittee did
not propose any text, I suggest the following draft
resolution:
((The General Assembly
((Decides to defer to its sixth session consideration
of item 59 of the agenda of its fifth session, entitled
'The appropriate adjustment of the frontiers between
Egypt and the former Italian colony of Libya, with
particular reference to paragraphs 2 and 3 of annex
XI of the Treaty of Peace with Italy'."
225. If there are no objections, I shall declare this
draft resolution adopted.
It was so decided.
The meetiny rose at 6.15 p.m.

A-40464-Apri11951--3,600

.
