S/2023/430

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 June 2023
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, 9–12 March 2023
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 30 January 2023, the President of the Security Council informed
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo that it had decided to send
a mission to the country from 9 to 12 March 2023. The terms of reference of the
mission are contained in the annex to document S/2023/186. The mission was co-led
by representatives of France and Gabon and comprised the following members:

23-11321 (E)

Albania

Ferit Hoxha (Permanent Representative)

Brazil

Cícero Tobias de Oliveira Freitas (Counsellor)

China

Sun Zhiqiang (Acting Deputy Permanent
Representative)

Ecuador

Hernán Pérez Loose (Permanent Representative)

France

Nicolas de Rivière (Permanent Representative)

Gabon

Michel Xavier Biang (Permanent Representative)

Ghana

Nana Akua Barnor (First Secretary)

Japan

Ishikane Kimihiro (Permanent Representative)

Malta

Vanessa Frazier (Permanent Representative)

Mozambique

Pedro Comissário Afonso (Permanent Representative)

Russian Federation

Anna M. Evstigneeva (Deputy Permanent
Representative)

Switzerland

Pascale Christine Baeriswyl (Permanent
Representative)

United Arab Emirates

Mohamed Issa Abushahab (Deputy Permanent
Representative)

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

Fergus John Eckersley (Political Coordinator)

United States of America

Robert Anthony Wood (Alternate Representative for
Special Political Affairs)

230623

*2311321*

S/2023/430

II. Visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
A.

Meetings in Kinshasa
Briefing by the senior leadership of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
United Nations country team
2.
The members of the Security Council mission met with the leadership of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), the United Nations country team and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region. Discussions revolved around the
implementation of the mandate of MONUSCO, the electoral process, ongoing
regional processes and the future of the United Nations in the country.
3.
During the discussions, United Nations representatives presented the
deterioration of the security situation in the eastern provinces, marked by the
continued expansion of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23). Congolese authorities and
people said they expected the international community to condemn and impose
sanctions on Rwanda. United Nations representatives underscored the need for a
political solution to the crisis and for concerted support for the Nairobi and Luanda
processes, as complementary regional initiatives. In that context, the Security Council
mission members said that the solution to the crisis should be political and that
ongoing efforts to implement decisions made under the Nairobi and Luanda processes
should be further supported. The United Nations representatives advocated in favour
of support to fund the humanitarian response plan in the light of the worsening of the
humanitarian situation in the country. On the electoral process, they mentioned
persistent tensions around voter registration and possible risks associated with an
electoral process that would not respect the constitutional deadline.
4.
The members of the Security Council mission observed that MONUSCO was
operating in a very hostile environment, which impeded del ivery on its mandate and
the work of humanitarian actors. MONUSCO representatives underlined the need to
enforce the decision of the Congolese authorities not to integrate members of armed
groups into the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Cong o. United
Nations representatives explained that MONUSCO began providing logistical support
to the Independent National Electoral Commission, at its official request, through the
transport of 130 tons of electoral materials and continued to work with the U nited
Nations country team to support efforts to consolidate the judicial system and
transitional justice and prevent the recruitment of children.
5.
United Nations representatives also mentioned coordination and communication
between MONUSCO, the Congolese armed forces, the East African Community
regional force and bilateral forces, as part of efforts to deconflict operations and
ensure effective protection of civilians. Specific requests were made to Member
States to provide MONUSCO with capacities and adequate means to support the
implementation of its mandate, as set out in Security Council resolution 2666 (2022).
Council mission members heard further briefings on ongoing discussions between the
Government and the United Nations country team to review the joint transition plan.
Meeting with the Prime Minister and members of the Government
6.
The members of the Security Council mission also met with the Prime Minister,
Jean-Michel Sama Lukonde Kyenge, accompanied by the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister of the Interior, the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, the
Vice-Minister of National Defence, the Chief of Defence Staff of the Congolese
armed forces and the General Commissioner of the Congolese National Police and

2/8

23-11321

S/2023/430

other key members of the Prime Minister’s office. The Prime Minister thanked the
Council for having responded to the request of the Congolese authorities to lift the
notification requirement for the provision of military materiel and assistance. The
Council delegation informed those present that the objective of the visit was to
express solidarity with the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the context of the
deteriorating security situation in the east and to identify areas where its support was
needed.
7.
The Prime Minister gave a briefing on the security situation in the east and
called upon the Security Council to examine evidence of support by Rwanda for M23,
as contained in the reports of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and to impose sanctions against Rwanda. The Prime Minister requested the
support of the Council for regional efforts, an update of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
(commonly known as the Addis Ababa framework agreement), in the light of the
current security situation, and the implementation of the recommendations of the
mini-summit held in Luanda on 23 November 2022. Referring to the memorandum of
10 March 2023 on the new partnership between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations, which was subsequently handed over to the Council
delegation, the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Christophe
Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, noted that the new partnership should focus on the
following three priorities for the Democratic Republic of the Congo: peace and
security; political stability; and social and economic development. On MONUSCO,
the Council’s interlocutors explained that the President had instructed the
Government to work with the United Nations country tea m to review the joint
transition plan, in order to focus the Mission’s role on the following four benchmarks:
security; the protection of civilians; the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme; and the electoral process. They urged the
Council to adapt the Mission’s mandate from peacekeeping to peacemaking or to
provide the MONUSCO force with an effective Intervention Brigade.
8.
The Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs reaffirmed the
Government’s commitment to the Nairobi and Luanda processes, while calling for a
review of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. He called upon the United
Nations to mobilize resources to support the implementation of the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme. The Vice-Prime
Minister also reaffirmed the commitment of the Congolese authorities to hold
elections in 2023, in accordance with Constitutional deadlines but cautioned that the
persistent security situation in the east could impede the holding of an inclusive
electoral process. On the issue of the repatriation of refugees, the Vice -Prime Minister
reiterated his call upon the United Nations to support, through resour ce mobilization,
the implementation of the 2010 tripartite agreement among the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. On the illicit exploitation of natural resources, he called upon th e Security
Council to impose sanctions on perpetrators and to strengthen verification
mechanisms.
Meeting with the President of the National Assembly and the First
Vice-President of the Senate
9.
The Security Council delegation met with the President of the National
Assembly and the First Vice-President of the Senate, accompanied by members of
their respective bureaux. The Council members presented the objective of the visit
and sought the parliament’s view on the role and future of MONUSCO in the country,
progress in ongoing regional initiatives and security sector reform. The Council
members also stressed that MONUSCO was deployed in the country to protect
23-11321

3/8

S/2023/430

civilians and to help to restore stability, adding that United Nations personnel should
be protected by the host country.
10. The President of the National Assembly thanked the delegation for the
continuous support of United Nations Member States since the country’s
independence, citing successive United Nations interventions to address political and
security unrest and secession attempts. Referring to the cooperation among
MONUSCO, the Congolese armed forces and the East African Community regional
force, the President of the National Assembly thanked the troop -contributing
countries for their efforts and sacrifices. The President of the National Assembly
called for all foreign support for the “aggression” against the Democratic Rep ublic of
the Congo to end and urged the Security Council to examine the report of the Group
of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo regarding Rwandan support for
M23. He called for sanctions against countries conducting attacks against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President of the National Assembly stated that the Congolese authorities were
ready for dialogue, but stressed that M23 should withdraw from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. He also called for the cessation of all external support and the
withdrawal of all foreign armed groups from Congolese territory.
11. On the future of MONUSCO and the United Nations in the country, the
President of the National Assembly noted that the perceived inaction of MONUSCO
in areas where attacks against civilians occurred had prompted demonstrations against
MONUSCO in July 2022. He called upon the Security Council to strengthen the
Mission’s mandate and to give MONUSCO the capacities to implement its mandate
to protect civilians. On the cooperation between MONUSCO and the Congolese
armed forces, the President acknowledged that the Mission was providing support to
the Congolese armed forces in terms of medical evacuation an d information-sharing.
12. The members of the Security Council mission encouraged the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue to work towards peaceful, transparent,
inclusive and credible processes for the presidential and legis lative elections
scheduled in 2023, in accordance with the Constitution and electoral law, and stressed
the importance of avoiding incitement to violence and of stepping up efforts to widen
democratic space. The President of the National Assembly noted that the elections
would be held in 2023 and called upon the international community to help to restore
peace in the eastern provinces, so as to enable the holding of an inclusive election.
The President also informed the Council delegation that efforts had been made to
ensure that opposition candidates operated in a conducive and secure environment
and invited international observers to oversee the electoral process. He also thanked
MONUSCO for providing logistical support to the Independent National Electoral
Commission by transporting election materials.
Meeting with representatives of civil society organizations
13. Representatives of civil society organizations stressed that the persistent
security situation in the eastern provinces and the lack of credibility with regard to
the Independent National Electoral Commission and the Constitutional Court were
the main constraints for the holding of inclusive, free and fair elections. According to
the members of the civil society organizations, if the United Nations was convinced
of the need for elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the
aspirations of the Congolese population to vote within the constitutional deadline, it
was imperative that the Security Council put in place measures to help to restore peace
in the country, including sanctions and notification regimes for States supporting
armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to strengthen the
MONUSCO force Intervention Brigade.

4/8

23-11321

S/2023/430

14. Some representatives of civil society organizations encouraged the participation
of civil society in discussions about the transition plan. Women leaders advocated in
favour of the meaningful participation of civil society, including women’s groups, in
ongoing political and peace processes and called for better protection of victims of
sexual violence.
Meeting with members of the opposition
15. Discussions with some opposition leaders were also focused on the security
situation in eastern provinces and the electoral process. They denounced foreign
support provided to M23 and called for sanctions against States supporting armed
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They called for the review of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and for the adjustment of the Mission’s
mandate from peacekeeping to peace enforcement. On the electoral process, some
opposition leaders called for a consensual review of the composition of the
Independent National Electoral Commission and the Constitutional Court and warned
of the risk of political instability if the electoral process was not consensual,
transparent, inclusive, credible and respectful of the constitutional deadline.
Meeting with the President of the Republic
16. The President of the Republic, Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo, received
the Security Council delegation on 10 March 2023 in the presidential palace in
Kinshasa. Council members gave a briefing on the objective of the visit and sought
the President’s views on the situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
efforts to combat the illegal exploitation of natural resources, progress made in
preparations for the electoral process and the role of MONUSCO.
17. The President’s remarks were focused mainly on the deterioration of the security
situation in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of relations
with Rwanda. He stressed that the instability in the eastern part of the country was
linked mainly to the illegal exploitation of natural resources. The P resident called
upon the Security Council to put an end to the current instability and violence. He
expressed regret over the silence and inaction of the international community, despite
the crisis having resulting in more than 10 million deaths.
18. The President noted that hostile actions by some segments of the population
against MONUSCO were partly owing to the inaction of the international community
to resolve the M23 crisis. He underscored that to regain the credibility of MONUSCO,
the Security Council should strengthen the Intervention Brigade to enable it to
conduct offensive operations against M23. The Presiden t also stressed that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was in urgent need of stability to hold free and
fair elections within the constitutional deadlines.

B.

Meetings in Goma, North Kivu Province
Meeting with the Governor of North Kivu, the Minister of National Defence
and Former Combatants and the Minister of Social Affairs, Humanitarian
Action and National Solidarity
19. In his briefing to the members of the Security Council mission, the Governor of
North Kivu provided information on the activities of local and foreign armed groups,
namely the Cooperative pour le développement du Congo (CODECO), Mai -Mai, the
Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and M23. He commended MONUSCO for its
support, but expressed regret that that support had become passive since the
resurgence of the M23 in November 2021, which had prompted distrust of
MONUSCO among the population. He denounced the terrorist attacks on civilian

23-11321

5/8

S/2023/430

populations by the ADF group affiliated with Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh) and the use of increasingly sophisticated explosive devices. The Governor
called upon the Council to support the implementation of decisions made under the
Nairobi and Luanda processes, to examine the reports of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to impose sanctions on Rwanda, to support the
implementation of the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery and
Stabilization Programme and to facilitate the return of foreign armed groups to their
countries of origin, notably the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda. The
Minister of National Defence and Former Combatants called upon the Council to
assume its responsibility by restoring peace and security in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to provide the latter with the military and economic means to defend
itself.
20. The Governor also provided information to the Security Council delegation on
the illegal exploitation of natural resources and called upon the Council to require
States members of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region to respect
the Protocol against the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources of 30 November
2006 and to require international organizations involved in mining governance to
launch a mechanism on the traceability of minerals exported by Rwanda.
Ceremony to pay tribute to fallen peacekeepers
21. During a wreath-laying ceremony, the members of the Security Council mission
paid tribute to the fallen peacekeepers who had paid the ultimate sacrifice in the
service of peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Meeting with key actors of the Nairobi and Luanda processes
22. The Security Council delegation engaged with the following key regional actors:
the High Representative of the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Serge Tshibangu; the Commander of the East African Community regional force,
Major General Jeff Nyagah; and the Head of the ad hoc verification mechanism
established under the Luanda process, Lieutenant General João Nassone. Lieutenant
General Nassone gave a briefing to the members of the Council mission on the work
of the mechanism and informed them that M23 was not respecting the various
timelines for its withdrawal. Major General Nyagah gave a briefing on the new
deployment posture of the regional force and noted that control of supply roads to
Goma by M23 was having a serious impact on the price of basic commodities, on
humanitarian access and on freedom of movement and stressed the need to support
the political tracks of the Nairobi process and the Luanda process through diplomatic
pressure on M23 and its allies. While calling for financial s upport for the regional
force, Major General Nyagah also identified areas where technical support was
needed from MONUSCO. Professor Tshibangu gave a briefing on preparations for
the holding of the fourth round of consultations within the framework of the Nairobi
process and called for financial and technical assistance to support “transitional
measures” under the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery and
Stabilization Programme, pending the release in August 2023 by the World Bank o f
$250 million allocated to its programme to improve stability and resilience in
conflict-affected eastern provinces.
Meeting with the Mission force
23. The members of the Security Council mission thanked MONUSCO for its
efforts to implement its mandate amid various constraints. Discussions revolved
around challenges faced by MONUSCO in the delivery of its protection of civilians
mandated task, cooperation with the Congolese armed forces and the Eas t African
Community regional force and how the Council could best support the Mission.
6/8

23-11321

S/2023/430

24. The exchange with the MONUSCO force revealed that the Mission had adapted
its posture through physical presence and escorts, in order to better address the threat
posed by armed groups such as ADF, CODECO and Mai-Mai, which continued their
attacks against civilians in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The MONUSCO force presented its posture and strategy with regard to M23. In that
context, the Mission’s actions were limited by disinformation and restrictions of
movement imposed on its convoys. Nonetheless, MONUSCO stressed that it
continued to ensure protection of civilians in areas controlled by M23.
25. On the cooperation between MONUSCO and the Congolese armed forces, the
Mission noted that it continued to provide support to the Congolese armed forces , in
compliance with the United Nations Due Diligence Policy on Human Rights and in
accordance with resolution 2666 (2022). Emphasis was placed on the need to
accelerate security sector reforms by ensuring the professionalization of the
Congolese armed forces, with a structured and clear chain of command. MONUSCO
also provided information to the Security Council mission members on its cooperation
with the East African Community regional force through coordination and
information-sharing. MONUSCO reiterated its requests for the generation of
additional capabilities for its force. The mission members indicated that the Council
looked forward to receiving options for the reconfiguration of MONUSCO from the
Secretary-General.
Meeting with experts in natural resources
26. During their interaction with the members of the Security Council mission,
experts on natural resources provided briefings on regional initiatives with regard to
the transparent and legal management of natural resources and highlighted the
progress achieved since the high-level workshop held in Khartoum in 2021. A
presentation was also given on the initiative regarding batteries and electric vehicles
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia, which was supported by
the Economic Commission for Africa.
27. Experts made the following recommendations to strengthen security in artisanal
mining areas: to provide support to States demonstrating a high level of commitment
to the implementation, at the national level, of measures relating to the responsible
sourcing of minerals; to support the implementation of initiatives that promote fair
trade in minerals in the Great Lakes region; to advocate in favour of multi -donor
support to strengthen the capacity of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the governance of the mining sector; to provide technical support to the
National Commission to Combat Mining Fraud; to promote the use of national
initiatives and the operationalization of local multi-stakeholder structures; to
encourage destination countries and consumers of mining products to set up funds to
support the stabilization and development of countries of origin; and to encourage
States members of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region to respect
their commitments for the establishment of responsible supply chains and to boost
the stability of mining areas.
Meeting with women leaders of civil society organizations
28. The members of the Security Council mission heard briefings by women leaders
on the impact of the recurring cycles of conflict in eastern provinces on women and
children who were increasingly victims of sexual violence. They noted that armed
group activities had worsened the humanitarian situation, in particular in North Kivu,
where M23 continued to be active. They called upon the Council to help to restore
peace in eastern provinces, investigate crimes committed in the east, hold perpetrators
of serious crimes accountable and impose sanctions on armed groups and
neighbouring countries supporting them, and called for national dialogues between
23-11321

7/8

S/2023/430

neighbouring countries and foreign armed groups. Women leaders also called for the
support of the Council to ensure participation by women and young people in peace
processes and to ensure the protection and promotion of human rights. The delegation
reiterated the Council’s support for women leaders and committed itself to continuing
to work towards the restoration of peace and stability in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Council members also noted that MONUSCO was in the country
to support stabilization efforts.
Visit to an internally displaced persons site
29. The members of the Security Council mission visited the Bushagara internally
displaced persons site (5 km outside Goma town), which was hosting 2,900
households, and was welcomed by the Minister of Social Affairs, Humanitarian
Action and National Solidarity. Representatives of internally displa ced persons called
upon the Council to stop the conflict in the east so that they could return to their
villages. The Minister thanked the United Nations and humanitarian actors for the
assistance and noted that other internally displaced persons sites nee ded humanitarian
assistance. The delegation took note of the situation and pledged to work towards an
urgent response to provide humanitarian assistance to the population in need.
Press conference
30. The visit ended with a press conference, during which the co-leads of the
mission shared with the press the conclusions that the Security Council had drawn
from its mission.

8/8

23-11321
