102

General Asse01bly-Twenty-sixth Session

Trust Territory of New Guinea in their eflorts freely
to decide their own future,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the
Trusteeship Agreement of 13 December 1946;
2. Decides that, in accordance with the express
desire of the people of the Territories, the name to be
applied for United Nations purposes to the Territory
of Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea shall
henceforth be "Papua New Guinea";
3. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
necessary steps to ensure the speedy attainment by
Papua New Guinea of self-govemment and independence as a single political and territorial entity and,
in that regard, to establish, in consultation with the
freely elected representatives of the people, a specific
time-table for the free exercise by the people of Papua
New Guinea of their right to self-determination and
independence;
4. Urges the administering Power to discourage
separatist movements and to ensure that the unity of
Papua New Guinea is preserved throughout the period
leading up to independence;
5. Requests the Trusteeship Council, while continuing to exercise its specific responsibilities towards
the Trust Territory of New Guinea, and the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to bear
in mind the need to consider Papua N ew Guinea as a
single political and territorial entity and to take account
of this when determining the hineraries of future
visiting missions in consultation with the administering
Power;
6. Further requests the Trusteeship Council to continue to include non-members of the Trusteeship Council in its periodic visiting missions on the basis recommended in General Assembly resolution 2590 (XXIV);
7. W elcomes the invitation extended by the administering Power to the Trusteeship Council to dispatch a
special mission to observe the elections to the Papua
New Guinea House of Assembly in 1972 and the fact
that the mission will be composed as recommended in
General Assembly resolution 2590 (XXIV);
8. Recommends that the report of this special mission and those of future missions should be submitted
both to the Trusteeship Council and to the Special
Committee;
9. Urges the administering Power to intensify its
programme of political education in Papua New Guinea
and to expedite the implementation of the programme
for accelerated localization of the Papua New Guinea
public service;
1O. Requests the administering Power further to
intensify and extend the educational services, including
technical and administrative training, provided for the
people of Papua New Guinea;
11. Further requests the adrninistering Power to
continue to expand the measures being taken to promote ownership, management and participation by the
inhabitants of Papua New Guinea in enterprises
throughout all sectors of the economy;
12. Requests the administering Power to report to
the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee on
the implementation of the present resolution;

13. Requests the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee to continue to examine this question
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-seventh session.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2866 (XXVI). Question of the Seychelles
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Seychelles,
Having considered the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Cornrnittee on the Situation with regard
to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 19
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its previous resolutions relating to
the question, in particular resolution 2709 (XXV) of
14 December 1970,
A ffirming that the Seychelles should accede to independence without any prejudice to their territorial
integrity,
_Mindful of the views expressed to the Special ComIlllttee by the leader of the Seychelles People's United
Party, 20
Noting the statement of the Chief Minister of the
Seychelles21 that he would welcome the dispatch of a
United Nations mission to the Territory and would
agree to the holding of a referendum on the future
status of the Territory under the auspices of the
United Nations,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Seychelles to self-determination and independence
in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), and calls upon the Govemment of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem Ireland, as the
administering Power, to take ali necessary measures to
enable the people to exercise that right without further
delay;
2. Requests the administering Power, in accordance
with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, to receive the special mission of the
United Nations envisaged hereunder and to make the
necessary arrangements, in consultation with the special
mission, for the holding of a referendum on the future
status of the Territory;
3. Requests the Special Comrnittee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, in consultation with the administering
Power and with the assistance of the Secretary-General,
to appoint immediately a special mission to visit the
Seychelles for the purpose of recommending practica!
steps to be taken for the full implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly-in particular for the purpose of determining the extent of
19 !bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/
Rev.1), chap. IX.
20 See A/ AC.109/SC.2/SR.96.
2 1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentysixth Session, Fourth Committee, 1927th meeting.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

United Nations participation in the preparation and
supervision of the referendum on the future status of
the Territory-and to submit a report thereon to the
Special Committee;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
examination of the question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2867 (XXVI). Question of Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia
and St. Vincent
The General Assembly,
H aving considered the question of Antigua, Dominica,
Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and
St. Vincent,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the fu11 implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its previous resolutions relating to
the question, in particular resolution 2710 (XXV) of
14 December 1970,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 22
l. T akes note of the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Antigua, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-NevisAnguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent;
2. Requests the Special Committee to give full consideration to this question in accordance with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, in particular resolution 2593 (XXIV) of
16 December 1969, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its twenty-seventh session.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2868 (XXVI). Question of Niue and the Tokelau
Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Niue and the
Tokelau Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,23
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
22 !bid.,

Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/
Rev.1), chap. XXII.
28 Jbid., chaps. IV and XV.

103

Having heard the statement of the representative of
the administering Power, 24
Taking into account the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Committee regarding developments in Niue and the Tokelau Islands,
Noting the recent constitutional developments in Niue
which have been embodied in the Niue Amendment
Act, enacted in 1971 by the Government of New
Zealand as the administering Power,
Noting with appreciation that the administering
Power has responded positively to the requests contained in the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly by extending an invitation to the Special
Committee to send a visiting mission to Niue and the
Tokelau Islands in 1972,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Niue and the Tokelau Islands to self-determination in
conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
2. Calls upon the administering Power to take
further measures, in accordance with the wishes of the
people, to enable the people of the Territory to exercise
their right to self-determination as soon as possible;
3. Takes note of the arrangements made by the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for
the dispatch of a visiting mission to Niue in 197225
and requests the Special Committee to instruct the
visiting mission to obtain first-hand information on conditions in the Territory and on the wishes and aspirations of its people and to recommend practica! steps
for their advancement as soon as possible towards selfgovernment and self-determination;
4. Requests the administering Power to provide al1
the necessary assistance and facilities to the visiting
mission in the discharge of its tasks;
5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2869 (XXVI). Question of American Samoa, Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Brunei, Cavman Islands, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Guam,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Turks and
Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Bahamas, Bermuda, British Virgin lslands, Brunei,
Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Gilbert and
Ellice Islands, Guam, Montserrat, New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Turks
and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
24 lbid., Twenty-sixth Session, Fourth Committee, 1960th
meeting.
25 !bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/
Rev .1), chap. IV, para. 22.
