S/2016/44*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 January 2016
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
Security Council tasks under Security Council resolution 2231 (2015)
1.
The present note sets forth practical arrangements and procedures for the
Security Council for carrying out tasks related to the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), particularly with respect to the provisions specified in paragraphs 2
to 7 of annex B to that resolution.
2.
The Security Council shall take any necessary action to support and improve the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), including:
(a)

Monitoring the implementation of the resolution;

(b) Taking action, as appropriate, to improve the implementation by Member
States of the resolution;
(c) Answering enquiries from Member States and international organizations
regarding the implementation of the resolution;
(d) Responding appropriately to information regarding alleged actions
inconsistent with the resolution;
(e) Undertaking outreach activities to promote proper implementation of the
resolution, including the provision of practical guidance;
(f) Reviewing and deciding on proposals made by Member States pursuant to
paragraphs 2, 4, 5 and 6 (b) of annex B to the resolution, including the review of
recommendations from the Joint Commission regarding proposals by Member States
and international organizations to participate in or permit the activities set forth in
paragraph 2 of annex B to the resolution and section 6 of annex IV to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (i.e., the procurement channel functions);
(g)

Granting exemptions to the restrictions, as specified in the resolution.

Practical arrangements
3.
To facilitate its work under resolution 2231 (2015), the Security Council shall
select on an annual basis one member to serve as its facilitator for the functions
specified in the present note. The facilitator shall brief the other members of the
Council on its work and the implementation of the resolution every six months, in
parallel with the report submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with
paragraph 7 below.
* Reissued for technical reasons on 25 February 2016.

16-00208* (E)

250116

*1600208*

S/2016/44

4.
In normal circumstances, the Security Council shall convene informal meetings
at the expert level to carry out the functions specified in the present note.
5.
Also in normal circumstances, the Security Council shall seek to make decisions
related to the functions specified in the present note by consensus and under a noobjection procedure, with a deadline of at least five working days, without prejudice
to the possibility of voting pursuant to the Security Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
Secretariat
6.
The Security Council requests that the Secretary-General appoint the Security
Council Affairs Division of the Department of Political Affairs as a point of contact in
the Secretariat and to support the work of the Security Council and of its facilitator on
those issues. The point of contact shall:
(a) Assist the facilitator in the organization and staffing of informal meetings
of the Security Council related to the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015);
(b) Manage all incoming and outgoing communications related to
implementation of the resolution and assist the facilitator in corresponding with
Member States on behalf of the Security Council;
(c) Draft correspondence, speaking notes and briefings of the facilitator
related to the implementation of the resolution;
(d) Maintain and archive all information and documents relating to the
Security Council’s work related to the implementation of the resolution;
(e) Maintain and promote publicly available information on the restrictions
imposed by the Security Council, including through the Council’s website and
outreach activities;
(f) Provide administrative support for the Security Council’s review of
recommendations from the Joint Commission, including:
(i) Receiving proposals from Member States seeking to engage in nuclearrelated activities or transfers;
(ii) Responding to queries from Member States about the procedures for the
submission of a proposal to the Security Council and the process for review;
(iii) Circulating immediately to the Joint Commission Coordinator and the
members of the Security Council incoming proposals and transmitting
recommendations from the Joint Commission to the members of the Council and
final decisions of the Council to the relevant Member States;
(iv) Receiving any other communications from the Joint Commission and
transmitting them to the members of the Security Council, and transmitting any
relevant communications from the Security Council to the Joint Commission;
(g) Perform any other task, upon request from the Security Council, to support
the implementation of the resolution.
7.
The Security Council requests that the Secretary-General report to the Security
Council every six months on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). Prior to
the public release of that report, the Security Council shall meet informally, normally

2/3

16-00208

S/2016/44

at the expert level, to review the findings and recommendations contained in the
report.
Procurement channel approval
8.
The Security Council shall review and take action on proposals by Member
States and international organizations to participate in or permit activities set forth in
paragraph 2 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015) and paragraph 6 of annex IV to the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. The process shall be as follows:
(a)

Member States shall submit proposals directly to the Security Council;

(b) The Security Council shall immediately forward such proposals to the
Joint Commission Coordinator for the Joint Commission’s review;
(c) The Joint Commission, following the procedures specified in annex IV to
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, as well as any further procedure developed
by consensus, shall provide a recommendation to the Security Council;
(d) After five working days following receipt by the Security Council of such
a recommendation, that recommendation shall be deemed to be approved by the
Council unless the Council has adopted a resolution to reject it;
(e)

The Security Council shall notify the proposing State of its decision.

9.
Once the Security Council receives a recommendation from the Joint
Commission, any Council member may request a vote of the Council to reject that
recommendation. If a vote is requested, then the Council member requesting the vote
should explain why it believes that the recommendation should be rejected. The
member may also request an informal meeting of the Council to discuss the matter
further. Any resolution to reject a recommendation from the Joint Commission must
be adopted within five working days following receipt of the recommendation, o r else
the recommendation shall be deemed to be approved.
10. The Security Council shall strive to take other actions related to the present
functions, including responding to enquiries, providing guidance and examining and
taking appropriate action on information regarding alleged actions inconsistent with
the relevant restrictions, by consensus.
11. The members of the Security Council shall treat as confidential documents
created by, transmitted to or sent from the Council under the present arrangements and
procedures.
12. Communications submitted to the Security Council under the procedure
specified in paragraph 8 of the present note shall not be considered as official
documents of the Council.
13. The Security Council shall coordinate closely with the Joint Commission on all
tasks of the Council related to the nuclear-related restrictions imposed in resolution
2231 (2015). The Council further notes that exporting States are requested to
cooperate with the Joint Commission in accordance with annex IV of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action.

16-00208

3/3
