S/PV.9318

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9318th meeting

Tuesday, 9 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei (S/2023/305)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-13045 (E)
*2313045*

S/PV.9318

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

10 April in Khartoum, the parties agreed to continue
discussing issues related to Abyei, including the final
status. I welcome those positive developments and
commend the parties for their willingness to engage.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Abyei (S/2023/305)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Sudan and
South Sudan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Martha Ama
Akyaa Pobee, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa
in the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and Peace Operations; and Ms. Hanna Serwaa
Tetteh, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Horn of Africa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/305, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pobee.
Ms. Pobee: I thank members for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and the
mission’s support to the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM). I take this
opportunity to update the Council on some of the most
recent developments since the publication of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2023/305), including those
related to the outbreak of hostilities in the Sudan.
The outbreak of fighting in the Sudan on 15 April
capped off a reporting period marked by encouraging
signs of engagement between the Sudan and South
Sudan on the Abyei issue. Of significance in that
regard was a meeting between the President of South
Sudan and the Chairperson of the Sovereign Council of
the Sudan in Juba in January, at which they discussed
Abyei and possible cooperation on their shared border.
At a meeting between the chairpersons of the national
committees of the two countries, convened on 9 and
2/19

09/05/2023

Despite the positive momentum created earlier in the
reporting period, the outbreak of violence in the Sudan
may deeply impact the chance for political progress on
Abyei and border issues. With fighting ongoing and
mediation efforts under way, the United Nations will
continue to support the Sudan and South Sudan when
dialogue on Abyei resumes. Special Envoy Tetteh, who
will brief the Council today, will provide members with
a more comprehensive update on developments related
to the Sudan and South Sudan.
In Abyei, UNISFA is monitoring the potential
impact of the fighting in the Sudan, such as an influx
of displaced persons, the entry of armed groups into
the Area or the emboldening of spoilers in local
intercommunal relations. While none of those risks
have materialized in a major way so far, the mission
remains alert to their possibility. More immediately,
UNISFA has already taken steps to protect the safety
of its personnel in the Sudan, with the evacuation of 33
personnel from Khartoum on 23 April. On 2 and 3 May,
58 United Nations civilian personnel were evacuated
from Kadugli, following a decision by the designated
official for the Sudan.
Despite the cessation of hostilities agreement
signed between the Ngok Dinka and Twic Dinka in
April 2022, intermittent clashes continued to take place
in southern Abyei, with reports of incidents on the
opposite side of the southern boundary. The tensions
also led to protests within the UNISFA headquarters
demanding the removal of Twic Dinka contracted staff,
compelling the mission to provide physical security for
those individuals.
UNISFA continued to support efforts led by
the Government of South Sudan to reduce tensions
between the Ngok Dinka and Twic Dinka communities,
in close coordination with the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS). Those efforts included a
civil-society-led dialogue conducted in Wau in April.
Although the dialogue did not result in a formal
agreement being signed, it did produce agreement in
principle on a cessation of hostilities. The outbreaks
of violence between the two communities in Abyei
have since become less frequent. A related concern is
the proliferation of weapons, particularly in southern
23-13045

09/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Abyei, which has coincided with the emergence of the
Ngok Dinka youth self-defence group known as Tit
Baai, which was formed after clashes began between the
Ngok Dinka and Twic Dinka in February 2022. UNISFA
continues to confiscate weapons and ammunition, in
keeping with Abyei’s weapon-free status.
Despite the continued trust deficit between
the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities, the
violence between them declined overall. UNISFA and
its partners were able to convene a seasonal peace
conference in Todach, inside the Abyei Area, in March.
In an agreement signed at the meeting, the communities
agreed on a cessation of hostilities and on ensuring
freedom of movement, among other measures aimed at
peaceful coexistence. Women from both communities
participated and presented recommendations that
helped inform the agreement.
The humanitarian environment in Abyei remained
challenging, with United Nations and non-governmental
organizations aiding some 212,000 vulnerable people in
Abyei, including roughly 30,000 internally displaced.
Intercommunal violence affected humanitarian efforts,
with some organizations withdrawing from the Agok
area in February and two aid workers killed in an
attack in Rumamier on 2 January. The recent outbreak
of fighting in the Sudan risks further complicating
the humanitarian situation in Abyei. As of 8 May, a
total of 535 people from the Sudan have been recorded
as arriving in the Area. Humanitarian partners are
anticipating and preparing for more population
movements.
The reconfiguration of UNISFA into a United
Nations multinational peacekeeping force is in its final
stages. Of the 3,250 military personnel authorized,
3,078 have deployed. Again, the fighting in the Sudan
has disrupted deployment routes, meaning that the
scheduled arrival of additional personnel and equipment
will have to be postponed, which will affect force
capacity. Planning is currently under way on alternative
arrangements that can minimize the delay while
safeguarding the security of personnel and equipment.
The situation in the Sudan has also impacted UNISFA’s
logistics. Our mission support colleagues are working
to secure the reliable resupply of goods. That includes
logistics for the headquarters of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism in Kadugli, in
the Sudan, and its two team sites, where restrictions
on air and ground movement have created additional

S/PV.9318

challenges for resupply as well as the implementation
of mandates.
UNISFA continues to face challenges related to
force mobility, particularly during the rainy season,
which severely restricts ground movement. At the
same time, no progress has been made regarding
the re-operationalization of the Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism’s Sector 1 headquarters in
Gok Machar, South Sudan, and its two team sites,
following its forced withdrawal in 2021. We note the
call of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism on
18 January for a strategy to sensitize the communities
along the border, including in Gok Machar, and urge
the Government of South Sudan to take the necessary
steps to enable the re-establishment of those locations
as soon as possible. Due to the non-issuance of visas,
there has been no progress on the deployment of the
three formed police units and additional individual
police officers mandated by the Security Council.
In the meantime, United Nations police continued to
assist and monitor the community protection and joint
protection committees. Needless to say, it is now more
critical than ever to provide rule-of-law support to the
people of Abyei, and we count on the Security Council
to lend its valuable support on that issue.
During the period under review, UNISFA reported
the deployment of South Sudanese military and police
personnel in Agok, in southern Abyei, and Sudanese
national police in Farouk, in northern Abyei. The
mission sent notes verbales to both Governments
requesting them to remove their security personnel in
line with Abyei’s demilitarized status.
I am pleased to report that the United Nations
country teams in the Sudan and South Sudan, in
collaboration with UNISFA, finalized the administrative
arrangements for the Abyei joint programme and began
the implementation of projects to create an environment
conducive to peaceful coexistence. The first projects
include the establishment of a nutrition centre in Amiet
market for women and children and the provision of
vocational training for young people.
In conclusion, I would like to thank Major
General Benjamin Sawyerr and the women and men
of UNISFA for their work in the service of peace in
Abyei, particularly at a time marked by additional
challenges and uncertainty. I would also like to express
our appreciation to the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their close collaboration and to the

23-130453/19

S/PV.9318

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

members of the Security Council for their continued
support to UNISFA.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Pobee
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Tetteh.
Ms. Tetteh: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
progress in implementing resolution 2046 (2012),
which relates to outstanding bilateral issues between
the Sudan and South Sudan, and the situation in South
Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
The unprecedented conflict that erupted in the
Sudan on 15 April between the Sudanese Armed Forces
(SAF) and the Rapid Support Forces (RSF), in addition
to its devastating impact on the Sudanese population,
is also having a profound effect on the bilateral
relationship between the Sudan and South Sudan.
The humanitarian, security, economic and political
consequences of the developments in the Sudan have
raised concerns among the South Sudanese political
leadership. The unstable situation has already seen the
return of South Sudanese refugees being hosted by the
Sudan, as my colleague Assistant Secretary-General
Pobee mentioned, and we could potentially see more than
200,000 South Sudanese refugees hosted by the Sudan
returning if stability is not restored soon. That would
be a challenge for a country where two thirds of the
population already require humanitarian assistance. As
the Sudanese authorities are not currently in a position
to protect their borders effectively, the insecurity at
the border between the Sudan and South Sudan could
increase with the cross-border movements of armed
and criminal groups. The fighting in the Sudan is also
affecting the daily commercial activities and delivery
of food and other basic goods from the Sudan to South
Sudan and could potentially put oil exports from South
Sudan through Port Sudan at risk.
Based on our consultations, the Government
of South Sudan is wary of the consequences of the
Sudanese conflict for South Sudan’s stability and
security and has been particularly proactive in
engaging with the Sudanese parties. Juba has been at
the forefront of mediation efforts between the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces leaders,
including as part of the 16 April regional proposal made
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) for the Presidents of South Sudan, Kenya and
Djibouti to urgently travel to Khartoum to engage with
4/19

09/05/2023

the parties; as part of the joint South Sudanese-Egyptian
call for a ceasefire and proposal of joint mediation; and
in a standalone South Sudanese engagement which,
we note, resulted in a commitment in principle by
Sudanese military leaders to a seven-day cease fire,
which was announced by South Sudan’s Ministry for
Foreign Affairs.
The conflict in the Sudan is putting in jeopardy the
incremental progress achieved by the two countries in
addressing their outstanding bilateral issues. Before
the fighting erupted, relations between Khartoum and
Juba were stable, characterized by regular bilateral
meetings, including at the highest level, with General
Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan visiting Juba in January and
February. The countries also held a meeting of their
Joint Political and Security Mechanism (JPSM) in Juba
in January, but no other joint mechanisms provided
for in their 2012 cooperation agreements have so far
been reactivated.
While the Sudan is experiencing this conflict,
South Sudan is still grappling with a fragile security
and political situation. President Salva Kiir Mayardit’s
decision on 3 March to dismiss the Minister of Defence
and Veterans Affairs, Angelina Teny, and Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition
appointees have sparked tensions, members of the
international community have made engagements to
seek to reduce the impact. As has been the case over the
past few years, high-level engagements have featured
prominently in the countries’ bilateral relations.
In January, General Al-Burhan and President
Kiir agreed to establish a joint security force along
their countries’ borders to prevent the infiltration of
illegal weapons and combat negative forces and their
activities. General Al-Burhan and President Kiir also
agreed to deploy joint patrols to halt the uncontrolled
flow of arms and ammunition across the border and
to institute regular meetings between their respective
national security agencies to share intelligence and
coordinate actions to address potential threats.
On 19 February, they closed the workshop that
evaluated the Juba Peace Agreement in the Sudan,
ending with the signing of the third amendment to
the implementation matrix. At the same workshop,
President Kiir also urged the non-signatory rebel
movements — the SPLM-North faction, led by
Abdelaziz Al-Hilu, and the Sudan Liberation Army
faction, led by Abdul Wahid Al-Nur — to join the
23-13045

09/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

peace process in order to bring about sustainable
peace within the Sudan and within the two countries.
General Al-Burhan reiterated the commitment of his
Government to working with the signatories to the Juba
Peace Agreement to fully implement the matrix in view
of the desire for sustainable peace in the Sudan.
In late February, a high-level South Sudanese
delegation — comprised of Mr. Benjamin Bol Mel,
presidential envoy on special programmes; Mr. Dier
Tong Ngor, Minister of Finance and Economic Planning;
Mr. Puot Kang Chol, the Minister of Petroleum; and
Mr. Johnny Ohisa Damian, Governor of the Bank of
South Sudan— travelled to Khartoum for negotiations
on oil and other economic matters. The two countries
signed agreements relating to economic and technical
arrangements on oil, including arrangements
concerning the transportation, processing and export of
South Sudan’s crude oil, as well as the arrangements for
crude oil lifted by the Sudan to supply the Um-Dabakir
power station and the Khartoum Refinery, in addition
to dealing with other financial issues.
On 13 March, as guarantor of South Sudan’s Peace
Agreement, the Sudan dispatched to Juba a high-level
delegation led by a member of the Sovereign Council,
Lieutenant General Shams-Eddin Al-Kabashi, and
accompanied by the Minister of Defence, Lieutenant
General Yassin Ibrahim Yassin, as well as the acting
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ali Elsadig Ali, to help
unblock the deadlock between President Kiir and First
Vice-President Riek Machar.
Subsequent to that visit, there was also an
announcement by South Sudan’s Presidential Adviser
on Security Affairs, General Tut Gatluak, of the
readiness of the two sides to discuss the implementation
of the previously negotiated four freedoms agreement.
The efforts of the Sudanese as guarantors of the Peace
Agreement have been complemented by the efforts
deployed jointly by the African Union (AU), IGAD,
the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), as well as by the engagement
of Ethiopia’s Prime Minister, Abiy Ahmed, with
both leaders.
Concerning the final status of Abyei, the two
countries agreed during their meeting in Khartoum on
24 October 2022 to meet again every three or months on
the issue. Meanwhile, a meeting of the JPSM, co-chaired
by the Ministers of Defence of the two countries, took

S/PV.9318

place in Juba on 18 January. Among other decisions,
the JPSM directed the Military Chiefs of Staff to form
a joint committee to monitor the implementation of the
resolution of the previous JPSM meeting regarding the
redeployment of their respective forces outside the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone and to develop a concept
of operations to work on the decision by their Heads
of State concerning the deployment of a joint force
across the Sudan-South Sudan border. The meeting also
urged the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee (AJOC) to
resume its work within one month, including by holding
regular meetings to ease tensions among communities
in the Abyei box. It should be recalled that the AJOC
last met in 2017.
Another meeting, previously referred to by
my colleague, was held by the Abyei Committee
chairpersons in Khartoum on 9 and 10 April, with the
participation of Major General Benjamin Sawyerr,
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
Force Commander and Acting Head of Mission, and
myself, which was the first time since I took on this
role that the parties had met in that format to discuss
the future of Abyei. They did not reach agreement on
the prioritization of the issues to be discussed, with the
Sudan emphasizing that the improvement of the security
situation in the Area and the provision of humanitarian
assistance and services should precede discussions on
Abyei’s final status, whereas South Sudan was at the
time only interested in discussions on the final status.
However, both agreed to continue their discussions
and to better prepare for the next meeting, which was
planned to take place in Juba before the end of April.
However, in the light of the current developments, it
will take time to recover the momentum that had been
building in respect of the discussion of those issues.
I would now like to turn to the developments
concerning the two areas of South Kordofan and
the Blue Nile. Like most of the Sudan’s states, Blue
Nile and South Kordofan have been affected by the
conflict between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Rapid Support Forces, with deteriorating security
and humanitarian situations. In Blue Nile, clashes
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid
Support Forces have been reported, and the conflict
has displaced some of the civilian population. In South
Kordofan, humanitarian activities have been suspended
or restricted due to the fighting between the Sudanese
Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces.

23-130455/19

S/PV.9318

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The conflict between the Sudanese Armed Forces
and the Rapid Support Forces will only deepen the
mistrust between the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North, led by Abdelaziz Al-Hilu, and the
Sudanese military actors regarding the comprehensive
peace negotiations on the two areas. In January,
there was no concrete outcome from the meeting in
Juba between General Al-Burhan and SPLM-North’s
Abdelaziz Al-Hilu, despite the call by President Kiir
for the non-signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement to
join the peace process in the Sudan.
The priority now obviously is to stop the fighting
and to start constructive negotiations between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces
that will hopefully lead to a permanent ceasefire and the
return to a transitional civilian Government, however
distant that prospect immediately seems. That would be
the prerequisite for meaningful engagement to resume
with the SPLM-North Al-Hilu faction, both for future
engagement on Abyei and to address the outstanding
bilateral issues between the Sudan and South Sudan.
My Office will continue to engage with the
Governments of both countries, the AU and IGAD and
work to create more fortuitous circumstances conducive
to the return to regular dialogue towards the settlement
of the issues provided for in the 2012 cooperation
agreements. My Office will also continue to offer its
support and work with colleagues in the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan and
UNMISS on those issues, including the resolution of
the issues pertaining to the South Kordofan and Blue
Nile states.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Tetteh
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Assistant-Secretary-General Pobee and Special Envoy
Tetteh for sharing the progress of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) on mandate
implementation and their updates on Abyei.
I would like to begin by thanking UNISFA’s
leadership personnel, who continue to provide stability
and peace in Abyei, despite the ongoing challenges
from the Sudan crisis. It is disappointing to learn that
hostilities in Khartoum have further jeopardized the
safety and security of UNISFA personnel, as well as
6/19

09/05/2023

impeded UNISFA’s ability to carry out its mandated
tasks, including protecting civilians, assisting
humanitarian efforts, supporting a peaceful settlement
of the final status of Abyei and its border issues and
establishing the Abyei police service.
The United States condemns the ongoing fighting in
Khartoum between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Rapid Support Forces. We are deeply concerned about
the killing of over 500 people, the internal displacement
of 334,000 civilians and the safety and security of over
100,000 people fleeing to neighbouring countries.
We are also deeply concerned about the protection of
children and reports of conflict-related sexual violence
towards women, children and men.
According to UNICEF, the fighting in the Sudan
has led to a child-protection crisis, in which children are
separated from their families, abducted and recruited.
We gravely stress that child protection must be a priority
and urge UNISFA, regional partners and international
partners and Council members to follow good practices
for child protection during the Sudan crisis.
We stand in solidarity with the people of the
Sudan in their unshakable commitment to democracy
and urgently call for the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the Rapid Support Forces to implement and uphold a
permanent nationwide ceasefire. We urgently call on
the parties to commit to ensuring the safety, security
and protection of civilians and to return immediately
to the process of resuming the Sudan’s transition to
civilian rule.
We are also gravely concerned for the millions of
civilians in need of life-saving humanitarian assistance
in the Sudan and the growing attacks on humanitarian
aid workers. Armed actors are targeting humanitarian
assets and facilities, looting field vehicles and
damaging aircraft used to transport aid workers and
supplies, limiting assistance to areas where it is needed
most. The inability of humanitarian organizations to
safely operate threatens to further impact millions of
vulnerable Sudanese, especially those displaced by the
ongoing fighting.
The United States reiterates its call to parties to
ensure the safety and security of all United Nations
staff, facilities and humanitarian and medical personnel.
We strongly urge the parties to ensure UNISFA and
humanitarian partners have immediate, full, safe and
unhindered access and capacity to carry out their
life-saving work throughout the Sudan.
23-13045

09/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We are deeply alarmed at the consistent presence
of Sudanese and South Sudanese forces and police in
Abyei — a clear violation of the demilitarization of
the Abyei box. We stress that Abyei should remain
demilitarized from any forces besides UNISFA.
We further stress the need for South Sudan to
support the Joint Border Verification Monitoring
Mechanism in re-establishing Sector 1, located in
southern Abyei, given the ongoing fighting between the
Ngok Dinka and Twic Dinka, the influx of refugees and
internally displaced people fleeing from the Sudan and
the presence of armed forces.
We are pleased with UNISFA’s continued
engagement to resolve tensions between the Ngok Dinka
and Twic Dinka. We strongly encourage UNISFA to
strengthen those efforts, and we reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call on both communities to uphold their
ceasefire agreement and utilize the tools UNISFA offers
to support and enable a safe and inclusive environment.
We further call on the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka to
utilize peaceful solutions during the seasonal migration
period.
To that end, we also encourage UNISFA to continue
to pursue gender parity at all levels and to incorporate
the perspectives of women and youth within its
important work.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Special Envoy
Tetteh for their briefings. I welcome the Permanent
Representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan to the
meeting today.
The Sudan and South Sudan are parties to the
issues related to Abyei. As such, a political solution in
that connection cannot be achieved without dialogue
and cooperation between the two sides.
In the previous period, bilateral relations between
the Sudan and South Sudan improved. The leaders of
the two countries maintained close communication on
the situation in Abyei, considered the formation of a
joint security force along the border and made positive
remarks on addressing the final status of Abyei. That laid
a good political foundation for the ultimate settlement
of Abyei-related issues, which China considers very
encouraging.
Regrettably, the current instability in the Sudan
may have an impact on and complicate the resolution
of the issues. We wish to see an early ceasefire in the

S/PV.9318

Sudan and believe that the Sudan and South Sudan can
maintain the momentum of dialogue and cooperation
and implement the consensus already reached. We hope
that the Abyei-related issues will not be affected by the
situation in the Sudan and that there will continue to
be favourable conditions for the settlement of the final
status of Abyei for the parties concerned.
China appreciates the sustained efforts by the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel to
resolve the related issues of Abyei and supports its
continued role as the main channel of good offices.
Intercommunal relations are the key to achieving
long-term peace and stability in Abyei. In the recent
period, intercommunal conflicts in the region caused
casualties, damages to houses and displacement.
China is concerned about that and calls on relevant
communities to cease hostilities and maintain dialogue
and engagement to achieve harmonious coexistence.
We welcome President Kiir’s efforts to convene
relevant community leaders to resolve disputes and
encourage the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) to continue to support the efforts
of regional countries and organizations in promoting
intercommunal reconciliation and maintaining security
in the region.
While paying attention to the situation in the
Sudan, the international community should continue to
focus on addressing the humanitarian and development
challenges faced by the people in Abyei; strengthen
basic material assistance such as food and medicine;
and provide development support such as education,
vocational training and agricultural and pastoral
guidance. China welcomes the development and
implementation of joint programmes in Abyei by
UNISFA and the United Nations country teams in the
Sudan and South Sudan and the implementation of a
number of quick-impact projects related to people’s
livelihoods and well-being.
China commends UNISFA for its unremitting efforts
to maintain peace and stability in Abyei and welcomes
the upcoming completion of its reconfiguration and the
efforts of relevant troop-contributing countries in that
regard.
In order for UNISFA to make progress in its work,
the close cooperation of the Sudan, South Sudan and
other parties is needed. We encourage UNISFA to
strengthen strategic communication with all relevant
parties and deepen the local population’s understanding

23-130457/19

S/PV.9318

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of and trust in peacekeeping operations. We also expect
the Sudan, South Sudan and other relevant parties to
facilitate the UNISFA’s implementation of its mandate.
As a troop-contributing country to UNISFA, China
will continue to resolutely fulfil its peace mission and
support the work of UNISFA with concrete actions to
contribute to security and stability in the region.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee and Special Envoy Tetteh for their
briefings. I also welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representatives of the Sudan and South
Sudan in our meeting today.
Malta is committed to a stable, secure, peaceful
and prosperous Abyei. Only a mutually acceptable
permanent settlement can achieve that. We call on all
parties to assume their respective responsibilities and
to ensure that the region is free from hostilities and
violence.
It is with regret that we hear that clashes in the Sudan
are adversely impacting the situation in Abyei. As we
continue to stand with the people of Abyei, we call on
the Sudan and South Sudan to continue working towards
a meaningful and lasting peace in the region. Malta
is encouraged by the latest high-level engagements,
including the Summit held in Juba in January. We also
welcome the intercommunal dialogues, which we hope
will translate into progress at the grass roots. We urge
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in these talks, as well as of local authorities, traditional
leaders, civil society and youth. We stress that political
will needs to be matched by implementation.
Violence continues to stall peace and security in
Abyei, with civilians bearing the brunt. We strongly
condemn the fighting and call on all sides to silence
the guns and respect the demilitarized status of the
Area. We support the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and the United Nations
Mine Action Service for their work in addressing the
dangerous proliferation of weapons and possession of
firearms and ammunition in the region.
It is unacceptable that sexual and genderbased violence remains rampant, with impunity for
perpetrators adding to the distress for women and girls.
Malta commends the work of UNISFA as it strives to
address and mitigate violence against women and girls
through awareness campaigns and training. We also
8/19

09/05/2023

support the establishment of a referral mechanism that
survivors can use, without fear and stigma.
Malta is deeply concerned about the heightened
risk of recruitment or use of children in armed conflict,
and we acknowledge UNISFA’s work in sensitizing
interlocutors on these and other related violations.
In Abyei, more than 200,000 people are in need
of humanitarian assistance. Access to basic services,
such as water, sanitation, education and primary health
care remains dire. Climate-induced flooding and water
shortages are driving further displacement and leading
to outbreaks of communicable diseases. That, in
addition to the conflict, exacerbates hunger and severe
food insecurity in the region.
Malta commends the work of local and international
humanitarian partners on the ground and regrets that
insecurity continues to impact their operations. We
continue to call for unhindered, rapid and safe delivery
of aid.
We call on all parties to respect international
humanitarian law. In that regard, we condemn —in the
strongest terms — the murder of two aid workers in
Rumamier in January and express our condolences to
their families. We remind all parties that humanitarian
workers are not targets.
Furthermore, it is imperative that UNISFA’s
mandate is implemented without hindrance. Parties
must respect the freedom of movement of mission
personnel, and visas must be issued in a timely manner.
We support the ongoing reconfiguration of UNISFA
into a multinational force, which is now at its last stages.
As we commend the deployment of an all-woman
platoon, Malta continues to support the recruitment of
women peacekeepers through the Elsie Initiative Fund,
as well as the appointment of gender-based violence
officers in the mission.
In conclusion, Malta reiterates the importance of a
peaceful and secure Abyei. UNISFA’s role is crucial and
effective but needs to be complemented by the support
of all parties. As the situation in the Sudan enters a
chapter of direct talks, we call on all parties to utilize
this momentum to facilitate dialogue and reconciliation
in Abyei. We can be successful only if political will is
translated into action.
23-13045

09/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Special
Envoy Tetteh for their briefings.
I will make three brief points.
First, the United Kingdom commends the tireless
efforts of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) to help maintain peace and security in
Abyei under challenging circumstances. A year since
the mission began its transition from having a single
troop-contributing country to becoming a multinational
force, it is clear that this process has been a success and
that the newly configured force is making a tangible
difference to the security situation in Abyei.
Secondly, despite the positive role played by
UNISFA, the local population continues to suffer from
an absence of basic services. The United Kingdom urges
all parties to fully respect international humanitarian
law and protect and enable humanitarian staff, assets
and operations to deliver aid to those in need in all parts
of Abyei, without hindrance.
We remain concerned about the ongoing
intercommunal violence and increasing tensions within
the Dinka community. We welcome the recent efforts
by South Sudan to stop the violence between the Ngok
Dinka and the Twic Dinka.
We are, however, concerned by the positioning
of the South Sudanese People’s Defence Forces and
national police service personnel in Abyei, in violation
of the 2011 agreement. The presence of those forces
is exacerbating tensions and hindering peace. We call
upon the Government of South Sudan to withdraw its
forces without delay.

S/PV.9318

the importance of resuming talks on the final status as
soon as is practicable.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee and Special Envoy Hanna Tetteh for their
informative briefings. I also welcome the representatives
of the Sudan and South Sudan to this meeting.
Today’s meeting is taking place at a very critical
time where, despite the extension of the declared
ceasefire, we are witnessing continuing clashes in
the Sudan, heavy loss of life and worsening security,
economic and humanitarian situations. This could
jeopardize the fragile stability that the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) has
supported in the Abyei Area.
In view of the current situation in the Sudan and
cognizant of its close link to the stability of the Abyei
Area and to UNISFA’s ability to carry out its mandate,
the United Arab Emirates reiterates its call for the
parties to put an immediate end to hostilities, commit
to the ceasefire, ensure the protection of civilians
and promote rapid and unimpeded humanitarian
access in the Sudan. In that context, we appreciate the
vigorous efforts of Saudi Arabia and the United States
in facilitating the ongoing talks between the parties
in Jeddah.
The United Arab Emirates continues to provide
daily assistance to the Sudanese people and to help
evacuate individuals from more than 20 countries
and provide them with care throughout their stay in
the United Arab Emirates, pending their return to
their countries.

Thirdly, we echo the Secretary’s General concern
over the effect on Abyei of the military clashes across
the Sudan. We note the offer by President Kiir to
facilitate talks between the Sudanese armed forces and
rapid support forces. The United Kingdom underlines
its support for regional efforts to promote a ceasefire,
including through the trilateral mechanism. We echo
calls for a lasting ceasefire and for humanitarian needs
to be urgently addressed.

We maintain our strong belief that there is no
substitute for dialogue and constructive engagement to
return the Sudan to the path of a peaceful transition.
We will therefore continue to support the initiatives
in that regard, such as those led by the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the League of Arab States, as well as other initiatives,
given their central role in helping the Sudan overcome
this crisis.

In conclusion, the conflict in the Sudan is a
tragedy. It also presents a significant impediment
to agreeing a peaceful settlement to the final status
of Abyei, which remains key to enabling long-term
peace and development in the territory. We urge the
parties not to lose sight of this vital issue and stress

With regard to the developments in the Abyei Area,
we note the need to maintain cooperation between the
Sudan and South Sudan on the Abyei Area, including
through high-level engagements, such as bilateral
talks and meetings on the Abyei Area, the parties’
commitment to engage constructively and discuss the

23-130459/19

S/PV.9318

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

issue of the final status of Abyei in future rounds of
talks and their agreement to resume the meetings of the
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee. Again, we believe
that regional organizations have an important role in
supporting and consolidating those relationships in
order to achieve the desired results, especially given the
potential impact of the current situation in the Sudan
and the ongoing developments in South Sudan.
While efforts continue with regard to paving the
way for discussion on the final status of the Abyei
Area, nevertheless, we remain concerned about the
ongoing intercommunal clashes, violence and incidents
hindering UNISFA’s operations, which serve only to
further exacerbate the already precarious security and
humanitarian situation in the Abyei Area. Therefore, the
United Arab Emirates calls for a cessation of violence
and condemns the killing of civilians and humanitarian
workers, as well as incidents of harassment and acts of
sexual and gender-based violence.
We commend UNISFA’s leadership in advocating for
the participation of women from various communities
in the Abyei peace and security processes, including
the establishment of a joint female peace committee
in the Amiet area. We reiterate the critical importance
of women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
to ensure sustainable peace processes and prevent the
spread of conflict.
Given the difficult living conditions in Abyei and
challenges in the wider region, it is encouraging to
see the joint efforts of the Resident Coordinators in
the Sudan and South Sudan to implement the Abyei
joint programme, which is crucial in supporting the
livelihoods of the people in the Area. As we have
mentioned several times, peaceful coexistence,
tolerance and dialogue are essential pillars for building
peaceful and prosperous societies. In that context, we
commend UNISFA’s continued engagement with all
stakeholders, including traditional leaders, youth and
women, to promote dialogue between communities,
in particular ahead of the transhumance period. We
call on all parties to abide by their obligations under
existing agreements.
Lastly, the United Arab Emirates encourages
UNISFA to continue strengthening its efforts in the
Abyei Area and coordinating with United Nations
agencies to reduce current tensions among communities.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee and Special Envoy Tetteh for
10/19

09/05/2023

their valuable briefings. I would also like to welcome
the delegations of the Sudan and South Sudan to today’s
meeting.
Brazil is proud to contribute to the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). It would be
remiss of us not to commend UNISFA for its work and
show our gratitude to all troop- and police-contributing
countries that enable vital activities to be carried out on
the border between the Sudan and South Sudan under
these dire circumstances. We sincerely appreciate
the tireless efforts to protect civilians and sustain the
delivery of humanitarian assistance in Abyei.
Brazil echoes the concerns of the SecretaryGeneral in his most recent report (S/2023/305) about
the impact of the military clashes in the Sudan on issues
relevant to the Abyei situation. Displaced Sudanese
civilians, who fled to Abyei in recent weeks, have dealt
with spiking food prices affecting the local population
since clashes began on 15 April. The fragile security
situation in and around the box may deteriorate even
more under the new, evolving circumstances. We urge
the parties to the conflict in the Sudan to resolve their
differences through dialogue. We commend the active
role played by the United Nations, the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the Arab League, the United States, the United
Kingdom, Saudi Arabia and all partners of the Sudan
that have pushed for a negotiated resolution to the
ongoing conflict.
Dialogue is also vital to the dynamics in Abyei
and the bilateral links between the Sudan and South
Sudan. The January summit in Juba was a timely
development, given the increasing need to revitalize
the Abyei political process. We sincerely hope that trust
between the Sudan and South Sudan will continue to
grow. Their commitment to shared understanding and a
fair implementation of agreed measures underpins any
viable and sustainable solution to the status of Abyei.
Aside from acknowledging the crucial stabilizing
factor played by neighbouring countries thus far, we
commend the manner in which regional and subregional
arrangements have stimulated convergence between the
two countries. We particularly support South Sudan’s
leadership role, alongside Djibouti and Kenya, in their
ongoing IGAD engagements with the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Rapid Support Forces. If South Sudan
and the Sudan become more prominent stakeholders in
23-13045

09/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

each other’s peace, the chances of reaching a deal on
their shared border issues will increase.
UNISFA has dealt remarkably well with the
challenge of troop reconfiguration. It has largely
succeeded in the delicate transition from being a single
troop-contributing country mission to a multinational
one. We also believe that UNISFA’s one-year mandate,
established by resolution 2660 (2022), has been
an improvement. It enhances the mission’s ability
to properly implement its fundamental tenets and
responsibilities. A more extended authorization entails
the mission’s leadership and peacekeepers establishing
deeper networks with local communities and
stakeholders. However, we are concerned that UNISFA
will probably face even more stern tests ahead.
Fighting and displacement in the Sudan may
cause unpredictable effects in Abyei. Long-standing
hindrances to UNISFA’s activities, such as visa
processing, remain unresolved. Those unnecessary
tribulations impair the mission’s pivot to additional
peacebuilding, police and justice tasks.
We reiterate our full support for UNISFA. Even if
today’s most pressing issues for the Sudan and South
Sudan lie elsewhere, security in Abyei depends on
the peacekeeping mission’s activities. The proper
implementation of the mission’s mandate benefits both
parties.
In conclusion, we strongly encourage the Sudan
and South Sudan to seize the essential support provided
by the United Nations, through UNISFA, redouble their
goodwill vis-à-vis the mission’s personnel and solve the
outstanding issues that affect UNISFA’s activities.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Pobee and Special Envoy Tetteh for their
insightful briefings.
Japan appreciates the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) (S/2023/305), which elaborates
on both the progress and the challenges in Abyei and
highlights the continued relevance of the mission’s
mandate. Mindful of the observations made in the
Secretary-General’s report, I would like to make the
following four points related to UNISFA’s mandate.
First, Japan continues to closely follow the situation
in the Sudan, where armed clashes continue unabated
and have spread across the country. Once again, we call
upon the parties to enact an immediate and permanent

S/PV.9318

ceasefire and return to peaceful dialogue. Japan also
calls on the parties to protect civilians, international
organizations and other aid agencies’ personnel and
medical staff, as well as their equipment and materiel.
Humanitarian access must be maintained. Japan
expresses its strong concern about the negative impact
of the military fighting in the Sudan on the situation in
Abyei. We therefore again call on the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Rapid Support Forces alike to uphold
the ceasefire and return to peaceful dialogue and the
political process. The Council must speak with one
voice in that regard.
Secondly, amid all the challenges, efforts must
continue to enhance cooperation among the relevant
parties to resolve pending issues related to the final
status of Abyei. We encourage both the Sudan and South
Sudan to renew their participation in the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism and the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee. Those bodies are crucial for ensuring
effective administration and realizing a peaceful and
mutually acceptable resolution.
Thirdly, the immediate security and humanitarian
challenges on the ground in Abyei must be addressed.
The ongoing intercommunal violence — particularly
the increase in tensions between the Ngok Dinka and
the Twic Dinka — has exacerbated insecurity. The
humanitarian situation is worsening, especially owing
to flooding and the lack of infrastructure. Japan urges
all the relevant parties to promote intercommunal
dialogue to tackle those challenges. We also call on
both the Sudan and South Sudan to make progress on
establishing the Abyei joint police service to ensure
lasting security. We ask all the parties to cooperate
with humanitarian staff and fully respect their assets
and operations in order to ensure local people’s access
to necessary aid.
Fourthly, Japan calls on both the Sudan and South
Sudan to address UNISFA’s outstanding operational
issues, such as freedom of movement, the deployment
of the three formed police units and individual
police officers, access to the Athony airstrip and the
re-operationalization of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism in Sector 1, including the
Sector headquarters in Gok Machar.
In conclusion, Japan would like to thank all UNISFA
personnel for their service in protecting civilians and
mitigating violence in a challenging environment. We

23-1304511/19

S/PV.9318

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

reiterate our full support for the efforts of the United
Nations in the region.
Mr. Biang (Gabon): I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the three African members of
the Security Council (A3), namely Ghana, Mozambique
and my own country, Gabon.
At the outset, we would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2023/305), as well as Assistant
Secretary-General Pobee and Special Envoy Tetteh for
their insightful briefings on the situation in Abyei and
the activities of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA). Our statement will focus
on the political, security and humanitarian situations.
At the political level, the A3 notes the continued
strengthening of relations between the Sudanese and
South Sudanese authorities through the organization
of several high-level meetings, particularly on border
issues, with a view to finalizing the status of Abyei.
We took positive note of the agreement between the
Sudan and South Sudan on strengthening cooperation
and resolving outstanding issues following the meeting
on the final status of Abyei of the Chairpersons of the
national committees of both countries in Khartoum
on 24 October 2022. That political will was further
demonstrated at the joint meeting between the Sudan
and South Sudan on the Abyei region held in Khartoum
on 9 April. That positive signal should, however, be
translated into action by both countries to enable real
progress on the ground towards the finalization of
Abyei’s status. However, we are concerned about the
fact that the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee has
not met since 2017, despite statements by the parties.
Regrettably, in practice there has been no major
progress in the implementation of the 2011 agreement
on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei Area for more than a decade.
(spoke in French)
The A3 notes with regret that the internal political
situations and the continuing economic, security and
humanitarian challenges in the Sudan and South Sudan
are significantly slowing progress on finalizing the
status of Abyei. The discussion of that final status
naturally compels us to consider the current situation
in the Sudan and the continuing deadly clashes between
the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support
Forces. The situation in the Sudan undoubtedly
has repercussions for the situation in Abyei and the
ongoing political discussions with South Sudan on
12/19

09/05/2023

the management of that territory. In that regard,
Ghana, Mozambique and Gabon echo the African
Union’s communiqué of 20 April 2023 and call for an
immediate and permanent ceasefire, a coordinated and
unhindered humanitarian response and the protection
of civilians and essential infrastructure in combat
zones. We urge other border countries to mobilize to
facilitate the repatriation of international personnel and
receive refugees from the Sudan. We strongly believe
that the current crisis in the Sudan cannot be resolved
by military means. We urge all the parties concerned
to resume dialogue and work to arrive at an urgent
de-escalation plan.
We note that there are other efforts under way
towards achieving a permanent ceasefire and creating
corridors to allow humanitarian assistance to alleviate
the suffering of displaced persons. We reiterate that
the trilateral mechanism of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the United Nations should play a crucial role in all of
those efforts for a unified, coordinated and concerted
response.
On the security front, the persistence of
intercommunal clashes, armed violence, the destruction
of property and sexual violence in Abyei are major
sources of concern for the A3. We firmly condemn the
intercommunal violence that has occurred, particularly
between the Ngok Dinka and Twic Dinka and the
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities. We call
on all parties to refrain from any action that could
exacerbate tensions. We note President Salva Kiir
Mayardit’s commitment to easing tensions between
the communities through a meeting of the Governors
of Warrap and Lakes states, the Chief Administrator
of Abyei and the traditional leaders of the Ngok
Dinka and Twic Dinka to discuss their differences.
We hope that the creation of a buffer zone through the
deployment of security forces in the disputed areas
will lead to a de-escalation of the violence. We also
welcome the actions of UNISFA aimed at promoting an
intercommunal dialogue.
The A3 condemns the violation of the Abyei Area’s
demilitarized status by the continued presence in
southern Abyei of the South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces, intelligence officers and members of the South
Sudan national police service, as well as the decision of
the Government of the Sudan to deploy national police
officers to the northern part of Abyei. It is important
to keep in mind in that regard that the absence of
23-13045

09/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

strong administrative institutions, particularly in
terms of security and justice, is rendering the territory
permanently fragile.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
serious humanitarian crisis affecting the Horn of Africa
due to climate change and the various ongoing conflicts
has not spared the Abyei region. The A3 notes that the
people of Abyei are experiencing significant difficulties
in accessing basic services. The situation is expected to
worsen with the humanitarian impact of the clashes in
the Sudan, which are leading to the mass displacement
of civilians. Given the impact of the situation in the
Sudan on the humanitarian situation in Abyei, the
A3 stress that it is crucial to strengthen humanitarian
assistance and mobilize adequate funding to meet the
growing needs of people already suffering in difficult
living conditions, which it will be essential to improve
by restoring the provision of services, including access
to water, health, education, communications and basic
infrastructure.
The A3 condemns in the strongest terms the armed
attacks on UNISFA staff and humanitarian personnel.
We offer our sincere condolences to the families of
the deceased aid workers in Abyei. It is imperative
that every measure be taken to ensure the safety
and protection of humanitarian workers, as well as
unhindered humanitarian access. We further urge the
Sudan and South Sudan to fully respect the status of
forces agreement and to facilitate the implementation
of UNISFA’s mandate through the issuance of visas and
necessary administrative documents for the deployment
of troops, civilians and police units.
The A3 underscores that a solution on Abyei’s
final status can be achieved only if the Sudan and
South Sudan stabilize their internal political situations
and make concrete the discussions aimed at reaching
an agreement on the management of the Area. In that
regard, the A3 commends the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development for their
engagement in support of the bilateral discussions for
peace in the region and on defining the status of the
Abyei Area. We would also like to warmly commend
the UNISFA staff, who are carrying out their mandate
despite the difficult conditions.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support to
Special Envoy Tetteh and all the stakeholders for their
tireless efforts on the ground to find a political solution
to the issue of the final status of Abyei.

S/PV.9318

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I too join others in thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Martha Pobee and Special Envoy
Hanna Tetteh for their briefings. I also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representatives of the Sudan
and South Sudan at today’s meeting. I would like to
emphasize four points.
First, the Abyei Area has once again been feeling
the effects of the instability that its surrounding
region has been experiencing since 15 April, when
fighting began in the Sudan. The status quo that has
existed in the Abyei Area since 2016 has exacerbated
that vulnerability, which becomes worse each time
a crisis occurs in the region. The situation is all the
more regrettable because the conflict in the Sudan risks
holding up the positive dialogue that had been under
way for several months between Khartoum and Juba.
We welcomed those efforts, which offered encouraging
prospects, and urge the parties to continue them.
Only the parties themselves can bring about stability
in Abyei. The current crisis should motivate them to
get back to basics. Beyond resolving the territory’s
final-status issues, progress should also be made
towards improving the living conditions of the local
population and preventing intercommunal violence.
We welcome the peacebuilding efforts of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA),
in conjunction with the United Nations country teams
in the Sudan and South Sudan, and we encourage the
United Nations to adapt to the current challenges in
order to preserve those significant gains. We also call
on the communities of Abyei to stay out of the ongoing
conflict in the Sudan. The parties to the conflict should
refrain from any action that could add to the instability
in Abyei, which should be a demilitarized zone.
UNISFA has a major role to play in protecting
civilians, and in that regard, we welcome all the efforts
it has made to encourage peace between the Ngok Dinka
and Misseriya communities. We are deeply concerned
about the violence between the Ngok Dinka and Twic
Dinka communities and call on the South Sudanese
authorities to continue their efforts to bring about peace.
UNISFA, which only recently completed a complex and
costly reconfiguration, is already facing new logistical
challenges. It must maintain its capacity to fulfil its
mandate, and we are counting on the Secretariat, the
troop-contributing countries and the countries of the
region to ensure that.

23-1304513/19

S/PV.9318

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In that context, we reiterate our full support for
Special Envoy Hanna Tetteh and her teams. The United
Nations has an essential role to play in coordinating
peace efforts in the Horn of Africa, particularly with
regard to the conflict in the Sudan, and France is playing
its full part in those efforts. We encourage the States of
the region to resolve their disputes through dialogue,
whether they concern Abyei, other border disputes or
the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Pobee and Special Envoy
Tetteh for their briefings, and I commend the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
for its efforts, especially in promoting dialogue and
security in the Abyei Administrative Area even now,
under more difficult conditions. In that context, we urge
the parties to ensure unhindered access for UNISFA
and see to the security of its staff.
At the outset, Albania expresses its concern about
the situation in the Sudan, which represents a risk for
the already fragile Abyei Area. We call on the Sudanese
parties to cease hostilities and work to achieve a
nationwide ceasefire, as well as supporting the regional
efforts in that regard. I will make three brief points.
First, we want to commend the high-level
engagement that was ongoing before the fighting started
in the Sudan. The fighting is affecting the momentum
that was reached previously in implementing the
agreement on the administrative and political
arrangements for Abyei. In that context, we urge
the Sudan and South Sudan to focus on reconvening
meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and
to implement the agreement on administrative and
political arrangements aimed at resolving border issues
and community tensions. The parties should ensure that
the meetings facilitate the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in order to strengthen their role.
Secondly, the security situation remains very
difficult. We are concerned about the fact that the
unresolved final status of the Abyei Area and the
situation in the Sudan have increased the tensions. We
condemn the continued armed clashes between the Ngok
Dinka and the Twic Dinka communities, which are a
major challenge for the protection of civilians and have
resulted in an increase in the circulation of weapons
among young people. We call on all stakeholders to
implement the cessation of hostilities agreement and to
work with UNISFA to strengthen dialogue and social
14/19

09/05/2023

cohesion. In that regard, we call for the removal of
all obstacles to the mission in its work and echo the
Secretary-General’s call for the Sudan and South Sudan
to withdraw their military and police troops from the
Abyei Area.
Thirdly, we remain concerned about the protection
of civilians and the dire humanitarian situation,
particularly as the ongoing violence has led to the
displacement of thousands of people and has increased
human rights violations, including sexual and genderbased violence. Civilians are being denied basic
services and access to justice and are in urgent need
of humanitarian assistance. To that end, establishing
joint border structures, including the Abyei police,
is essential to enhancing the rule of law and
strengthening accountability.
In conclusion, despite the challenging situation, the
Sudan and South Sudan must continue to work to resolve
the final status of Abyei through peaceful means. The
fighting in the Sudan risks preventing further dialogue
and impeding UNISFA’s implementation of its mandate.
We stress that a settlement on the final status of Abyei
can be reached only through dialogue and compromise.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to wish everyone
in the Chamber a happy 9 May, which is Victory Day.
On this momentous occasion, we pay our profound
respects and extend our deepest recognition to all
whose unparalleled feats on the battlefield and selfless
labour on the home front enabled the defeat of Nazism.
Were it not for this day, the founding of the United
Nations would not have happened. We believe that the
legacy of the great victory will continue to contribute
to strengthening and building productive relations
among nations and peoples on a basis of respect for the
principles of equal rights and the self-determination
of peoples.
We thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha
Pobee and Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Horn of Africa Hanna Tetteh for their briefings.
We welcome the participation in today’s meeting of
Mr. Al-Harith Idriss Al-Harith Mohamed and Mr. Akuei
Bona Malwal, the Permanent Representatives of the
Sudan and South Sudan.
We very much appreciate the joint efforts deployed
by the leadership of South Sudan and other regional
players aimed at ensuring a swift cessation of the
hostilities in the Sudan between the Sudanese Armed
23-13045

09/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Forces and the Rapid Support Forces. We note in
particular the work of the South Sudan authorities in
hosting Sudanese refugees on their territory and their
willingness to assist in resolving the humanitarian
crisis in the region. We believe that a settlement in the
Sudan would also help to create conditions conducive
to advancing cooperation on the Abyei issue, especially
since both countries recently demonstrated earnest
intentions to develop their dialogue on Abyei, including
by establishing mutually beneficial cooperation on
the joint exploitation of the disputed Area’s potential
oil resources. The summit of the leaders of the Sudan
and South Sudan and the meeting of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism, both held in January in Juba,
served to reaffirm their commitment to working together
on border issues. We commend the determination of
both countries to develop a strategy for working with
local communities living along the common border
to restore the normal functioning of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, including in
Gok Machar.
We continue to believe that, in order to successfully
advance an inter-Sudanese settlement that would
determine Abyei’s final status, joint efforts by both
parties are needed. We consider unacceptable any
unilateral attempts to alter the status of the disputed
Area in violation of the existing international legal
framework and the agreements signed by the two
States. In that connection, it is important that both
countries uphold their obligations to support Abyei’s
demilitarized status.
The state of intercommunal dialogue in the Area
is a cause for concern, especially in the light of the
ongoing conflict between the Twic Dinka and Ngok
Dinka. At the same time, we note the significant steps
taken by the South Sudanese authorities aimed at
achieving reconciliation between the two communities.
The United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) remains a key factor for ensuring
stability in the region. We welcome the role the Blue
Helmets are playing in resolving current security
problems and the assistance that is being provided
through the United Nations peacebuilding programme.
The transformation of UNISFA into a multinational
mission is almost complete. We expect the mission to
continue to carry out its mandate with a clear focus
on maintaining security and providing support to both
States in their efforts to find a mutually acceptable
solution to the border dispute.

S/PV.9318

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I join other representatives in thanking the Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, Martha Pobee, and
Special Envoy Hanna Serwaa Tetteh for their
informative briefings. I also acknowledge the
presence of the representatives of the Sudan and
South Sudan, whom we welcome. I also welcome the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Abyei (S/2023/305) and on progress made towards the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNIFSA), submitted
pursuant to resolution 2660 (2022).
Ecuador underscores the extensive efforts of
UNISFA to fulfil its mandate in complex circumstances
and urges the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan to provide vital support for the work of the
United Nations Interim Force.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern that
efforts aimed at a peaceful resolution of the final status
of Abyei and border issues, as well as the implementation
of UNISFA’s mandate, will be affected by the violent
fighting in the Sudan. We encourage movement towards
an inclusive political process to resolve the Abyei issue.
In that regard, the role of the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, together
with support from the United Nations, is central.
We further call on the parties to implement the
conclusions of both the Juba summit and the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism of 12 and 18 January,
respectively. We urge unrestricted and unconditional
respect for the demilitarized Area of Abyei, in which
only UNISFA and the Abyei police service, once it is
established, have legal authority.
The violence between the Ngok Dinka and
Twic Dinka communities, in addition to death and
destruction, resulted in the displacement of people,
a situation in which women and girls are the most
affected. We reject any recruitment or use of minors or
any violation of international law.
We reiterate that accountability is a central
mechanism for reconciliation, reparations for victims,
deterrence and a culture of prevention and respect for
human rights.
We call on the parties to redouble their efforts
to achieve a definitive cessation of intercommunal
hostilities and to strengthen the agreements and
objectives of the Wau peace conference of in April.

23-1304515/19

S/PV.9318

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We underscore the contribution of the women
and youth representatives who participated in that
process and call on the Community Empowerment for
Progress Organization, Concordis International and the
International Organization for Migration to continue
to provide support and monitoring to transform the
cessation of violence into a basis for sustainable peace,
which is necessary for free movement, humanitarian
access and peaceful coexistence.
We also recognize the contribution of women
at the Todach conference, and we encourage the
broadening of women’s full, equal and substantive
inclusion and participation in all social spheres as an
essential step towards achieving sustainable peace and
integral development.
Ecuador will continue to promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes and pay special attention to that
area. Since 2005, a total of 151 Ecuadorians have served
as military observers or staff members of the missions
in Abyei, the Sudan and South Sudan.
The fighting in the Sudan in April affected the
capacity to provide essential supplies, including food,
endangering peacekeeping personnel who were in
Khartoum in the process of being transferred to assume
their posts in Abyei. What better illustration could
there be of the impact of violence on food security? In
this case, I am referring to the risks faced by people
with protection. But how many hundreds or thousands
of civilians who are already facing malnourishment or
shortages and are now seeing their situation further
deteriorate owing to the link between hunger and
conflict? In Abyei, internal and external factors are
likely to deteriorate the degree of food insecurity. It
is time to silence the guns once and for all and move
towards a definitive solution.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Switzerland.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Martha Pobee
and Special Envoy Hanna Tetteh for their edifying
briefings and all their work, as well as that of the
mission. I also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan at
this meeting.
We commend both Governments for their
constructive engagement with a view to resolving the
16/19

09/05/2023

dispute over the Abyei Area, both with respect to its
final status and the border demarcation issue.
The conflict that erupted in the Sudan on 15 April
calls into question that progress and threatens to put
an end to that positive momentum. We are concerned
about the impact that the fighting could have on the
political process, the humanitarian situation and
the implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
We reiterate our call on both Sudanese parties to
immediately silence the weapons, respect international
humanitarian law, commit to a lasting ceasefire, ensure
humanitarian access and resume dialogue. Given the
real risks of instability, we call on the Sudan and South
Sudan to respect the 2011 agreement and relevant
Security Council resolutions.
I would like to make three brief points.
First, more needs to be done to protect the local
population from armed incidents and intercommunal
clashes. We are concerned about the ongoing tensions
between the Twic Dinka and Ngok Dinka communities.
We call on them to de-escalate the situation and to
continue joint efforts to find a solution through dialogue.
We commend the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka on the
success of the March conference and encourage them
to build on that positive momentum, especially in view
of the upcoming transhumance period. In the absence
of the Abyei police service, the community protection
committees and the joint protection committee are
essential to strengthen the rule of law. In addition,
Abyei must remain a demilitarized zone, free from all
armed forces and elements.
Secondly, given the potential impact of the conflict
in the Sudan, it is important to build trust and strengthen
inclusive community engagement. We welcome the
revitalization of the consultative forums on women
and peace and security, as well as the activities of the
joint women’s peace committee in the Amiet region.
Similarly, the increased involvement of youth networks
in communicating early warnings illustrates the key
potential of young people as agents of peace. We fully
support the efforts of the United Nations country teams
in the Sudan and South Sudan to operationalize the
Abyei joint programme.
Thirdly, UNISFA will continue to play a vital role in
peace and security in Abyei in the months to come. We
welcome its strong engagement with the communities
in Abyei and hope that the troop reconfiguration
23-13045

09/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

will provide the mission with additional operational
capacity. We call on the Sudan and South Sudan to
continue to respect the status-of-forces agreement.
In conclusion, we express our full support to
UNISFA and the Special Envoy, as well as to the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development. We affirm our commitment to work with
all stakeholders to achieve peace and prosperity in the
Abyei Area.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, for assuming the presidency of the Security
Council during this month of April. We would like
to thank Ms. Martha Pobee, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa, for her valuable briefing on the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). We
also wish to thank Ms. Hanna Tetteh, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa,
for her briefing and for her personal interest in the
developments in the Sudan. In that regard, we take note
of the Secretary-General’s report on the situation in
Abyei (S/2023/305).
Bilateral relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan have steadily improved. That is manifest in
the successful visit of the Chairperson of the Sudan’s
Transitional Sovereign Council, Lieutenant General
Abdel Fattah Al-Burhan, to Juba in January, where we
agreed with the President of South Sudan, Mr. Salva
Kiir Mayardit, on the deployment of joint forces on the
borders in order to strengthen security and stability,
prevent the infiltration of illegal weapons, combat
negative forces on the joined borders and operationalize
and revive joint engagement mechanisms between the
two fraternal countries.
Among the most important results of this meeting
is the call for the Abyei joint mechanisms to redouble
efforts in order to define the final status of the Area
and to promote economic development and social
cooperation. The rapprochement between the two
countries is also evident in the second round of the highlevel committee between both countries in Khartoum,
upon the invitation of the Sudan, as they met last month,
with the participation of the United Nations, the African

S/PV.9318

Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD). Both parties addressed all
issues of common interest, with due consideration to
the needs of communities in the Abyei Area, including
humanitarian assistance and the necessary development
for delivering humanitarian assistance and services and
creating development projects such as hospitals, schools
and roads. Those projects must be jointly undertaken
by both parties, with help from the international
community and the United Nations in order to achieve
the final status of Abyei.
Major General Benjamin Sawyerr, UNISFA’s acting
Head of Mission and Force Commander, presented a
review of the security situation in Abyei, which included
a number of recommendations. Both parties hailed the
report and promised, during their meetings, to address
the elements contained therein. They also agreed to
hold the third round of the high-level committees in
Juba, at a date to be set by both parties.
This rapprochement positively impacts the situation
in Abyei, which runs counter to the doubts raised by
certain representatives, who maintain that the current
situation will undermine the rapprochement and, in
turn, harm the situation in Abyei. However, stability in
Abyei is definitely a goal of the Sudanese leadership,
as the Government of the Sudan is committed to build
on the bilateral relations between the two fraternal
neighbourly countries in order to promote peaceful and
communal coexistence in the Area and to accelerate
consensus on the final status of Abyei.
In that regard, I would like to touch upon the
following points.
First of all, the Government of the Sudan depends
substantially on the amicable relations between the
Sudan and South Sudan, as we are two spiritual
fraternal countries, and we have to build on the positive
momentum of those relations to solve the situation in
Abyei, including by establishing interim administrative
and security mechanisms, as provided for in the
agreement of 20 June 2011, signed by both parties.
We also stress the importance of border demarcation,
non-infringement and non-transgression on lands and
non-alteration of the demographic status quo.
In that regard, the conflict between the Ngok Dinka
and Twic Dinka has impacted the overall humanitarian
and political situation in Abyei. In addition, the
proliferation of weapons, the repeated attacks and the
spread of crime require law enforcement and justice

23-1304517/19

S/PV.9318

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

institutions to put an end to insecurity and crime and
to hold the perpetrators accountable. They also require
the establishment of joint mechanisms, especially the
joint police, in keeping with the 2011 agreement.
At the time when the Sudan stresses and maintains
the importance of peace and stability and security in
Abyei, we underscore the importance of refraining
from all unilateral measures that threaten stability in
the UNISFA area of operations. We also stress that
Abyei should remain free of military manifestations and
maintain a demilitarized buffer zone north and south
of the zero line. Pursuant to the agreements signed by
both countries, we call upon UNISFA to implement,
expand and increase quick-impact projects, as they
will positively impact the lives of people in Abyei,
especially in the fields of ensuring education, health
and potable water and maintaining security and order.
We fully commend the Secretary-General’s focus,
in his report, on young people. We believe that greater
attention should be given to vocational training for
youth, as well as to supporting veterinary services and
improving our qualitative capacities for women and girls
with a view to contributing to sustainable peace efforts
and raising awareness among people working in the
animal production sector. We stress the importance of
activities related to peaceful coexistence, with the goal
of bolstering stability among the Abyei communities
and building local coordination mechanisms, with the
support of civil society and the civilian administration.
The Secretary-General’s report also refers to the
presence of the Sudanese police in Diffra, the aim
of which is to secure oil-production facilities and
avoid insecure conditions that hinder the movement
of technical teams within those facilities. That was
addressed during our discussion of the extension of
the UNISFA mandate last year. However, we note
that the mission’s efforts in unifying and providing
logistic and technical support to community police
were unequally distributed in the three areas of Abyei.
There is a need for balanced attention by the mission
to all three areas, and we commend its efforts to
ensure peace and security in Abyei. We also noted an
imbalance in the activities of the mission with regard to
support for stability, peacebuilding and the provision
of water and education. The Secretary-General’s report
attributed the shortcomings in the provision of those
services to the absence of Government institutions. In
that regard, we stress the importance of establishing a
18/19

09/05/2023

joint administrative committee in accordance with the
2011 agreement.
We reiterate that the Government of the Sudan
is committed to improving its cooperation with the
Government of South Sudan in order to strengthen the
work of the joint political and security mechanism and
the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, as well as to
ensure the establishment of joint mechanisms between
the two countries according to the provisions of their
signed agreements, with a view to reaching a solution
to all final status issues in Abyei based on the terms
of reference agreed between both parties. The Sudan
maintains, as the penholder stressed previously, that
UNISFA’s status should remain unchanged for the
one-year extension of its mandate. UNISFA’s mandate is
therefore temporary, with very specific security tasks.
We call for supporting and strengthening the existing
joint mechanisms between the Sudan and South Sudan
and for promoting the community administration until
we agree on Abyei’s final status.
Some members have talked about the current
situation in the Sudan. We spoke at length about the
issue in Security Council meetings last week. We want
to stress that the situation in Abyei will not be affected
by the current conflict in the Sudan and that has been
underscored in recent meetings with representatives
of both countries. We also stress that the Sudan is
committed to a peaceful solution to the current conflict,
which was started by a rebel group against the Sudanese
Armed Forces. We want to emphasize the capacity of the
Sudanese Armed Forces to maintain order in the Sudan
and in Khartoum in particular. We therefore stress our
readiness for full cooperation with the United Nations,
as well as all humanitarian relief operations, and for the
opening and oversight of humanitarian corridors and
protection for relief workers by the Sudanese Armed
Forces, which are highly and professionally trained in
that area.
We also reiterate that we positively acknowledge
the African initiative put forward by IGAD and the
African Union. However, we note that the AU did not
invite representatives of the Sudan to attend the meeting
held in Addis Ababa, which left my country unable to
voice its opinion. We wanted an exception to be made
to invite the Sudanese delegation so that we could voice
our opinion and forge ahead with the mediation efforts
led and sponsored by the AU and IGAD. Besides that, a
high-level Ambassador, an Under-Secretary for Foreign
Affairs and a presidential envoy, has been appointed
23-13045

09/05/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and is conducting shuttle-diplomacy visits to the IGAD
region and East Africa. He met yesterday with the
authorities of South Sudan, having met previously with
authorities in Djibouti, and is now on his way to meet
with the Kenyan authorities to promote Africa’s role.
The political leadership of the Sudan welcomes the
role of the African Union and all other initiatives. Let
us not forget that the Sudan is also a member of the
League of Arab States. The Sudan will not ignore any
positive initiatives. However, we support the African
initiative and the efforts of IGAD, of which the Sudan
is the current Chair, which is why we are now trying to
clear the air around that initiative. The situation at the
Khartoum airport did indeed affect the arrival of all
three leaders, but three deputies of those leaders were
then scheduled to meet with the Sudanese authorities.
We are now ready to meet with any delegation from
IGAD or the AU. As I said previously, we are a fullfledged partner of the AU, and the Sudan should
be invited to all meetings held by the AU Peace and
Security Council.
I would like to thank you, Madam President, and
all the speakers who made moderate statements today.
I am also grateful for your concern about the situation
in the Sudan. We stand ready to cooperate with all who
are helping the Sudan and providing relief efforts. We
are ready to listen to all members in hopes that their
efforts can help to contain the current situation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): At the outset, my
delegation would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, your delegation and your country on this
historic opportunity to preside over the Security Council
for the first time. My delegation will always support
your presidency. I would also like to acknowledge
the presence of our two briefers, Ms. Martha Pobee,

S/PV.9318

Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, and Ms. Hanna
Tetteh, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Horn of Africa. We have taken note of their insightful
briefings on the situation in Abyei.
South Sudan takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on Abyei (S/2023/305) for the reporting period.
As the Council is aware, today’s briefing comes at a
time when the Sudan is going through very difficult
circumstances. As stated in the report, relations
between the two countries are cordial and will remain
so despite the ongoing misunderstanding between the
warring parties. We therefore call on the international
community to respond to the growing demands on the
humanitarian front in the Sudan and in its neighbouring
countries, which received an influx of refugees, despite
being unprepared to do so, in the space of a few days
after the fighting ensued in Khartoum and other parts
of the Sudan.
The Republic of South Sudan is seized with
the unfolding crisis in the Sudan and is committed
to assisting bilaterally and regionally, through the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, where
President Salva Kiir Mayardit has been given the lead
to seek a solution to the crisis, through the African
Union and within the international community, for the
betterment of our countries and the region.
I would like to conclude by calling on the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei to remain
vigilant and prevent any negative elements that may
want to destabilize the Area while we seek a solution in
our sister country of the Sudan.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I would like to thank all members for their
constructive participation.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

23-1304519/19
