8

General Anernbly-Twenty-fifth Seuion

7. Requests all States, as well as the specialized
agencies and international institutions, to withhold
assistance of any kind from the Governments of Portu~al and South Africa and from the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia until they
renounce their policy of colonial domination ·and racial
discrimination;
8. Reiterates its declaration that the practice of
using mercenaries against national liberation movements in the colonial Territories constitutes a criminal
act and calls upon all States to take the necessary
measures to prevent the recruitment, financing and
training of mercenaries in their territory and to prohibit
their nationals from serving as mercenaries;
9. Requests the colonial Powers to withdraw immediately and unconditioµally their military bases and
installations from colonial Territories and to refrain
from establishing new ones;
10. Condemns the policies, pursued by certain colonial Powers in the Territories under their domination,
of imposing non-representative regimes and constitutions, strenithening the position of foreign economic
and other interests, misleadinJ world public opinion
and encouraging the systematic influx of foreign immigrants while evicting, displacing and transferring the
indigenous inhabitants to other areas, and calls upon
those Powers to desist forthwith from such policies;
11. Requests the. Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of the Declaration in all Territories which
have not yet attained independence and, in particular,
to formulate specific proposals for the elimination of
the remaining manifestations of colonialism, taking
fully into account the relevant provisions of the programme of action for the full implementation of the
Declaration;
12. Requests the Special Committee to make concrete suggestions which could assist the Security Council in considering appropriate measures under the
Charter of the United Nations with regard to developments in colonial Territories which are likely to
threaten international peace and security, and recommends that the Security Council take such suggestions
fully into consideration;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to examine the compliance of Member States with the
Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on the
question of decolonization, particularly those relating
to the Territories under Portuguese domination, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
pay particular attention to the small Territories, and
to recommend to the General Assembly the most appropriate methods and also the steps to be taken to
enable the populations of those Territories to exercise
fully and without delay their right to self-determination
and independence;
15. Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate fully with the Special Committee by permitting
the access of visiting groups to the colonial Territories
in order to secure first-hand information concerning
the Territories and to ascertain the wishes and aspirations of the inhabitants of those Territories under
their administration;
16. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee, to con-

tinue to take concrete measures through all the media
at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to give widespread and continuous publicity to
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, to the situation in the colonial Territories and
to the continuing struggle for liberation being waged
by the colonial peoples;
17. Requests Member States, in particular the administering Powers, to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in promoting the large-scale dissemination of
information on the work of the United Nations in the
implementation of the Declaration;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the facilities and personnel
necessary for the implementation of the present resolution as well as the various resolutions relating to the
question of decolonization adopted by the General
Assembly and the Special Committee.
1929th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.
2728 (XXV). Report of the Working Group on
the Financing of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Working Group
on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, 13
Recalling its grave concern about the acute financial
situation of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
its serious implications for the future work of the
Agency,
Bearing in mind the need to take all possible measures to prevent a reduction of the services being
provided to the Palestine refugees by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
Taking into account the urgency to undertake such
action,

1. Approves the report of the Working Group on
the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East;
2. Endorses the recommendations contained in
paragraph 10 of the report of the Working Group and
urges the full co-operation of all concerned for their
implementation;
3. Requests the Working Group to continue its
work in accordance with General Assembly resolution
2656 (XXV) of 7 December 1970 and the present
resolution;
4. Renews its appeal to all Governments to join in
a collective effort to solve the financial crisis of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
1931st plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
13 Ibid., Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 35,
document A/8264.
