106

General Assembly-Thirty-third Sessiooi

of 4 December 1974, 3512 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, 31/180 of 21 December 1976 and 32/159 of
19 December 1977,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1918 (LVIII) of 5 May 1975, 2103 (LXIII)
of 3 August 1977 and 1978/37 of 21 July 1978,
Taking note of decision 25/10 of 27 June 1978 of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme concerning the implementation of
the medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region, 93
Noting with satisfaction the decisive role played by
the United Nations Sahelian Office on the one hand
~n helping to combat the effects of 'the drought and t~
implement the priority medium-term and long-term
recovery and rehabilitation programme adopted by the
States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sabel and, on the
other hand, in mobilizing the necessary resources to
finance priority projects,
Noting with ~atisfaction the measures taken by the
Food and Agnculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Food Programme to establish
stockpiles of food in the Sudano-Sahelian region,
Considering that the nature and magnitude of the
ne~ds of the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region,
~h1ch are among the least developed countries, make
I! necessary for the international community to contmue and to strengthen its action of solidarity in
support of the recovery efforts and the economic development of those countries,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the medium-term
~nd long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme
m the Sudano-Sahelian region and the emergency
measures taken on behalf of the region, 94
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of
the ~ecretary-General on the implementation of the
~edmm-term an~ long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme m the Sudano-Sahelian region and the
emergency measures taken on behalf of that region; 95
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Governments
agencies of the United Nations, intergovernmental or~
ganizations, private organizations and individuals that
have contributed to the implementation of the mediumterm and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme drawn up by the States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in
the Sabel;
3. Also expresses its gratitude to the Governments
and intei:national organizations, particularly the Food
and Agnculture Organization of the United Nations
and the World Food Programme, which have responded promptly and efficiently to the requests for
emergency assistance by the countries of the SudanoSahelian region victims of the drought in 1977;
4. Urges all Governments, agencies of the United
Nations, intergovernmental organizations, private organizations and individuals to continue to respond
favourably, either bilaterally or through the United
93 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 13 (E/1978/53/Rev.l ), chap. XX,
sect. G.
94DP/326 and Corr.1; A/33/267.
911 A/33/267.

Nations Sahelian Office or any other intermediary, to
requests for assistance from the Governments of the
States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sabel and from
the Committee itself;
5. Urges Member States, international financial
institutions and intergovernmental organizations to increase their support for and assistance to the shortterm measures taken in various fields by the States
members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sabel to combat the effects of
the drought until the medium-term and long-term
measures produce their full effect;
6. _Urges Member States, particularly the developed
countnes, to support the efforts of the States members
of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought
Cont1;ol in th~ Sabel to establish emergency and
secunty stockpiles of basic food-stuffs and stocks of
agricultural inputs;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts ~o mobilize the financial resources necessary
for the implementation of the medium-term and longterm projects identified by the States members of the
Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control
in the Sabel;
8. Reaffirms the role of the United Nations Sahelian
(?ffice as the ce~tra~ point and principal body responsible ~or co-ordmatmg the efforts of United Nations
agencies to help the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian
region to implement their recovery and rehabilitation
programme;
9. Requests the United Nations Sahelian Office to
continue its close co-operation with the Permanent
Inter~State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel
a_nd its efforts to ensure co-operation and co-ordinat1<;m betw_een United Nations programmes and bodies,
with a view to the implementation of the mediumterm and long-term assistance programme;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
report _to the General Assembly, through the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme and the Economic and Social Council on
the implementation. ~f t~e medium-term and long-term
recovery and rehab1htat10n programme in the SudanoSahelian region .

88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
33/134.

United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developin« Countries
e

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 J?ece?lber l 97 4 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
~f 16 Septem~er 197 5 on development and internat10nal economic co-operation,
Recalling further its resolutions 31/179 of 21 December 1976 and 32/183 of 19 December 1977 on
t~e United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operat10n among Developing Countries as well as resolution

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

32/ 182 of 19 December 1977 on technical co-operation among developing countries,
Taking note of the Economic Declaration and the
Action Programme for Economic Co-operation adopted
by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo
from 16 to 19 August 1976,96 and of the Declaration
and the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation adopted by the Conference of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 25 to 30 July 197 8, 97
Taking note also of resolution CM/Res.560 (XXIX)
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its twenty-ninth ordinary
session, held at Libreville from 23 June to 3 July
1977,98 and endorsed by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its fourteenth ordinary session, held at Libreville from 2 to 5 July 1977, and of resolution
CM/Res.659 (XXXI) adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its thirtyfirst ordinary session, held at Khartoum from 7 to
18 July 1978, 99
Bearing in mind the recommendations made at the
Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries, held at Mexico City from 13 to
22 September 1976,100 and the decisions of the First
Conference of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity and the League of Arab
States, held at Cairo from 7 to 9 March 1977, 101

Bearing in mind also the Kuwait Declaration on
Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries
of 5 June 1977,102
Recognizing the role of technical co-operation among
developing countries for initiating, designing, organizing
and promoting co-operation so that developing countries can create, acquire, adapt, transfer and pool
knowledge and experience for their mutual benefit and
for achieving national and collective self-reliance,
Declaring that the United Nations Conference on
Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries,
held at Buenos Aires from 30 August to 12 September 1978, is a major step in the strengthening of
co-operation among developing countries and that the
implementation of its decisions would constitute a
major contribution in the evolution of international
co-operation for development and in the establishment
of the new international economic order,
Considering that the agreements reached at the
Conference call for urgent action,
l. Expresses its appreciation and thanks to the
Government and the people of Argentina for the excellent facilities and generous hospitality provided for
the United Nations Conference on Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries;

2. Commends the Secretary-General of the Conference on the successful preparation and organization
of the Conference;
96 See A/31/197, annexes
97 See A/33/206, annexes

98 See A/32/310,

II and III.
I and II.

annex I.
99See A/33/235 and Corr.1, annex I.
1oosee A/C.2/31/7, part one.
101 See A/32/61, annexes.
102 See A/CONF.79/PC/18.

107

3. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Conference; 103
4. Endorses the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for
Promoting and Implementing Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries 104 as an important instrument of the international community to intensify and
strengthen co-operation among developing countries,
thus making international co-operation for development more effective;
5. Endorses the resolutions adopted by the Conference on assistance to Namibia, national research
and training centres of multinational scope, and technical co-operation among developing countries in the
spheres of employment and human resources; 105
6. Urges all Governments to take intensified and
sustained action for the implementation of the Buenos
Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing
Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries
and the resolutions adopted by the Conference;
7. Requests the organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations development system, including
the regional commissions, to take expeditious action,
within their respective fields of competence, for the
implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action
for Promoting and Implementing Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries and the resolutions
adopted by the Conference;
8. Calls upon other subregional, regional and interregional intergovernmental organizations to take all
necessary measures, as appropriate, for the implementation of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for
Promoting and Implementing Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries and the resolutions
adopted by the Conference;
9. Requests the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme to give the necessary
orientation to the activities, programmes and projects of the United Nations Development Programme
in order to support the objectives of technical cooperation among developing countries, including the
strengthening of the Special Unit for Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries so as to assist
the Administrator in carrying out the functions described in recommendation 34 of the Buenos Aires
Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries; 104
10. Commends the organs, organizations and bodies
of the United Nations development system, including
the regional commissions, for their effective contribution to the Conference and to its preparation, through
the Interagency Task Force, and recommends the continuation of consultation and co-ordination on technical co-operation among developing countries by appropriate means;
11. Decides to entrust the over-all intergovernmental review of technical co-operation among developing countries within the United Nations system
to a high-level meeting of representatives of all States
participating in the United Nations Development Programme, to be convened by the Administrator of the
l03 Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries, Buenos Aires, 30
August-12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.78.11.A.11 and corrigendum).
10 4 / bid., chap. I.
105 Ibid., chap. II, resolutions I, 2 and 3.

108

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Programme in accordance with the provisions of the
Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Co-operation among Developing
Countries, requests him to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on the organizational
and substantive arrangements for the first meeting, to
be held in 1980, and also decides that Arabic will be
an official language at these meetings.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
33/135.

Role of qualified national personnel in
the social and economic development of
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, and 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling further its resolutions 1824 (XVII) of
18 December 1962, 2083 (XX) of 20 December 1965,
2259 (XXII) of 3 November 1967, 2528 (XXIV) of
5 December 1969 and 32/192 of 19 December 1977,
Bearing in mind the Lima Declaration and Plan of
Action on Industrial Development and Co-operation. 106
adopted at the Second General Conference of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
held at Lima from 12 to 26 March 1975, in which it
is declared, inter alia, that in order to carry out their
national development plans, in particular those involving industrialization, the developing countries
should raise the general cultural standard of the peoples in order to have available a qualified work force
not only for the production of goods and services,
but also for management skills, thus making possible
the assimilation of modern technologies,
Taking note of the relevant provisions of, and
recommendations contained in, the Buenos Aires Plan
of Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries 107 and the
resolutions 108 adopted by the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing
Countries, held at Buenos Aires from 30 August to
12 September 1978,
Taking into account the necessity for the activities
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies in
the field of training qualified national personnel at the
international, regional and subregional levels to be in
keeping with the national plans and requirements of
the developing countries in this area,
Taking into account also the necessity for the organs
and agencies within the United Nations system, in
formulating proposals concerning a new international
development strategy for the 1980s, to take fully into
consideration the problems of training qualified national personnel,
106 See A/10112, chap. IV.
I07 Report of the United Nations

Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries, Buenos Aires, 30
August-12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.78.11.A.l 1 and corrigendum), chop. I.
tOB /hid., chap. JI.

Expressing the conv1ct10n that, in order to hasten
the economic and social progress of the developing
countries, it is necessary to intensify measures for the
full utilization of human resources, especially for the
training of national personnel, taking due account of
the national plans of each country and its present
and long-term requirements for qualified personnel at
all levels and in all important sectors of socio-economic
activity,
I. Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and with the assistance of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the International Labour Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Health Organization
and other organizations concerned, to undertake a
study containing concrete recommendations on the
training of qualified national personnel in developing
countries in accordance with their respective national
development plans;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to pay
special attention to the formulation of recommendations, especially on:
(a)
Enhancing the role of qualified national personnel in industrialization and creating adequate scientific and technological capacities in developing countries, in particular in the least developed, land-locked
and island developing countries;
( b) Enhancing the role of qualified national personnel in the field of trade and development and in
related areas of industrial economic co-operation;
(c) Measures designed to enhance the role of
qualified national personnel in integrated rural development in developing countries;
(d) Measures designed to create adequate conditions for ensuring general school education in developing countries as a pre-condition for the effective
implementation of their long-term strategy for training
qualified national personnel and for eliminating illiteracy among the adult population;
( e)
Measures for strengthening the capacity of
developing countries to encourage patterns of voluntary
migration in the interests of their development and
for assisting in reversing the phenomenon of the
"brain-drain";
(f) Enhai1cing the role of qualified national personnel in public health;
3. Recommends that the competent United Nations
organs should take into account the role of qualified
national personnel in the social and economic development of developing countries when identifying possible
elements for a new international development strategy
for the 1980s;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
study and recommendations to be made in accordance
with the present resolution, together with a progress
rep~rt, to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session through the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme and the Economic
and Social Council at its second regular session of
1979.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
