S/PV.9400

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9400th meeting

Monday, 21 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Biang
Mr. Nyarku
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Chanda
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-24603 (E)
*2324603*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9400

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As in previous months, many Palestinian casualties
in the West Bank occurred in the context of Israeli
operations and clashes in Area A. On 26 July and from
11 to 15 August, five Palestinians, including a 16-yearold and a 17-year-old, were killed by Israeli security
forces in refugee camps near Nablus, Tulkarem
and Jericho.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: I brief the Council today as
the concerning trends we have seen in recent months
continue throughout the occupied Palestinian territory.
Palestinians and Israelis are killed and injured in
near-daily violence, including just hours before this
briefing, when another fatal shooting attack killed
an Israeli in the West Bank. This violence is fuelled
and exacerbated by a growing sense of despair about
the future. While the parties have taken some actions
towards stabilizing the situation on the ground,
unilateral steps, including settlement growth and
demolitions, continue, as do Israeli operations in Area
C, Palestinian militant activity and settler violence.
The lack of progress towards a political horizon that
addresses the core issues driving the conflict has left
a dangerous and volatile vacuum, filled by extremists
on all sides. We are a long way from the sentiment that
prevailed when the Oslo Accords were signed 30 years
ago, on 19 August.
Between 25 July and 15 August, 16 Palestinians,
including five children, were killed, and 59 Palestinians,
including six women and 137 children, were injured
by Israeli security forces in the occupied West Bank
during demonstrations, clashes, search-and-arrest
operations, attacks and alleged attacks against Israelis
and other incidents. Another Palestinian was killed
and eight others, including one child, were injured by
Israeli settlers and other civilians in shooting attacks,
stone-throwing and other incidents. According to
Israeli sources, one member of Israeli security forces
was killed, and nine Israelis, including a woman and a
child, were injured by Palestinians in shooting attacks,
stone-throwing and other incidents.
2/15

21/08/2023

Israeli security forces also killed three Palestinians
on 6 August, including a 15-year-old boy, near Jenin,
when Israeli security forces opened fire on their
vehicle. According to a statement by Israeli security
agencies, the three intended to carry out an imminent
attack against Israelis. All were claimed as members
by Palestinian militant groups. In another incident, a
13-year-old boy died by an improvised explosive device
in Qalqilya on 26 July.
Palestinians also carried out attacks or alleged
attacks against Israelis. On 25 July, three Palestinians
claimed by Hamas opened fire towards an Israeli
checkpoint near the Mount Gerizim community, in
the northern West Bank, and were shot and killed by
Israeli security forces. On 1 August, a Palestinian shot
and injured six Israelis at a shopping mall in Ma’ale
Adumim, near Jerusalem, before being killed by Israeli
security forces. The same day, Israeli security forces
shot and killed a 15-year-old Palestinian boy who
allegedly attempted to stab two Israeli soldiers near a
settlement, south of Hebron. On 5 August, a Palestinian
from Jenin shot and killed a municipal patrolman in Tel
Aviv, before being killed by a second patrolman.
Turning to settler violence, on 2 August an Israeli
guard of the Ofra settlement fatally wounded a 17-yearold Palestinian after he reportedly threw a Molotov
cocktail towards the settlement. On 4 August, armed
Israeli settlers from the nearby outpost of Ramat Migron
approached Burqa village near Ramallah, leading
to stone-throwing confrontations with Palestinians.
Settlers fired live ammunition, killing a 19-yearold Palestinian and injuring another. One Israeli was
injured by Palestinians throwing stones. Israel police
arrested two Israelis on suspicion of involvement in
the killing. Six Palestinians were also arrested. Two
days prior, settlers from the same outpost reportedly
installed a tent and grazed sheep on private Palestinian
land near the village.
As the violence spirals, I again reiterate that all
perpetrators must be held accountable and swiftly
brought to justice. Violence against civilians, including
23-24603

21/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

acts of terror, are unacceptable and must be condemned
and rejected by all. Security forces must exercise
maximum restraint and use lethal force only when
strictly unavoidable to protect life.
Turning to settlement-related developments, on
3 August, the Israeli Supreme Court dismissed a
petition to dismantle an outpost established in the
former settlement of Homesh, in the northern West
Bank, evacuated as part of the 2005 Disengagement
Law. The outpost had been set up following an
amendment to that law by the Israeli Knesset in
March, lifting the ban on Israelis entering the area. On
7 August, the Jerusalem District Planning Committee
advanced plans for approximately 2,000 housing units
in the settlements of Nof Zion and Ramat Alon in
East Jerusalem. On 14 August, Israeli security forces
demolished four structures in an outpost near Kokhav
HaShahar settlement in the West Bank. I reiterate that
all settlements are illegal under international law and a
substantial obstacle to peace.
Israeli authorities demolished, seized or forced
owners to demolish 58 Palestinian-owned structures
in Area C and six in East Jerusalem, displacing 28
Palestinians, including 14 children. The demolitions
were carried out owing to the lack of Israeli-issued
building permits, which are nearly impossible for
Palestinians to obtain.
On 17 August, a Palestinian elementary school in
Ein Samiya serving nearly 80 pupils was demolished
days before the start of the school year — the third such
demolition in the past year. I call on Israeli authorities
to end demolitions of Palestinian-owned property and
the displacement and eviction of Palestinians and to
approve additional plans that would enable Palestinians
to build legally and address their development needs.
In July, Israel ended the additional monthly
deductions of some $14 million from Palestinian
clearance revenues which began in February. Some
$14 million continues to be withheld each month in
line with an Israeli law mandating the withholding of
what Israel says the Palestinian Authority (PA) pays to
perpetrators of attacks against Israelis or their families.
The PA’s fiscal state remains dire with a projected
deficit of more than $370 million for 2023. Austerity
measures have resulted in significant reductions to
civil servant salaries and social assistance.

S/PV.9400

Meanwhile, funding shortages continue to curtail
United Nations agencies’ ability to provide crucial
services to Palestinians. To get through the end of the
year, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) needs
$35 million urgently to maintain food assistance for
1.2 million Palestinians in Gaza, while the World
Food Programme requires $41 million to restore its
operations across the occupied Palestinian territory.
It is worrisome that, more than halfway through
2023, the humanitarian appeal for Palestinians
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory is funded
at just over 30 per cent. I encourage Member States to
maintain and increase their funding to United Nations
agencies and humanitarian partners to ensure that they
can continue delivering vital services on the ground.
On 30 July, President Mahmoud Abbas chaired a
meeting of Secretaries-General of Palestinian factions
in El Alamein, Egypt, which he convened following
the major Israeli military operation in Jenin. Senior
officials from Hamas and other Palestinian factions
participated, while the Palestinian Islamic Jihad refused
to attend. In a subsequent statement, President Abbas
called for a follow-up committee to complete dialogue
on the issues discussed to “end divisions and achieve
Palestinian national unity”.
On 10 August, President Abbas issued a presidential
decree, retiring 12 out of the 16 PA governors and
establishing a committee to recommend candidates to
the President for selection. On 14 August, following
a consultative meeting organized by Hamas, the
movement welcomed the call by factions to hold local
elections in Gaza.
In Gaza, the cessation of hostilities continues to
hold. Nevertheless, the humanitarian situation remains
dire. The reporting period saw higher-than-normal
electricity shortages of up to 12 hours per day, driven
by a lack of capacity to meet soaring demand during the
summer. On 1 August, the Gaza power plant increased
electricity supply by nearly two hours a day thanks
to additional funding from Qatar. The power cuts
sparked popular protests directed at Hamas authorities
over living conditions, with thousands of Palestinians
taking to the streets on 30 July. Video images of Hamas
security forces beating protesters circulated widely. The
protests were matched by Hamas-led counterprotests
against the Israeli closure regime.

23-246033/15

S/PV.9400

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In violation of Palestinian law and the State of
Palestine’s international obligations, seven civilians
in Gaza were sentenced to death for collaboration with
Israel after a Hamas military appeals court upheld and
strengthened previous sentences. I echo the SecretaryGeneral in highlighting that the United Nations opposes
the imposition of the death penalty in all circumstances.
Turning to the region, on the Golan, the ceasefire
between Israel and Syria has been generally maintained.
However, the situation has remained volatile owing
to continued violations of the 1974 Agreement on
Disengagement of Forces by both parties. In Lebanon,
violent clashes in the Ein Al-Hilweh Palestine refugee
camp between Fatah and Islamist factions have led to at
least 13 fatalities, with over 50 people injured. I echo
the messages of the United Nations Special Coordinator
for Lebanon in urging all actors to exercise restraint
and to avoid any further violence.
As tensions along the Blue Line continue,
including with respect to the disputed Sheba’a Farms
and Al-Ghajar, I urge political leaders in Lebanon and
Israel to refrain from inflammatory rhetoric. I further
urge the parties to continue their close engagement with
the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon
and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon to
defuse tensions and avoid any escalation, in addition to
upholding their respective obligations under resolutions
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
Since my most recent briefing (see S/PV.9361),
we have witnessed the continuation of the negative
trajectory that has marked this conflict for far too long.
Violence continues on the upswing, with over 200
Palestinian and nearly 30 Israeli fatalities in the West
Bank and Israel thus far this year, already surpassing
2022’s annual figures and the highest figures since
2005. Settlement expansion continues unabated.
The fragility of the PA fiscal situation, compounded
by funding shortages facing key United Nations
agencies, threatens to worsen the plight of the most
vulnerable Palestinians.
While we must urgently focus on addressing the
most critical issues and on de-escalation of the situation
on the ground, we cannot ignore the need to restore a
political horizon. The United Nations remains firmly
committed to supporting the parties to achieve an
end to the occupation and the establishment of a twoState solution, in line with United Nations resolutions,
international law and previous agreements.
4/15

21/08/2023

The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of the note contained in document
S/2017/507, which encourages all participants in Council
meetings to deliver their statements in five minutes or
less, in line with the Security Council’s commitment to
making more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing.
The United States remains deeply concerned
about violence in the West Bank and Israel. And we
express our condolences to those injured or killed in
the past month.
We strongly condemn Palestinian terrorist attacks
against Israelis, including this morning’s shooting
attack near Hebron, the 19 August attack outside
Huwara, which killed a father and son, and the 5 August
attack in Tel Aviv, which killed an Israeli police
officer. We condemn the reckless launch of rockets by
militants in the West Bank, a deeply troubling event,
and strongly condemn the terror attacks by settlers
in Burqa on 4 August, which killed a 19-year-old
Palestinian. We note Israel has made several arrests and
expect accountability and justice to be pursued with
equal vigour in all cases of violent extremism, whether
the perpetrators are Palestinian militants or extremist
Israeli settlers.
The escalating violence underscores the need for
the parties to take immediate steps to de-escalate and
restore calm. We encourage Israeli and Palestinian
security forces to increase their cooperation to improve
the security situation in the West Bank.
We urge all parties to take proactive measures to
counter all forms of violence and incitement to violence
and to refrain from actions that inflame tensions,
including settlement activity, evictions, the demolition
of Palestinian homes, terrorism, incitement to violence
and payments to the families of terrorists. I would
also like to take a moment to urge Hamas to return the
remains of Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin and release
the two Israelis who are currently being held captive by
Hamas in Gaza.
23-24603

21/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The United States remains deeply concerned by
the damage inflicted on the Jenin camp, including
the damage done to United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) installations as a result of the July Israeli
security force operation. At this perilous moment,
it is imperative that UNRWA be able to continue its
life-saving work. I would like to thank those who have
generously supported the UNRWA flash appeal. We must
all make meaningful and early contributions. UNRWA
faces a funding shortfall, and supportive statements
by Governments are all too often not accompanied by
contributions. We strongly encourage Member States
to join us in funding UNRWA so that people in need
can receive support and cope with rising food prices,
and so that UNRWA can continue to provide education
and health care. At the same time, we will continue to
insist that UNRWA strengthen its effectiveness and
financial sustainability, and we will continue to bolster
the Agency’s accountability and transparency.
The United States also remains deeply concerned
by Hizbullah’s provocative actions along the Blue Line,
which represent an increasing threat to Lebanon’s
peace and security and to Israel’s. We are committed
to extending a robust United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon mission that is capable of performing its duties
independently of the Lebanese Armed Forces. As part
of the mandate renewal discussions, we must address
the activities of Green without Borders, which has
provided support and cover for Hizbullah’s operations
in southern Lebanon along the Blue Line. The United
States Department of the Treasury imposed sanctions
on Green without Borders and its leaders last week for
those activities and related actions, and we made clear
when announcing those sanctions that we will continue
to support Lebanese civil society groups that protect
Lebanon’s natural environment, while also relentlessly
pursuing Hizbullah and their support networks. We will
remain vigilant concerning Iran’s support for Hizbullah
and other militia groups that carry out destabilizing
activities in the region.
The United States continues to promote efforts to
lower tensions and restore goodwill. We continue to
support a two-State solution and to believe that goodfaith dialogue is the best path to stability, and we
appreciate our partners in the region that join the United
States in facilitating discussions between the parties.
Today I would like to acknowledge the appointment of
the Saudi Arabian ambassador to Jordan as non-resident

S/PV.9400

consul general in Jerusalem. We stand ready to be
supportive of any and all efforts that will bring us closer
to a two-State solution. The bottom line is that Israelis
and Palestinians deserve equal measures of security,
prosperity and freedom, and we will continue to work
towards those goals in tangible ways in the immediate
term. Therefore, let us keep at it, let us work together
and let us do everything in our power to advance a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace between Israelis
and Palestinians.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
The United Kingdom is extremely alarmed by the
growth of settler violence in the occupied Palestinian
territories. United Nations agencies have recorded
591 settler-related incidents resulting in Palestinian
casualties, property damage or both to date in
2023 — the highest monthly average of incidents since
records began. That includes the murder by settlers
of Palestinian Qusai Jamal Maatan, which the United
Kingdom condemns. The displacement of more than 400
Palestinians across seven communities from their land
due to ongoing settler violence is unacceptable. As an
occupying Power, Israel is obliged under international
humanitarian law to properly provide security for the
local population. Israeli authorities must do more to
hold to account and hinder the efforts of those who
have made the lives of Palestinians intolerable, such as
in the communities of Al-Qaboun and Al-Mughayyir,
including by thoroughly investigating every incident of
settler violence in order to bring those responsible to
justice and end the culture of impunity.
The United Kingdom condemns the abhorrent
terrorist attacks perpetrated in Tel Aviv on Saturday
5 August, the West Bank town of Huwara on 19 August
and the South Hebron hills just today, which took the
lives of a further four innocent Israelis. The Palestinian
Authority must tackle terrorism and incitement. We also
see continued violations of international humanitarian
law in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
evictions and demolitions. On Friday 17 August,
Israel demolished a West Bank Protection Consortium
school in Ein Samiya. The continued demolitions
of Palestinian property and the evictions by Israeli
authorities of Palestinians from their homes are contrary
to international humanitarian law, put Palestinians at

23-246035/15

S/PV.9400

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

21/08/2023

risk of forcible transfer, cause unnecessary suffering
to ordinary Palestinians and are harmful to the peace
process. Israel must also urgently provide a clear,
transparent route to construction for Palestinians in
Area C.

go unpunished. Given the risk of escalation, France
calls on all parties to exercise maximum restraint.
The Security Council has a responsibility to ensure
compliance with the resolutions it has adopted, in
particular resolution 2334 (2016).

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) faces a
deep funding crisis. UNRWA can only be a stabilizing
force in the region while it is able to deliver vital services
to Palestinian refugees. We call on Security Council
members and Member States to work collectively to fill
the critical funding gaps.

As we approach the thirtieth anniversary of the
Oslo Accords, the lack of progress on the ground
is fuelling the spiral of violence and jeopardizing
international peace and security. Council members
must work together to take concrete action to implement
a two-State solution, and the first step towards that is
re-establishing a credible political horizon. The United
Nations has an important role to play in restoring
confidence between the parties and relaunching the
peace process. It is also essential for regional players to
pool their efforts constructively. The normalization of
relations between Israel and several States in the region
has been contributing to stability and security. But
that momentum will be incomplete as long as it is not
accompanied by a resumption of the political process
towards a solution that meets the legitimate aspirations
of both Palestinians and Israelis.

Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
France condemns the pursuit of unilateral measures
that constitute an obstacle to peace. It condemns
the Israeli colonization of Palestinian territories,
which contravenes international law and constitutes
a major obstacle to peace. France calls on the Israeli
Government to stop building new housing in the
settlements. The recent decisions taken by the Israeli
authorities on settlement in Jerusalem are alarming.
France will never recognize the illegal annexation of
territories or the legalization of informal settlements. It
is also deeply concerned by the continued demolitions
in East Jerusalem and the West Bank and condemns
Israel’s destruction of humanitarian infrastructure in
Area C. The demolition on 17 August of the school in
Ayn Samir in Ramallah governorate, which is funded
by European donors, including France, is unacceptable.
International humanitarian law must be respected, and
Palestinian children have the right to an education.
France is also alarmed by the forced departure
of Palestinian populations in Area C in Ramallah
governorate as a result of the recurring attacks carried
out by settlers. It recalls that the forcible transfer of
populations contravenes the Fourth Geneva Convention.
France also condemns all attacks targeting civilians,
which are never justified. We deplore the attacks
carried out last Saturday at Huwara and last Monday
near Hebron, which claimed the lives of three Israeli
civilians. France also condemned in the strongest terms
the terrorist attack carried out in Tel Aviv on 5 August
and reiterates its steadfast commitment to the security
of Israel.
The violent acts perpetrated by some Israeli settlers
against Palestinian civilians with a view to terrorizing
them are also unjustifiable and deplorable and must not
6/15

France would also like to point to the vital role of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees (UNRWA), which contributes to the stability
of the region by providing essential humanitarian aid to
Palestinian refugees, particularly in terms of security
and education. France has significantly increased its
financial support to UNRWA since 2018 and calls on
all Member States to do the same.
Israelis and Palestinians alike deserve to live in
peace and security. France is ready to contribute to any
peace initiative that advances a two-State solution.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I thank Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his update on the situation in
the region.
It has been less than a month since the Security
Council last met to consider this topic (see S/PV.9387).
The situation on the ground remains worrisome, with
continued tensions and attacks that have been causing
more and more civilian deaths and injuries. Recent
data from the Secretary-General’s latest report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2023/345)
shows that the situation in the region is critical. There
are no signs of a reduction in the clashes between Israel
and Palestine. Mozambique condemns the escalation
of violence in the occupied Palestinian territory and
23-24603

21/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

reiterates its appeal to the Israeli forces to protect and
respect lives.
The ongoing dialogue, initiatives and other
proposals that may emerge must be encouraged and
supported, paving the way for a solution to the crisis
in the region. In that regard, the concept of a twoState solution, based on the relevant resolutions and
decisions of the Council and the General Assembly,
remains a good basis for ensuring the coexistence of
the two neighbouring peoples and States, as well as
for the peace and stability of the region. We therefore
encourage all efforts aimed at a genuine dialogue for
peace towards a negotiated political settlement for
peaceful coexistence between Israel and Palestine
based on the fundamental principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
We strongly condemn the attacks on and
destruction of some settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, which have not only aggravated
the humanitarian situation but have led to the loss of
many lives, the destruction of property and dismay
for the many families affected. Another matter of
concern is the limited operations and activities of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. The Agency, whose work is
vital to peace and stability, continues to face a lack of
funds and resources to support all core services. There
are therefore millions of Palestinian refugees at risk of
not benefiting from essential services. In that regard,
Mozambique urges regional actors and the international
community, including the private sector at large, to
work urgently to join their efforts in order to provide
the Agency with the financial support it needs.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our appeal
to the members of the Council to redouble their role in
influencing and advocating for a sustainable solution
to the Palestinian situation, in full compliance with the
relevant resolutions, decisions and other instruments of
the United Nations.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing
today. As has been the case with many of his previous
briefings recently, we have heard no encouraging news
or progress. The Security Council has held innumerable
meetings on this issue, too many to count. All I know
is that the question of Palestine has dragged on for
more than 70 years and remains unresolved. In the
current circumstances, we must rely on firm political

S/PV.9400

will, effective diplomatic action and resolute collective
efforts to prevent the Palestinian-Israeli situation
from getting completely out of control and to promote
a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement to the
question of Palestine.
First, it is imperative to oppose violence and
incitement to violence and to earnestly uphold
international law. The situation on the ground has
remained tense for some time, with negative incidents
happening in quick succession and leading to
escalations of violence and civilian casualties. More
than 40 Palestinian children have been killed since the
beginning of this year, and we are deeply concerned
about that. We condemn all violence against civilians
and the killing and abuse of children, and we oppose
the excessive use of force by security forces. All the
parties concerned must exercise calm and restraint,
and the occupying Power should earnestly fulfil its
obligations under international law and ensure the
safety and security of the population and their property
in the occupied territory. The barbaric expansion of
settlements continues to change the status quo in the
occupied territory, in violation of international law and
Council resolutions, and is further exacerbating the
confrontation between Palestine and Israel. We urge for
an end to all settlement activities and to the escalating
settler violence. The holy sites in Jerusalem have a
bearing on the religious sentiments of the followers.
We must take a clear stand against irresponsible
provocation and incitement and earnestly respect the
historical status quo of the holy sites and Jordan’s
custodianship of them.
Secondly, it is essential to promote economic
development and protect people’s livelihoods effectively.
The prolonged occupation has severely constrained
Palestinian economic and social development and the
volatile security situation has made Palestinians’ lives
worse. We call on Israel to ease and lift its unreasonable
restrictions on the movement of goods and the use
of land in the occupied territory, create conditions
conducive to the development of the Palestinian
communities in the West Bank and lift the blockade
of the Gaza Strip as soon as possible. We urge the
international community to pay attention to and support
the needs of the Palestinian economy and its people’s
livelihoods, provide humanitarian assistance and help
Palestinians alleviate the financial crisis. China signed
an agreement last week with the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near

23-246037/15

S/PV.9400

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

East on an annual contribution and will continue to
provide humanitarian and development assistance to
Palestine and support the work of the Agency.
Thirdly, it is important to fulfil international
commitments and earnestly promote the concept of a
two-State solution. Managing the crisis in piecemeal
fashion is unsustainable, and the fundamental solution
to the Palestinian question lies in the establishment of
an independent State of Palestine with full sovereignty,
based on the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as
its capital. The international community must place the
question of Palestine higher on the international agenda.
The United Nations and the Security Council must
take forceful action to advance the two-State solution
with a sense of urgency, shoulder their responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations and earnestly
uphold fairness and justice. China welcomes the recent
tripartite summit held between Egypt, Jordan and
Palestine and supports the convening of a larger, more
authoritative and more influential international peace
conference to create conditions for the resumption of
peace talks.
China is ready to continue to work with the
international community to make unremitting efforts
to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement
of the question of Palestine at an early date and promote
lasting peace and stability in the Middle East.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing.
Since our previous meeting on 27 July (see
S/PV.9387), security incidents involving civilians have
continued. The terrible toll cited by Special Coordinator
Wennesland in his briefing is particularly shocking in
terms of the number of victims and deaths. We condemn
all acts of violence, which hamper the construction of a
lasting peace between Palestinians and Israelis and push
the prospect of a two-State solution further away. The
continued expansion of settlements, demolitions and
expulsions — particularly in the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem — constitute another major
obstacle to building a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace. They are clear violations of international law that
must be stopped. As for the absurd practice of detaining
the remains of those killed, we call for them to be returned
to their families in Palestine and Israel, respectively.
It is essential to respect the status quo of Jerusalem’s
holy sites and the crucial role of the Hashemite Kingdom
8/15

21/08/2023

of Jordan as their official custodian. We deplore the
increase in violence targeting the Christian community
in Israel, particularly in their places of worship
and cemeteries. It is important for the international
community to ensure that the Israeli-Palestinian crisis
does not sow the seeds of antagonism between the three
monotheistic religions.
The situation in Gaza remains fragile, even though
the latest ceasefire is being respected to a certain extent.
Despite some easing of restrictions on access to Gaza,
the blockade must be lifted by Israel in accordance with
resolution 1860 (2009) in order to facilitate unimpeded
access for the delivery of humanitarian aid.
On 17 August, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs announced that a primary school
for Palestinian children had been demolished in the
West Bank region of Ein Samiya, just a few days before
the start of the new school year. According to UNICEF,
three schools have been demolished across the West
Bank in the past 12 months. We call for schools to be
sanctuaries. We also reiterate our call for maintaining
funding for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Without that
financial support, vulnerable civilian populations risk
losing access to health-care services, education and
food. Such a situation would only dramatically increase
social unrest on the ground, as well as poverty and
violence, particularly gender-based violence, including
in refugee camps in Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.
With regard to the inter-Palestinian dialogue, we
welcome the decision taken by the political authorities
on 30 July following a meeting in Egypt, which was
attended by the President of the Palestinian Authority
and the leader of Hamas, to form a committee with
the aim of putting an end to the 17-year division of the
occupied territories.
I wish to conclude by reiterating Gabon’s call
for restraint, a cessation of hostilities and dialogue,
stressing the need to respect international law,
particularly international humanitarian law, and for
ensuring the protection of the rights of the Palestinian
people while guaranteeing Israel’s security. We urge
the parties to respect the relevant Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2334 (2016), and to implement
the commitments made in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr Tor Wennesland, for his
23-24603

21/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9400

briefing. In the light of his presentation, the Security
Council must firmly reiterate its calls for de-escalation
and the protection of the civilian population in the
Middle East conflict.

such a process would help to reverse the continuing
weakening of the Palestinian Authority, the loss of
legitimacy of its institutions and the erosion of the
provision of essential services to the population.

The year 2022 was the deadliest year for Palestinian
civilians in the West Bank since the United Nations
began recording cases in the conflict, yet that tragic
record has already been broken this month. According
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, twice as many Palestinian civilians died in
the West Bank in the first seven months of 2023 than
in the same period last year, either during operations
carried out by Israeli security forces or due to violence
committed by settlers. At the same time, 24 Israeli
civilians lost their lives as a result of acts of violence
perpetrated by Palestinians. Switzerland condemns all
acts of violence against civilians.

In that respect, we are concerned about the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
particularly in the Gaza Strip. The financial difficulties
of the World Food Programme and the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) are worrisome and must
be addressed as soon as possible. We hope that the
ministerial meeting on UNRWA to be held in New
York in September will help to stabilize the Agency’s
financial situation.

It must be acknowledged that the Council’s
unanimous adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2023/1 in February has not yet borne fruit. The
commitments subsequently made by the parties must
be followed urgently by action. Switzerland calls on the
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to make an unequivocal
commitment to de-escalation, address the root causes of
the conflict and restore a political horizon with a view
to achieving a negotiated two-State solution. With that
in mind, we call on all parties to respect international
law and refrain from any unilateral measures, acts of
provocation or inflammatory language that could fuel
the conflict and constitute an obstacle to peace.
Such obstacles include the acceleration of settlement
development in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. We recall that settlements are
illegal under international law, and Israel must refrain
from taking measures that would introduce permanent
changes, in particular demographic and administrative
changes, in the occupied territory. In that context, the
displacement of communities — such as the recent
displacement of 89 Palestinians, including 39 children,
in Ras Al-Tin following violence by settlers and
coercive measures by Israel — could constitute forced
transfers, which are likely to further inflame tensions.
We remind Israel of its responsibility to protect the
occupied population.
Switzerland encourages the continuation of
discussions between the Palestinian parties aimed at
restoring their political unity. Combined with other
measures, such as the holding of elections at all levels,

Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
As we just heard from Mr. Wennesland, we have
seen a significant surge of violence in the West Bank in
the absence of a tangible peace process. Japan is deeply
troubled by the operations of the Israeli forces, including
the recent raid in Jericho, which led to the killing of two
Palestinians, including a 16-year-old boy. At the same
time, we were shocked to learn about the murder of an
Israeli security guard, shot by a Palestinian gunman in
Tel Aviv earlier this month. Japan strongly condemns
all acts of terrorism and the targeting of innocent
people and emphasizes the importance of the protection
of civilians, especially children. All perpetrators of
heinous crimes must be held accountable. Unilateral
actions, such as Israel’s illegal settlement activities
and demolitions of Palestinian homes, as well as acts
of terror by Palestinian militants, only fuel tensions
on the ground and take us further away from a
sustainable solution.
We urge all the parties to exercise maximum
restraint and commit to de-escalation. As we have
repeatedly stressed, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can
be resolved only through direct talks and negotiations
between the parties. We acknowledge the recent meeting
in Egypt that explored reconciliation efforts among
Palestinian factions and encourage the continuation
of such diplomatic engagements aimed at bringing
the parties together and contributing meaningfully to
the revitalization of a comprehensive peace process in
the region. There is ultimately no alternative to a twoState solution whereby Israel and Palestine can coexist
peacefully side by side, in line with internationally
agreed parameters, including resolution 2334 (2016).

23-246039/15

S/PV.9400

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Japan will never cease its efforts to achieve peace and
stability in the region.
Despite some recent generous contributions and
pledges, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
is still facing significant funding shortages, which
may limit its ability to provide life-saving support to
Palestine refugees. After last month’s Israeli military
incursion in Jenin, President Abbas has vowed to
help rebuild the refugee camp there. Last week Japan
was proud to announce its new grant of humanitarian
assistance, in cooperation with UNRWA, amounting
to $1 million in the areas of sanitation, health and
response to unexploded ordnance, which will contribute
meaningfully to those efforts.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing.
As previous speakers described, the security
situation in Israel and Palestine has deteriorated
markedly since the beginning of the year, with tensions
escalating to alarming levels. Tragically, the civilian
population continues to suffer the most, receiving
the brunt of the conflict and paying an unacceptably
heavy toll. Brazil condemns all acts of violence against
civilians, whether Israeli or Palestinian, and particularly
deplores the disproportionate use of force. Terrorism,
in any form or manifestation, is also unacceptable and
we deeply condemn and reject it.
The first step here is clear — all the parties must
exercise maximum restraint and uphold their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. The
fact that those obligations continue to be ignored is cause
for profound concern and keeps fuelling the conflict.
The escalating Israeli military actions have heightened
tensions and left a trail of suffering and destruction
in the West Bank. The frequent violent raids, such as
those recently carried out in Jericho and the Tulkarem
refugee camp, are deeply concerning. An ever-present
risk looms, as events in the West Bank may spill into
Gaza, where the humanitarian situation continues to
worsen, exacerbated by the ongoing blockade. The
importance of advancing confidence-building measures
cannot be overstated. Regrettably, the commitments
made in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh to refraining
from provocative unilateral actions and pursuing
de-escalation measures remain unfulfilled.
10/15

21/08/2023

The expansion of settlements, especially following
recent decisions by the Israeli Government, obstructs
peace, fuels violence and aggravates humanitarian
needs. Displacement resulting from settler violence
has been increasing, according to reports from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Israeli settlements are illegal under international law,
as outlined in resolution 2334 (2016), which condemns
all measures aimed at altering the demographic
composition, character and status of the Palestinian
territory. What we are witnessing is a complete
disregard for the Council’s resolutions and the Charter
of the United Nations. Brazil calls on the Government
of Israel to end all settlement activities and concentrate
on building lasting peace in the region, based firmly on
international law.
On the other hand, intra-Palestinian reconciliation,
together with efforts aimed at improving living
conditions in the West Bank and Gaza, is crucial to
advancing a path to peace. Success in that area is tied
to sustainable economic growth. We must recognize
the significant role that poverty, food insecurity and
widespread despair play in creating fertile ground for
extremist forces. Addressing those outstanding issues
is essential. The low funding levels for United Nations
appeals underscore that there has been a decline in
the capacity of international humanitarian assistance,
even amid severe crises on multiple fronts. Yet the
humanitarian situation of Palestinian refugees remains
critical. Restoring the capabilities of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East is vital to enabling it to continue its
indispensable work.
In the end, only a two-State solution, based
on international law and supported by the whole
international community, will bring the peace and
progress that Israelis and Palestinians deserve, with
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and
security, within mutually agreed and internationally
recognized borders. It is about time that we accomplished
that and moved on to other pressing and ever-growing
challenges. But in the current volatile scenario, it
will be crucial to exercise restraint and avoid any
actions that might escalate tensions or provoke further
violence. Despite the formidable challenges, we must
redouble our efforts to advance the cause of peace
and reconciliation.
23-24603

21/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his
valuable briefing.
The deteriorating conditions in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including events that have
occurred in the past few days, are an inevitable result of
the lack of a political settlement between Palestinians
and Israelis. The ongoing clashes, incursions and
acts of violence have become a bitter daily reality for
Palestinians. We are increasingly worried about the
consequences of the ongoing escalation, not just for the
security and stability of the two peoples immediately
concerned but for the entire region.
The United Arab Emirates is of the view that it is high
time for the international community to bring its full
weight to bear in dealing with the Palestinian question
as a priority dossier. We must intensify the efforts
to rebuild confidence among the parties and resume
serious and effective negotiations based on the agreed
international terms of reference, foremost among them
the concept of a two-State solution. We stress that a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace cannot be achieved by
inciting violence and hate speech. It requires the values
of tolerance and peaceful coexistence that we have
called for many times, particularly in this Chamber,
with a view to ending the enmity and establishing a
safe and stable future that responds to the aspirations
of present and future generations.
We also call for an end to all illegal and repressive
practices against Palestinians and Palestinian towns
and villages, especially the growing aggressions in
the occupied West Bank, including incursions, forced
displacement and the demolition of homes. That serves
only to increase tensions and undermine peace efforts.
With the return of students to their schools, we
stress the rights of Palestinian children’s rights to a safe
education, which means putting an end to the terrorism
and violence that are perpetrated by Israeli authorities
and settlers against students while they are on their way
to school, present in school and returning home from
school. We also stress the need to stop unjust demolitions
of schools, such as the demolition conducted last week
at Ain Samiya in the West Bank a few days before the
beginning of the school year. Demolition notices for
scores of other schools must also be cancelled, as we all
believe that the role of education is essential for building
stable and prosperous communities, in particular those
affected by conflicts.

S/PV.9400

The violence perpetrated by settlers has reached
unprecedented levels, with the dangerous patterns seen
in Ramallah, Nablus and surrounding villages this
year that led to the killing and injuring of Palestinians
and damage to property as well. Meanwhile, settlers
enjoy immunity, which encourages them to continue to
carry out such appalling and unacceptable crimes. The
continued attacks threaten to provoke more dangerous
clashes and a state of total chaos, with uncontrollable
consequences. That is why it is essential for Israel to
take genuine steps to put an end to settlers’ violence
and deter their acts of aggression. We once again
reiterate the need to preserve the current legal and
historical status of the city of Jerusalem and its holy
sites. Repeated incursions into Al-Aqsa Mosque must
end, and it must be ensured full protection. The role of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan must be respected
as the custodian of the holy sites in Jerusalem. In that
context, we express our concern over the repeated
attempts to change the demographic constitution of
Jerusalem. Israel continues to build illegal settlements
in East Jerusalem, while Palestinians there continue to
be subjected to attempts to expel them. As for the laws
that are imposed on them, they must be repealed.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its support for the fraternal Palestinian people,
including through providing them with humanitarian
needs and alleviating the harsh living conditions of
refugees. We continue our solidarity with Palestinians
in terms of their right to self-determination and the
creation of an independent Palestinian State along the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side with Israel in peace, security and
mutual recognition.
Mr. Nyarku (Ghana): I thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Tor
Wennesland, for his briefing on the situation in the
Middle East, which gives much cause for concern.
We regret that the period under consideration
witnessed some of the worst violent clashes in recent
times and that, despite the overwhelming desire around
the world for peace in the Middle East, especially in
the occupied Palestinian territories, the actions on
the ground manifest the contrary. We join others in
condemning the surge in acts of violence by both sides
against civilians, including acts of terror. As we look
forward to the thirtieth anniversary of the Oslo Accords
on 13 September, Ghana remains deeply concerned
about the lack of progress in finding a just and lasting

23-2460311/15

S/PV.9400

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

solution to the protracted dispute and the achievement
of a two-State solution. It is regrettable that 30 years
after the Oslo Accords, Israelis and Palestinians are
farther apart on reaching an agreement than ever before.
We hold that the two-State solution remains the
only realistic path for a lasting peace between Israel
and Palestine and urge action to address three issues
that undermine the viability of the two-State solution.
First, we must help stop the interminable cycle
of violence and the increase in settler-related clashes,
which have been the norm over the past eight months.
As reported by the United Nations, the past eight
months have seen the highest number of settler-related
incidents across the Middle East, compared to all of
last year. As the United Nations indicates, 591 settlerrelated incidents resulting in Palestinian casualties,
property damage or both were recorded in the first half
of 2023. Furthermore, we share the concern of UNICEF
about the demolition of Palestinian-owned properties
across the West Bank in the past 12 months, and we
also reiterate our call for Israel to stop the advancement
of settlement activities, halt all evictions from and
demolitions of Palestinian-owned structures and
respect Palestinian children’s right to education.
Secondly, the increasing frequency and intensity
of security operations by Israeli security forces using
sophisticated weapons and live ammunition have been
accompanied by the widespread destruction of civilian
infrastructure and private property and the arbitrary
arrest and detention of mostly Palestinian young people
in Gaza, Jenin and other refugee camps in the occupied
Palestinian territories. That mode of operation, while
aimed at ensuring the security of Israel, has led to the
greatest number of Palestinian fatalities and injuries
to children and unarmed civilians and has contributed
to the current situation of insecurity in the region. We
therefore call on the Israeli security forces to undertake
all security operations in a transparent manner, exercise
restraint and adhere to the principles of proportionality
and distinction during their security operations in the
West Bank and other parts of the occupied Palestinian
territories. We are equally concerned about the sharp
increase in violent attacks on unarmed Israeli civilians,
which have resulted in fatalities, the kidnapping
of innocent Israelis in Jerusalem and other Israeli
settlements, and the regular firing of rockets into
Israeli communities that have harmed innocent Israeli
citizens. We would like to reiterate our position that
attacks by terrorist or militant groups against innocent
12/15

21/08/2023

Israeli citizens will not advance the cause of Palestine.
The Security Council must act to protect all civilians.
Last but not least, we urge for an abatement of the
increasing number of provocative remarks and acts and
the adoption of radical policies on matters that affect
the well-being of both Israeli and Palestinian citizens.
We encourage the direct engagement of the parties in
order to enable the Palestinian people to exercise their
inalienable rights, while ensuring the security of the
State of Israel. We hold that any agreement that settles
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will ultimately require
the leaders in Jerusalem and Ramallah to engage with
one another. We therefore urge the parties to sustain
communications and de-escalate the situation on
the ground.
Finally, as we have stated before, the fate of
Palestine and Israel has been woven together by history
and the Council’s previous decisions. It is evident that
the only acceptable solution continues to be a twoState solution based on bilateral Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations, as envisioned by the Oslo Accords. The
Council therefore has an enduring responsibility to
support Israel and Palestine to find the peace that will
enable them to live side by side, with their interests
protected by their adherence to international law.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for briefing us on the current situation.
Malta remains deeply concerned about the
increasing frequency of violence, provocations
and unilateral decisions, which continue to cause
civilian suffering in both the occupied Palestinian
territories and Israel. Statistics from the Office for the
Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs underline that
the scale of violence affecting civilians has resulted in
a monthly average of fatalities in the West Bank and
Israel that is 85 per cent higher than the monthly average
for all of 2022. In that context, we again reiterate that
the protection of civilians in conflict and respect for
international humanitarian law are fundamental. We
also strongly reiterate our call for relevant parties
to safeguard lives and in particular the well-being
of children who continue to bear too many negative
repercussions of the prolonged conflict.
Malta unreservedly condemns all acts of terrorism
and extremist violence, which have regrettably
continued to take place in recent days and weeks.
That also includes extremist settler-related violence,
which has intensified in an alarming manner this year.
23-24603

21/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9400

Furthermore, we remain concerned about the high
incidence of Palestinian deaths following military
operations in the West Bank and urge the concerned
parties to fully respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law.

for the growing needs of the Palestinian people. In
that regard, we remain concerned about the Agency’s
precarious financial situation, and we highlight the
need for the Agency to be provided with predictable
and sustained funding.

Persistent unilateral actions continue to fuel
instability and instigate recognized flash points to the
detriment of any real prospects for peace. Malta recalls
that settlements are illegal under international law
and dangerously imperil the viability of the two-State
solution based along the pre-1967 borders. Additionally,
demolitions, forced evictions and settler violence have a
marked humanitarian toll on Palestinian communities,
particularly on herder communities. Within that
context, we call for the cessation of settlement expansion
and legalization.

Recent negative trends clearly indicate that steps
towards restoring a political horizon should be the
focus of our efforts. Israelis and Palestinians deserve to
coexist in freedom, peace and security.

Continued provocations and threats to the historic
status quo at the holy sites in Jerusalem must also
cease, as they threaten to ignite tensions with regional
repercussions. We emphasize, in that regard, the
importance of the special custodianship role of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
We welcome attempts being made by Israel’s
Security Cabinet to introduce economic measures
aimed at bolstering the Palestinian Authority.
The Palestinian Authority is also facing internal
challenges with increasingly negative trends with
regard to the rule of law and fundamental freedoms
in areas where the Palestinian Authority is in control
and in Gaza. In that regard, we are encouraged to note
steps in the context of intra-Palestinian reconciliation,
including through the formation of a dedicated
committee, as discussed in talks between Palestinian
factions on 30 July in Egypt. A stronger and more
credible Palestinian Authority as a partner is in
everyone’s interest. We continue to urge the authorities
in Palestine to hold the overdue national elections as
soon as possible, as that will be an important sign
of strengthening the legitimacy of the Palestinian
Authority for the Palestinian people.
Furthermore, we call on Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to return to good-faith dialogue and uphold
their commitments made related to security coordination.
In the absence of a political solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East continues to be the strongest pillar of support

Malta remains committed to the two-State solution
as the only just and comprehensive resolution that
addresses the legitimate aspirations of both sides.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
Based on what we have heard, it is clear that the
ongoing lack of a resolution to the Palestinian issue
continues to provoke regular bloody outbreaks of
violence in the area of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
creating growing threats to stability and security in the
entire Middle East region.
The long-term stagnation of the Middle East peace
process is compounded by Israel’s ongoing illegal
unilateral actions to create irreversible facts on the
ground, which negates the prospects for reviving direct
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis on a
universally recognized international legal basis with
the two-State formula as its central element, which we
have consistently supported.
The greatest threats remain the unprecedented pace
of Israeli settlement construction and the legalization
of outposts in the occupied Palestinian territories,
as well as violent Israeli military raids in the West
Bank — in Nablus, Jericho and Jenin — as well as
systematic violations of the status quo of the holy sites
of Jerusalem, in particular through provocative visits by
representatives of the Israeli leadership to the Al-Aqsa
Mosque compound.
This year, the Israeli authorities used a simplified
procedure to approve plans to build more than 12,000
housing units, accompanied by the forced eviction of
Palestinian families from their homes in East Jerusalem
and Area C in the West Bank, including as a result
of illegal actions by settlers. Against that backdrop,
the Israeli Government reportedly has approved and

23-2460313/15

S/PV.9400

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

financed a plan to preserve Israeli archaeological sites
in Area C in the West Bank in order to “strengthen
roots in Judea and Samaria”. Those plans are in direct
violation of the Oslo Accords, as well as a number
of international treaties on the protection of cultural
property in the context of occupation.
This year also risks becoming one of the bloodiest
on record, with more than 200 Palestinians already
killed, including women and minors, and thousands
more wounded. The July Israeli operation in Jenin
alone resulted in more than 140 casualties.
Another new threat on the ground is the
unprecedented spiral of violence against both Palestinian
and Israeli civilians. In that regard, the Israeli Air Force
continues to carry out arbitrary strikes on the territory
of Syria, including the outskirts of Damascus.
In such explosive conditions, a proper response
from the international community is especially needed.
In that connection, we are convinced that the planned
visit of Secretary-General António Guterres to the area
of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is very timely. At the
same time, we would like to recall that for many years
we have supported all relevant initiatives, including the
idea of organizing a Council mission to the Palestinian
territories and Israel.
For our part, we have consistently stated that there
is no alternative to continuing the necessary efforts,
including in the framework of the Middle East Quartet
of international mediators, to revive the peace process
and direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations on all final
status issues.
In that context, the key element remains the
restoration of inter-Palestinian unity on the basis of
the Palestine Liberation Organization’s platform. A
significant step to that end was made at the 30 July
meeting in El Alamein, Egypt, which resulted in a
proposal to establish a special committee to continue the
dialogue and monitor the implementation of previously
reached agreements.
In conclusion, I would like to once again highlight
the need to continue to provide comprehensive support
to the Palestinians in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip
and neighbouring countries through international
humanitarian agencies, led by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, whose activities have not only a humanitarian but
14/15

21/08/2023

also a political dimension and make a major contribution
to stabilizing the situation in the Middle East.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank you, Madam
President, and thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for the update.
It is very disheartening to start, as has occurred
many other times, by acknowledging that the situation
for civilians in the West Bank and Israel in the past
three weeks has not improved. The situation on the
ground keeps deteriorating with no end in sight.
It is indeed alarming that the death toll for the past
seven months equals the number of deaths that occurred
during the entire year of 2022. That represents a heavy
and painful toll for both sides, and it is unsustainable.
Albania condemns the killing of an Israeli patrolman,
as well as the deadly terror attacks committed in recent
days, and reiterates its support for the right of Israel to
defend itself in a proportionate manner.
There cannot be any justification for terror, and
everyone, in particular the youth, should distance
themselves from instigating violence and extremism
and condemn terrorism. Terror attacks cannot advance
any cause; they only empower extremists, which is the
last thing the Middle East peace process needs now
or ever.
The events in the Tulkarm refugee camp risk
escalating tensions in other areas in the West Bank.
The protection of civilians must always be the primary
concern, and international humanitarian law must
be respected. We condemn the violence of Israeli
extremist settlers in the very same way. The lives of
Palestinian and Israeli civilians are of equal worth. We
welcome the steps taken by the Israel Defense Forces
to address settler violence against Palestinians and call
for full investigation and for those responsible to be
held accountable.
We also reiterate our concern about the plans to
expand settlements. We call for the full implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016) and the strict observance of
international law. All unilateral steps that obstruct
peace and the viability of a two-State solution must
be withdrawn. We reiterate our call on the parties to
commit to de-escalation in deeds as well as words, and
to avoid unilateral steps that lead to tension and violence
on the ground. In the context of hope for a political
horizon, however remote it may seem, violence is not
and cannot be a solution, nor can it be a substitute for
23-24603

21/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

justice. The parties must abide by their commitments
regarding the implementation of the Aqaba and Sharm
El-Sheikh communiqués, as the best way to bridge the
deep and deepening divide.
Albania remains a firm supporter of freedom of
religion and belief and of the historic status quo of
the holy sites in Jerusalem. We commend Jordan in
its special custodianship role and call on the parties to
refrain from provocative actions that could affect an
already tense situation. Let me conclude by joining the
call of the Special Coordinator for the political horizon
to be restored, as crucial to breaking the current cycle
of deadly violence. That perspective is in the hands of
both sides. It lies in their will to move ahead, and in their
vision for the future — a future that speaks in the same
way to Israelis and Palestinians alike, a future in which
a viable and democratic Palestine exists alongside a
secure Israel and a future that encompasses two States
for two peoples, fully entitled to equal safety, security
and prosperity.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for the
briefing he delivered this morning on the situation in the
region and reiterate our support for his important work.
For the fifteenth time this year, the Council has
heard a troubling report. Violence, provocation and
destruction persist. Earlier this month, for instance,
we mourned the death of a Palestinian at the hands of
armed Israeli settlers in the West Bank town of Burqa,
in addition to that of an Israeli police officer shot by a
Palestinian in Tel Aviv. Two arrests were made following
the events in Burqa. Last Saturday two Israelis were

S/PV.9400

killed in Huwara. We condemn those deaths and all acts
of terror and violence, regardless of their origin, and we
hope to see the perpetrators prosecuted and punished.
Responsible political leaders must also clearly and
bluntly condemn such acts. Remaining silent about
them is reprehensible, and justifying them even more so.
According to information provided by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 165
Palestinians have been killed by Israeli military forces
and 22 Israelis have been killed by Palestinians in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem between 1 January and
7 August 2023. In the same period and geographic area,
seven Palestinians have been killed by Israeli settlers.
In that context, if we are to prevent further violence,
it is imperative to uphold the Council’s demand that
Israel immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, a demand expressed in
2016 in resolution 2334 (2016). For the same reason,
in February the Council once again strongly opposed
all unilateral measures that impede peace, including
the construction and expansion of settlements, the
confiscation of land and the legalization of settlement
outposts, the demolition of homes and the displacement
of civilians (S/PRST/2023/1). Today we reiterate those
calls in the belief that an enduring peace, which is
the common goal of all of us in this Chamber, will
come about only through a political, peaceful and just
solution between the parties, within the framework
of international law, with the existence of two States,
Palestine and Israel, on the basis of the 1967 borders.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

23-2460315/15
