I

UNITED NATIONS

l~l

NA TlONS UNIES

~
.....,~

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

841

COUNClt

RECORDS

THIRTEENTH YEAR
si MEETIN G: 8 DECEMBER 1958
Ime SEANCE: 8 DECEMBRE 1958
TREIZIEME

ANNEE

CONSEIJ. DE SECUBITE
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (SjAgendaj84.1)

Page

_

,..

Expression of thanks to the retiring President. .. .. . .. . . .

. ..

1
1

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Ahmed S. Bokhari, Under-Secretary for the Office
of Public Information. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

The Palestine question: letter dated 4 December 1958 from the representative
of Israel to the President of the Security Council (5{4123)
,

2

TABLE DES MATIERES
Grdre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/841) . . . . . .

.

1

Remerciements au President sortant
".............
Homma&e a la memoire de M. Ahmed S. Bokhari, sous-secretaire a l'informatIon
,
,,.,
,
,,
,.

1

Adoption de l'ordre du jour.......•... ,
, .. . .. .
.
..
Question de Palestine: lettre, en date du 4 de.cembre 1958, adressee au President du ConseH de securite par le representant d'!srael (S/4123)
,

2

( 20 p.}

1

2

SjPV.841

"I

J

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official

... '.

Records.
Symbols of Uniled Nalions documenls are composed 0/ capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicales a reference lo a United Nations
document.

•••

......'

."
<

Les documents pertinents qui ne SOllt pas reproduits in exlenso dans Les
comptes rendus des seances du Conseil de securite sont publiEis dans des suppI6.mcnlg trimestriels au,," Documents officiels.

.f,,'

Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Units se composent de
ldlres majuscules el de dlinres. La simple mention d'une cole dans un lerle signifie
qu'U s'aq1l d'un document de l'Organisation.

,
i

I'

r
(
r•
r

..

EIGHT HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIRST MEETING
Held in New York, on Monday, 8 December 1958, at 3 p.m.

HUIT CENT QUARANTE ET UNIEME SEANCE
Tenne a New~ York, le luuili 3 deccmbre 1958, a 15 heurcs.

Presidmf: Mr. G. JARHlNG (Sweden).

President: M, G. JARRING (Suede).

Present: The representatives of the following COlln~
tries: Canada, China, Colombia, France, Iraq, Japnn.
Panama, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

Presents " Les representants des pays suivants:
Canado, Chine, Colambie, France, Irak, Japan, Panama,
Suede, Union des Republiqnes ~ocialistes sovietiques,
Hoynnme-Uni de Grande~Bret::lgne et d'Irlande du
Nonl. Etats-Unis d'A..meriqnc.

Provisional agenda (S/Agcnda/Ml)

Ordre dll jour provisohe (S/Agenda/84I)

1.

Adoption of the agenda.

1.

Adoption de l'on1re du jour.

2.

The Palestine question: letter dated 4 December Hl58
from the representative of Israel to tile President
of the Security Council (8/4123).

2.

Question de Palestine; lettre, en date du 4 decembre
1058. adrcssce au President du Conseil de seeurite
pm le representant u'Israel (8/4123).

El.:pre&9illD of thank!i to the L'ctu,jng President

Remerciements au President sorlant

1. The PRESIDENT: Before we proceed to the adnption of the agenda. I should like tD sny a word of sincere
appreciation to the oulgoing President, 11r. Illueca,
who presided during the montll of November. As
President, he displayed to a high degree ';he skill 2nd
judgement which we alwuys have assDcialtd with our
collc~gue fro;n Panama.

1. Le PRf.SlDENT (trMail de l'anglais) : Avallt
de passer a l'adaption de l'ordrc du jour, je voudrais
adresser des felicitations sinceres au President somnt,
II'L Illuecu, qui u preside le Conseil pendant le mois de
novc1)lbre. Dans cc~ fanctions, le represenLant du
Panama a fail preuvc dn talent et des qlwlitcs de
jugcment que nOllS Ini connaissons depuis toujours.

2. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (translated from Spanish):
On belmlf of my country and on my own behalf, I wish
to express our deep gratitu.de for your very kind «od
friendly words. I should also like to wish you every
suece.s~ in your delicate task, although I feel sure that,
thanks to your experience and ability, the Security
Coancll will acqUit itself in t11c most constructive manner
possible during your term of office.

2. M. lLL'CECA (Pannl11<l) /lraduit de l'espagflolJ :
All nom de man pays et en man nom personnel, je
voudrais vous exprim"r, Monsieur le President, IT.es
scnumclIls ue profonde gratitude pour les paroles
aimablcs et IbUeuscs que vous avez bien voulu pro~
non~er a mon egard. Je vQudra[s en meme temps
former des vceux pour le SUCcE~s de votre tilche dClicate;
il est vrai que votre experience et vas hautes qualites
nom ~~Sllrent que, sous votre presidence. le Cons,~i1
de sccurite obtiendra des resultats aLlssi fructueux que
possible.

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Ahmed S. Bokhari,
Under-Se(''l't:tary for the Office of Public lafoJ'mation

Hommage A III me-moire de M Ahmed S. Bokhnri,
IlOIlH.Qeeretail'c ii I'iD£onnation

3. The PRESIDENT: The members of the Security
Council are acutely conscious of tJJe great loss which

3, Le PRESJDENT (traduil de l'anglais) : Les
membres du Conseil de securite: mesurent toute l'etendue
de la perte subie vendredi demier par l'Organisation
des Nations Unies du :ait du deces d'Ahmed Bol<hari.
DaEs les diverses salles de conference, des declarations
ant deja exprime la tristesse que nuus ressentons taus
de savoir qll'il n'est plus des notres,

the United NatiolJs has suffered through the death last
Friday of Aluncd Bokhari. Many words haw_ Hlready
been said in the chambers of this building testifying to
the sorrow which we f~el now that he is no morc with

us.

I

4. 1t would be unnecessary for me to dwell here upon
the many qualities ;-vhh:h. made .us all respec~ and like
llim. Occupying thIS chair, ! wIsh to pay tnbute to a
distinguished predecessor, As permanent representative of Pakistan, Aluiled Bokhnri represented his
country in this Council and presided over its meetings
in April 1952 and March 1953. I am sure HIat those
who had the provilege of being here at that time will
remember the excellent way in which he led the deliberatiollS of Uw CounciL They will also remember t11at
it was Ahmed Bokhari who, as President of the Security Council, inaugurated the chamber in which we
arc noW sitting, and that he then, after quoting from
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, suggested
that the Council humbly dedicate itself to the noble
purpose expressed therein,

4. II est inlltile de s'etcndm sur les nombreuscs
quaiites qui nous Ollt fait le respecter et l'aimer.
Cependant, comme titulaire actuel de la pl'esidence,
il sied que je rende hommage a un predecesseur distingue. En tant que representant permanent du
Pakistan, Ahmed 80khari a representc son pays au
Conseil et y a e.xel'ce les fonctions de president en
avriI 1952 et mars 1953. Tous ceux qui ont e"te ici a
cette epoque se rappelleront - j'en suis certain - la
raven excellentc dont il dirigeait les deliberations du
ConseiL fIs se rappelleront egalement que c'est Ahmed
80kltari qui, comme president du Conseil de secUl'ite,
a inaugltre la saIle oil nous siegeons nctuellement, et
qu'a ceUe occasion, aprts avoir cite des passages de
la Declaration universelle des droits de l'holllme, il a
demandc que le Conseil se voue au service des nobles
objectifs qui y sont enonces,

5, I know that this Council will for ever respect and
honour the memory of Ahmed Bokhari.

5. Je sais que le Conseil respectcra et honorera la

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

J.

mcmoire d'Ahmed BokharL

t'Qrdre. du jour est adoplC.

The agenda was adopted.
The Palestine quCl3rionl letter dated 4 December 1958
from the represcntative of Junel to the President of
the Security COlweiI (5/4123)

Question de Palelltine : Lettre, en dute dn 4. decembre 1958, adresllce au President du ConseiJ de
Securjte par le representant d'Israel (5}4123).

At lIle ilwilalion 0/ the President, ]Ir. Jibba Ehan,
representative of Israel, and Mr. Omm' l..oul(i, representative 0/ lhe United A.rab Republic, look places at the
Security Council lable,

Sur /'invitatioll dtl fJl'esidClli, M. Abba ";ban, represeniant d'lsracl, el Ai. Omar Lol1t[i, rr:prr:sentant de }a
RCptlbliqlle arabe IInie, prl'1lnent place rl la table dll
COlIseil.

6. The PRESlDENT; Before calling on the lint
speaker, the representative of Israel, I should like to
draw the aUention of members of the Council to the
letter from the representative of Isrnel to the President
of the Security Cour-cLl [S/4128], The report of the
Chief of Staff of the United NaVans Truce Supervision
Organization in Palestine [SI.f124] has just been circulated to members of the Council.

G. Le PHESIDENT (lraduil de l'aJ1!llais) : Avant de
donner ia parole au premier orateur inscrit, c'cst-a~
dire au representant d'Israei, ie vOlldrais attirer
l'attentioll des membrcs du Conseil sur In lcttre adressec
nu President du Conseil de secnrite par le representant
d'lsrael [S/4123]. Le rapport du Chef d'etat~Jllajor de
i'Organisme des Nations Unics charg,j de la surveillance
de la treve Cll Palestine lS/4124J vient d'etl'e distribl](~
aux memlJrcs du Conseil.

7, Mr. EBAN (Israel): For the fomth time this year,
the Security Council is seized of a complaint directed
again~l the United Arab Republic by one of tllc neighbouring States whosc security nnd peace it has threatened, The situation which Israel now submits to the
Council's attention comes af~er two years of relative
tranquillily on the other frontiers between Israel and
the Arab States. On flH the borders except that dividing Israel from the Syrian region of the Uuited Arab
RepUblic this tranquillity still prevailS.

7, :'II. EllAN (Israel) [traduil de l'anylals] : Pour la
quatrieme fois en l'espace d'ulI an, le COllseil de securite
est saisi d'une plainte cootre la Republique urabe unie,
formulee par l'LUI de ses voisins, dont la pai..x et la
securitc se trouvent menacecs. La situution qu'Israel
signalc aujourd'hl1i G. l'attention du Conseil se produit
aprcs deux nnnees de tranquillite relative sur les autres
frontieres entre Isra(j1 et les Etats arabes. Sur toutes
ces [rontieres, a I'cxception de celle qui scpare Israel
de la region syrienne de la Republiq,le arabe unie, le
calme continue de regncl'.

8. It used to be held in some quarters Lhat infiltrations and flttacks from Arnll States against Israel were
an inevitflble result of lhe fronUer configuration or
of the poiitical and emotional problems left behind
by the 1948 contlict. It was sometimes asserted that
Arab Governments, despite their formal responsibility,
were unable to eOnLrol or restrain such assaults. There
was never any substance to tItis view; and the prolonged maintenance of quiet during 1957 and 1958 ha~
proved conclusively that if Arab Governments decide

8.

On soutenait recemment encore duns certains
miiieux que les infilLraLions et les attaques des Etat~
arnbes contre Israel etaicnt une consequence inevitable
du trace des fronticres et de problemes politiques OLI
passionnels qui seraient la scquelle dll con flit de 1948.
On a parfois affil'me que les gouvernements arabes, en
dcpit des responsabilitcs qui sont les leurs, u'ctaient
pas en mcsure d'empecher compJetemellt ces attaques.
Cette assertion a toujours cite depourvue de fondement;
la tranquillite prolongec qui a regne en 1957 et 1958

2

rI
.',

,

I

T
I

r.

-I-

i
"

I

I

•

I

as a matter of policy to let Israel live in peace there will
be peaceful conditions on the Arab-Israel frontiers.
The Government of the United Arab Republic has the
full capacity - if it also has the will - to prevent the
recurrence of situ3tions such as that which Israel now
brings to the Secwity Council.

El

9. The aggression committed on 3 December 1\):")X is
described in my letter of 4 December to the President
of the Secnrity Council [Sf41Z.Jj, The Syrian army
post at Darbashiya and other military positiuns in
that area opened fire at llbout 1200 hours that day,
first on Israeli sllCpherds grazing their hcrds south of
Gonen, and then on a security patrol which came to
their rescue when they were trapped in a circle of fin:
and unable to tulte their homeward course. This ellgag{;~
ment took place orr Israel territory lying in the area
to which the demilitarization provisions 01 the 1949
Armistice Agreement do not apply. In a later development, defensive fire was directed by Israel exclusively
towards and against the posts from which the Syrian
attack was being conduclcd. At this stage, Syrian
forces opened a heavy artillery barrage on the villages
of I-hllata, Gonen, Shamir, NotcT<lh, Ashmura, Gadot
and Ma 'ale Habashan. A torrent of 600 to 800 shells
of varying calibres rained down on the sevell villages
along a front of more than sevent£cn kilometres.

9. L'ngression commise le 3 decembre 1958 fait l'objet
d'ull eXjlose ctetaille dans ma lettre du 4 dccembre
adressee ml Prt:shlent du Conseil de sccurite [S/d123].
Le jJoste de l'al'nlee syrienne situe a Darbashiya et
{l'all~rcs pastes militail'cs de la memc region ont ouvert
le feu nux environs de midi, d'abord sur des bel'gcrs
israeliens qui gnrdaienl lO'urs troupeaux nu snd de
Goncn, pnis sur llne plltrouille de securite qui accourut
a leUl' aidO' Lorsque, encercles par le fen, ils furent ruis
dans l'impossihilite de regagner leur village. eet engagement s'cst produit en territoire israelien, dans la
region a lnquelle les clauses de demilitarisation de la
convention d'armistice de 1949 ne s'appliquent pas.
Par la suite, Israel a ouvert un tir dCfensif, dirige exclusivemcnt conlre les postes d'ou l'attaque syrienne
ayait ttc declc-nchee. A ce moment, l'artillerie syrienne
a ouvert un feu conccntre sur les villages de Hlllata,
Gonen, Shamir, Nol,emh, Ashmura, Gadot ct Ma'ale
Habashan. Un deluge de 000 a 800 obus de calibres
divers s'est abattn SIll' les sept villnges, le long d'lI11
front (k pIllS de 17' lcilometres.

10. All of the facts which I have so far outlined to the
Security Council are confirmed even by a superficial
reading of the report submitted by the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization [5/4124], especially
parflgraphs 3, 5 and 7 of that report. Syrian initiative
in opening fire and also the fact of the artillery bombnrdment are fully borne out by the report. The Security
Council will observe that the effect of this bombardment
was to enlarge the original incident and to prevent
any localization or restriction of its efTects.

10. TOilS les faits que j'ai evoques jusqu'ici se trouvent
corrobores meme par un cxamen superficiel du rapport
etabli par l'Organisme des Nations Unies charge de
la surveillance dc la treve [5141241, et en particulicr par
ses paragrapher; .1, 5 et 7. Ce document confirme que
les Syriens ont OIIvert le fell les premiers el: etablit la
materialite du bombardement. Le Conscil de securite
notera que cc hombardement a eu pour cffeL d'aggraver
la par lee de I'incident initial et d'cmpeclIer toute locali.~aLion ou limitation de ses conscquenet'.'l.

11. The Syrian attacks of 3 December caused Israel
one death and three injuries, while damage to property
is estimated at 1 million Israel pounds. A United
Nations observer was also injured. A United Nations
observation post is in the centre of the area where the
Syrian attack was first launched. Apart from the
wounding of the United Nations observer, all the injury
inflicted on that day was to Israel civilian life and
Israel civilian property. It is our estimate that the
Syrians used five batteries with twenty-four guns.
The shells were mostly of 122 mm calibre; 81 mm
mortars and 82 mm recoilless guns were also used.

11. Les attaqlles syriennes dll 3 decembre ont cause
la mort d'lIn Israelien; trois alltrcs IsraCliens out ttc
blesses, et les uegats materiels sont estim~s a un million
de li:vres israeliennes. Un obscrvateur des Nations
Unies a egalement ttc blesse. Un poste d'observation
des Nations Unies se trouve en effct au centre du
secteur ou l'attaque syrienne a debute. Si I'on met a.
part I'observateur des Nations Unies blesse, les victimes
et les dommages ont ete exclusivement du c!"Jte israelien.
D'apres nos estimations, les Syriens ont utilise cinq
batteries de 24 pieces. Les obus etaknt surtout du
calibre 122 mm; des morLiel's de 81 mm et des canons
sans recuI de 82 mm ont egalcment ete utilise...

12. With decp respect, I urgently advise the Security
Council not to be governed in its estimate of these
events by the small number of casualties to llUman
life on that day. As I have stated, about 800 shells
were fired along a front of 17 kilometres and to El. depth
of flve miles against villages, consisting of farm houses
and buildings of slender comtruction. That an assault
of such intensity took no heavier toll of life is a result
largely of a fortunate but incalculable providence; and
partly of the prudent discipline which the villagers
displayed alter the first shells had fallen when they
left their homes and other buildings, took their children

12. Je me permets de dem~mder au Conseil d~ securite
de ne pas se laisser influencer dans son jugement par
le petit nombre de pertcs ell vies humllines. Comme je
l'ai dit, 800 obus environ ant ct6 tires sur un front
de 17 kilometres et sur une profondeur de 8 kilometres
contre des villages consistant en fermes et autres
bi'itiments construits en materLaux legers, Si nne
attaque de cette intensite n'a pas cause de pcrtes plus
lourdes, eela est dll pour une bonne part it des circonstances heureuses, et aussi a la sage discipline des
habihlllts des villages en question : des Ies premiers
Ob1lS, ils ont quitte kurs rnaisons et autl"l'S batiments

montre de fa~on concluante que si l~~ pays arabes
ont pour poHtique de laisser Israel en paix, le calme
regnera sur les frollth~res arabo-israeliennes. Le Gou·
vernement de la Rtlpublique uTabe unie a parfaitement
les moyens - s'il cn a egalement le desir - d'emncchcr
le retom dc situations comme celle dont Israel saisit B
prescnt lc Conseil de securite.

3

,

I,
,

~

,
,,

I

into shelters, and waited for the violence to subside.
The nature of these collective villages is such that artil~
lery bombardment could be expected to cause far
greater loss of life.

et emmene leurs enfants dans des abris, pOUl' y attendre
la fm du bombardement. Dans des villages collectifs
de ce genre, on aurait pu s'attendre Et ce qu'un bornbardement d'artillerie callse des pertefl. en vies hum~incs
beaucoup plus importantes.

13. Israel took the initiative of requesting the United 13. Israel a pris I'initiativc de demander a l'OrgaNations Truce Supervision Organization to call for an nisme charge de la surveillance de la treve d'ordonner
immediate cease-fire, which was set by the Truce Super- un ccssez-Ie~feu imwediat. Celui~ci a ete fixe a 17 heures.
vision Organization for 1700 hours. The report now Le rapport que nous avons SOllS les yeux precise all
before us states in parabrraph 7: "The Israelis did not paragraphe 7 : « Les Isra6liens n'ont pas tire apres
fire after 1700 hours. On the Syrian side small~arms 17 heures. Du cOte syriell, un tir de mousqueterie a de
fire again broke out after dark at 1940 hours." [S/4124, I nouveau eclate apres 10 tombee de la nuit, fl 19 It. 40. 11
para. 7.]
[514124, p". 7.]

14. When the bombardment had subsidcd, the farmers
and settlers of these Galilee villages were able to observe
the havoC'. which had iJeen done to their houses, their
places of toil and their children's homes. My delegation
has senL pictorial testimony of this damage to members
of the Security Council. In contemplating this damage,
the Security COl/neil should bear in mind that, by the
confession and avowal of the United Ar3b Republic
authorities themselves, no casuallies or damage had
been inflicted 011 Syrian farms or villaglls. Israel
machine-gun fire and some arlillery fire were opened
only after the Syrian assault had caused fatal results
to Israelis on Israel territory - and were even then
directed solely towards tile military posts from which
Syrian fire was being directed.

14. Lorsque le bombardement a pris fm, les fermiers
et colons de ces villages de Galih\e ont pu mesurer
l'etendue des destructions causees a leurs maisons, a
kurs lieux de travail et aux foyers de leurs enfants.
Ma Mlegatioll a envoye aux membres Ju Conseil de
securite des photographics montrant les dommnges
causes. Ell examinant ees dommages. le Conscil de
securite Jevra tenir compte du fait que, de l'avcu meme
des autorites de la RCpllbliquc ambc unie, aucune
pcrte ou destruction n'a et6 inlligee aux habitants dcs
fel'me~ ou des villages syriells. Du cote israelien, k
feu des mitraillcuses et certains tirs d'arLillcrie n'ont
commence que ]Msque l'attaque syrienne cut call~e
de, pertes sericuses anx Israeliens SIll' leur tcrritoire
- ct Hs Ont de diriges cxclusivement vel'S les l)osLes
rnilitaires d'ou vcnait le fell syrien.

15. Our fire, ns the UniteJ Nations Truce Sllpervision
Organization report points ant, came after the opening
of Syrian fire, and was directed, in the words of the
report, towards Syrian positions at Darbashiya and
Jalabina. There is, therefore, no argument here of
Syrian self-defence. We are faced with an act of international aggression, flagrant and unprovoked, involving
a breach of the central provisions of the United Nations
Charter and of article 1 of t.he General Armistice
Agreement between SYL"i..'l. and Israel. l

15, ComOle le sfluligne le rapport de ]'Orgunisme,
le tir n'a etc d&lenche du cOte israelien qu'apnis le
debut de l'attnque syriennc, et n'a eu pour objeetif,
eorome le dit expressement le rapport, que les positions
syriennes de Darbashiya et Jalabina. On ne sauralt
donc parler de legitime defense de la part des Syriens.
11 s'agit d'un acte d'agressioll intcrnationale, flagrant
et non provoque, qui constitue une violation des
dispositions fondamentales de la Chnrte des Nations
Unies et dc l'article premier de la COllvention d'armistice
general s)'":"o-israeJienne 1.

16. The position is that a ,,{ember State of the United
Na.tions has deliberately I1red 800 artillery shells upon
seven villages lying wiLhin the territory of another
Member Slate with the intention of destroying life and
property. Surely, lhis would he a source of international crisis if it occurred acl'OSS any frontier between
States anywhere in the world. Never has such a thing
happened witllout serious reaction and grave rep{'r~
cussions. The Charter of the United Nations does not
oblige - indeed, does not. allow - any Stale passiYCly
to endure such nssaults.

16, La gituation cst celle-ci : un Etat Membre de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies a delibCrement tir~
800 ohus sur scpt villages situes sur le territoire d'Ull
autre Etat Membre, dans I'intention d'y detruire des
vies et des biens. Il est evident que, sur t.onte autre
frontirre, un incident de ce genre cllt entl'aine une
crise internationale. 11 est sans exemplc que des faits
semhlables n'aiclIt pas pl'ovoque de reactions et dc
repercussions graves. La Charte des Nations Unies
n'oblige pas - et en fait n'autol'isc pas - un Etat
crucl qu'il soit, it. subir passivemcnt des attaques de
cc genre.

17. The first phase of the attack has Dccn the SlllJject
of an early investigation by United Nations military
observers, of which the results were conveyed lo my
Government. The United Nations military observer
writes:
.. First I tontacted the investigatiOll party on the
other side. . .. This was Israel territory. On this

Lcs observateurs militaires des Nnt:.ions Unies
ont proced~ rapidemcnt it une enqnele sur la premiere
phasc de l'aLtaquc; les resultats en ont cte communiques a man gonvernement. L'observatcur milituire
des Nations Unies ccnt cc qui suit:
«J'ai d'abord pris contact avec le groupe d'enqnelenrs de J'untre ct'Jte [... ]. Les evenements s'etaient
17.

•
..1·
\

. '. ,

I

I

,

I

,
i

•

.," ...
1 OfT1einl R.ecQJ'(I,~ flt lhe Sr.euri(1J Council. Fourth Yrllr, I
1 Proet3~verbaux uf1lcieis dll CIJn$l'{i dr secl1ritiE, guaSpecial Supplement No. 2.
lrieme nnn~e, SllppUment .~pecial /10 2.

4

spot MR. 21096 27847, as I arrived, I showed them
clearly that this was inside Israel territory, about
175 metres, Ten metres south-west of the junction
of the two wadis, the following could be seen in an
area ten metres long and 3 metres wide on the
southern bank of the wadi between the wadi and
the steep cliff: (a) about 10 impacts of bullets on
the rocks (parts of the rocks were found); (b) two
big spots of blood about 40 cm in diameter,

derouIes en territoire israelien, A cet endroit - point
d'intersection des eoordonnees 21096.27847 - , je
leur ai montre elairement des man arrivce que nous
nous trouvions en territoire israelien, a environ
175 metres de la frontiere, A 10 metres au sud-ouest
du confluent des dcux ouadi, on pouvait observer,
dans un espacc de 10 metres de long et de 3 metres
de large sur la rive meridionale de l'oued, entre
celui-ci et la fataise : a) environ 10 traces de balles
sur les rochers (on a ramassc des eclats de roche);
b) deux larges taches de sung d'environ ·10 centimetres
de diametrc.
« D'apres la disposition des traces de baBes, j'ai
pu deduire que les coups de fell avaient et6 tires dll
haut de ta fataise situec au nord-ouest dl! Confluent
des olladi, et auss! de I'est entre les deux ouadi,
Nous n'uvollS pu decollvdr aucun autre indice, ))

w

" I was able to deduce from the impact of the bullets
that the shots were fired from the top of the steep
cliIT north-west of the junction of the wadis, and from
east between the junction of the two wadis. No other
physical evidence could be fauna."
18. It is plain from this description that Syrian forces
not only fired from their fixed positions in their own
territory, but also crossed into Israel to attack their
victims from short range. This is also evident from the
fact that the body was despoiled of its equipment.
In the investigation conducted by the Truce Supervision
Organization, the Syrians have confessed this fact.

18, 11 ressort nettcment de cette description que les
forces syl'ienncs n'ont pas seulement ouvert le feu it
partir de lcurs llo::.itions sur leur propre territoire, mais
aus::.i qn'elles (Jut penetre en territoire isralllien pour
flttaqner leurs victimes a faible distance. Ccla est
egalement pl'ouve par le fait que le corps de la victime
a 6te depouillc de son ei]uipement, Les SyriC1ls L'ont
d'ailleurs reCOllUU all cours [le l'enquete menee par
l'Organisme charge de lfl SllTveillance de la treve,

19. United Nations observers have now had an opportunity of inspecting the havoc done to the seven Israel
villages, especially in HulatiJ and Ma'ale Habashan.
Buildings were destroyed or damaged. Water and steam
in~tallations were hit. Tractors and vehicles were pnt
out of commission. Electrical systems were damaged,
Storehouses, kitchens, dining rooms and dwelling
places were severely hit,

19. Les observateurs des Nations Unies ont eu depuis
la possibilite de constatcl' les degats subis par les sept
villages israCliens, en particulier Hulata et Ma'ale
Hnbashan. Des bil.timents onl eM detruits Oll endommages. Des instatlntions pour l'cau et la vapeur ont
ete touc!Hles. Des tracteurs et des vehicules ant et6 mis
hors d'usagc. Les installations electriques Ollt subi
des degats, Des cntrep()ts et des residenees ont ete
durement frappes.

20. This is the third occasion this year on which Israel
villages have been attacked by Syrian artillery; but
the intensity of this attack exceeded any previously
recorded, Both the number of Syrian guns and the
number of shells fired were greater than at any time
since the 1948 invasion. Ismel civilian targets were the
exclusive objects of this lire, and the villages involved
were nearly all remote from and unconnected with
the scene of the original attack upon Israeli shepherds
oH Gonen by the Syrian post at Darbashiya.

20. C'est la troisieme fois cette annee que des villages
israeliens sont attaques pHr J'Hrtillerie syrienne; cette
attaqlle est neanmoins d'un caractere plus grave que
celles qui 1'ont precedee. Le nombre des canons syriens.
aussi bien que celui iles coups tires, depasse tout ce
que l'on a vu depuis l'illva.~ion de 1948. Seuls des
objectifs civils ont cte vises; lcs villages atteints etaient
prcsque tOllS eloignes - rien ne les rattachait aux
lieux de l'flttaque contre les bergers israeliens a laquelle
se sont livres, devant Gonen, des soldats dll poste
syrien de Darbllilhiya.

21, To understand the significance of this week's
events and of the future prospect, it is necessary to
describe some of the topographical features of the area
under discussion. The Israel territory opposite the
Syrian frontier extends westward for ten kilometres
in open and low-lying ground, except for a small sector
north of Lake Kinneret, which is situated at a greater
elevation. On the olher hand, Syrian territory east of
the frontier is marked hy all ascending gradient rising
steeply for three kilometres and less sharply for a
further distance. Syrian territory is, on the average,
1,500 feet higher than Israel territory in the greater
part of this region. On the Syrian side, as the map
shows, there is a continuous chain of fixed military
positions and deep fortilications. Many of these positions are concentrated very close to the frontier. A
considerable part of the Syrmn army is arrayed in

21. Pour bien apprccier la portee des evcnements de
cctte semaine ct comprendre les perspectives futures,
il convient de decrire les caractcristiques topographiques
de la region dont il s'agit. Le territoire israeLien,pres
de la frontiere syrienne, est cIJnstitue sur 10 kilometres
vers l'ouest par des terra:ins ouverts et asscz bas, it
1'exception d'un petit secteur au nord du lac KinnerH,
qui est plus Cleve. En revanche, le territoire syrien,
a I'est de la Irantil~re, s'eLeve de fa<;:on tres marquee
sur les trois premiers kilometres, la pente devenant
mains forte ensuite. En moyenne, le territoirc syrien
surplombe de 1.500 pieds le territoire israelien dans la
plus grande partie de cette region. Du c6te syrien,
comme le moutrc la carte, il existe une liglle continue
de positions militait'es permanentes et de fortifications
profondes. Ban nombre de ces positions sont concentrees
a proximite immediate de la frlJnti~re, sur laquclle une

5

i
f

•
battle order along the Israel frontier. These positions
are equipped with light arms, medium machine-guns,
mortars and <!Uti-tank guns. Further inland there
are many Syrian artillery positions permanently held
and manned.

proport.ioll considerable des forces syriennes est rangce
en ordre de bataille. Les positions syriennes sont
cqnipees d'armes 16geres, de mitrailleuses moyennes,
de filortiers et de canons antichars. Plus loin veTS
l'ir.terieur, de nombreuses positions d'artillerir::. sont
amenagees et tenues de far;ml pel'lllanente.

Geography thus accords great strategic advantage
to the Syrians. Israel's civilian tnrgets llrc numerous,
easily visible and well within range, Clvilian activities
such as fanning, grazing, ploughing fllld digging of
irrigation eannls can be obstructed nlmost at wdl,
without a great deal of militQry valour or immediate
risk. The Israeli targets are ci\'ilian in character,
including women, children and livestock, and are all
above ground. The Syrians cnjoy the advantage of
height and their positions are mostly of a military
character, well dug in and mostly beyond visibility or
easy range.

22, La geographie donne ainsi Ull grand fJV<l.utage
strategique aux Syriclls. Lcs cibks qnc constituent
les agglomerations israCliennes sont nOll1breuses, aiscment discernables, et situees a bonne portee. Des
activites civiles telles que la culture tles champs, la
garde des troupeaux, lcs lllbours el la construction de
t;anaux d'irrigation pcuvent ctre tntravees presquc a
volonte, sails avoil' a deployer un grand courage mili~
taire ou a cOllrir un risque immediat. Les objeeUfs
isracliens sont des objectifs civils, comprennent des
femmes, des enfallt~, et <ltlssi dlt betail, et sont tous
a decouvcrt. Les Syriel1s jouissent de l'avantage de
l'altitude; lell]'S ]losiLiollS ont surtout un caractere
militaire, WJll bien reLranchecs, ct generalement peu
visibles et dimcilcs a aLLcilldre.

22,

23, Cette situation crec pour IsraEl un probleme que
je voudrais exposer franehement au Conseil de securite.
Le principe dont nous partons est que les villages
israeliens situes dans la region doivent ~tre proteges
- et seront proteges - eontre tout danger et toute
attaque du genre de ceux que comportaient les eve~
nements du 3 dccembre,

23. This situation creates a problem for Israel which I
wish to share with the Security Council in full candour.
The absolute starting-point of our position is that the
Israel villages in this area must and shall bc protected
against such danger and assault as that which charnc~
tcrized tlle events of 3 December.
24. The defence of its territory and citizens against
attack is the first obliga'l;ion of a government. This
obligation is recognized and endorsed by the law of
nations as expressed in our Charter. That Syrian
artillery shall not be allowed with impunity to fire
upon Israel farms and villages is an axiom lying beyond
any need of vindication or approval. Attacks such as
those made 011 these seven villages on 3 December
catlnot be sullcrcd to occur again. While I have
dc!\cribed the advantages which topography bestows
upon Syrian forces, I do not mean to indicale that it
was beyond Israel's technical capacity, in the exercise
of its inherenl right of self-defence, to silence Syrian
artillery attack. But because of the spec:al conditions
of terrain which r have described, military measures of
self-defence against attacking Syrian artillery would
require a response more drastic and extensive than the
easy assault which the Syrian forces organize from their
points of geographical advantage. The Government of
lsrael is ardently anxious to avoid this contingency if
it can. We huve therefore buried our dead, tended our
wounded, begun the rccollsLmction of our shattered
farms and homesteads and have turned to the SecuriLy
Council of the United Nations for peaceful redress, and
still more for vigorous deLerrence.

21. Vile des premieres obligations d 'un gouvcTllement
est d'assurer la deIcnse de son terdtoire et de ses
citoyens contre tou~e attaque. Cette obligation est
reeonnue et appuyee par le droit des g~ns tcl quc le
conS8cre la Charte des Nations Unies. Que l'artilleric
syriennc ne puisse impuncment ouvrir le feu sur des
fermes et des villages israeliens eonsLitue 1111 axiomc
qui n'a besoin d'etre ni prouve 1Ii a\Jpt'ollve. Le reLour
d'attaques comme celles qu'ont ell a subir sept villages
le 3 decembre ne saurait etre to1erc. Si j'ai indique
les avantages que la topogn.phie (Ionnc aux forccs
syriennes, cela ne signifie nnllemenl: qn'Israel n'a pas
les moyens techniques d'exercer SOll droit de legitime
defellse et de reduire an silence l'artillerie syrienlle.
Cependant, en raison des v"rlicdaritcs du terrain que
rai decrites, des mesnn.'s militaires de legitime defellse
contre les atta(']ues de l'artilJ~rie syrienne impliqueraient
une riposLe beaueollp plus eategorique et de plus vaste
t'llvergure que les faciles figressions organisees par les
forces syriellnes a parlir dc lieux qui leur donnent
l'avantage. Le Gouvernemcnt israelien souhaite ardemment pouvoir evitcl' d'en venir la, Nons avons done
enterre nos morts, soigne nos blesses, commcnce la
reconstruction de nos fermes et foyers dcmolis, et nous
nous touTllons vcrs le Conseil de securitc, dont nou,~
nttendons unc reparation pacifique, et, plus encore,
!les mesures energiques qui empecheront le retour de
semblables evenements.

25. We come to the Security Council in recognition
of its "primary responsihility for the maintenance of
internationHl peace and security." Wc come here
because the alternatives to United Arab Republic
renunciation of the kind of activity which it initiated
on 3 December are of a gravity that we prefer not to
contemplate. And the moral and psychological influence

25, Nous nous adressons au Conseil de seen rite en
raison de sa (( responsabilite principale " touchant le
11 maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales ~.
Nous le faisons pareI.' que, si la Republique urabe ume
ilC renonce pas a des actions dll genre de celle du
3 decembrc, les autres recours possibles sont d'une
gravite telle que nous preferons ne pas les envisager.

6

[

I

.)'
I

r

J
\
I'

i'

(
(
r
I

i
I.

r
f

/.
•

I

,.

r

i.
I

that needs to be directed to prevent such bombardments lies beyond the prestige of any international
authority of lesser rank and dignity than this.

En outre, seule la haute autorite intcrnationale qu'est
le Conseil possCde nne influence morale et ps)'chologique sufiisante PDIll' prevenir de tels bombardernents.

26. There is no room for a complacent belief that we
stand here before an isolated incident which, with all
its gravity, can be confidently expected not to recur.
There are reasons to apprehend lhal unless a strong
influence is brought to bellI' by tILe Security COllllCi!
these bomb<trdments JIlay Le repeated, with l'eperCUbsiom; far lJeyond those which have attended the bombardment of 3 December. Tltere mayor may not be
States in the United Nations which have suffered the
shooting of hundreds of .~hclls upon their territory and
population from the territory of a neighbouring State.
\v'e arc quite certain that there is no instance of any
State having suITered the repetition of such assaults
on several occasions. While we shall listen with interest
to what the representative of the United Arab Republic
has to say about the past and, above all, about the
future, the current evidence of his Gov<';ftlment's mood
and intention is profoundly disgHieting.

2(\. l\om ne pOl1vons pas nOl1s bercer de l'iIlusion
eoltfortantc qu'il s'llgit ici d'un grave incidcnt isole
dont on pellt espcrer qu'i1 ne se reprodllira pas. Nons
<tVOllS des raisoIl~ de ~railldre que, si le Conseil de
secnritc n'use p.'lS vigoureusement de SOli influence,
ces bornhardempnts pOllrront se renouve!er, avec dE::!\
nipercnssions bien pins graves gue cclles dn bombnrdement du 3 deccmbrc. Je ne sais [Jus s'il y a, a l'Orgllllisatioll dcs Nations Unies, rll'S Etats dont le territoire
et la population aienL eu it suhir un bombardement
de centaines d'obus vmwnt du territoire cl'un Etat
voisin. Mais jc slIis tout fi bit certain qu'il n'est pas
un ex.emple d'Etat gui ait admis pa.ssivement la repetition de telles attaques. Nous €C()uterons ayec jnteret
ce que le representant de la Rcpublique arabe unie
pourra dire au sujet du passe, et plus encore au sujet
de l'avenir, mais Ct! que nous savons actuellement de
l'ctat cl'esprit et des intentions de son gouvemcment
ne 13isse pas de 1l011S inqllieter profondement.

'Xl, Radio Cairo on 6 December 1958 at 1815 hours
made the following broadcast in Hebrew to the people
of Israel:
" What heppened last Wednesday was hut a small
blow and neverthdess it shocked Ben-Gurion .• ,
Why did he go to the Security Council'l He lIO
dO\lbt fears a breakdown in Israeli nerves, therefore
he fights a war of nerves against us in order to soothe
his citizens. This is an old system which will not
succeed, ., The Israeli towns arc removed from our
border, but incidents are likely to spread and nol
only the border settlements but all Israel's inhabitants
will be luut."

27. Le B dCc€lllbre 1958, it 18 h, 15, Radio~Le Caire
a difIuse en llcbrllll, a l'intention du peuple d'Israel.
la decl:'lration suivante :
(( Cl'. qui s'est passe mercredi dernier ll'etait qu'un
coup mineur, et cependant cela fl secoue Ben Gllrion...
Pourquoi a-t-il saisi le Conseil de securite? Ben Gurion
a sans doute peur tju'Isr21!1 ne fa.sse nne depression
nerveuse; il se livl'e a \,1nl'. guerre des nerfs contre
nous pour calmer ses compatriotes. C'est Ut une
vieille astuce qui ne reussira pas... Les villes isracUennes sont eloignees de notre frontiere, mais les
incidents risquent de se propager, et Cl'. ne sont
pas seulement les villages des frontieres d'Israel.
mais tous ses habitants, qui en supporteront les
consequences. J)

28. The Cairo Radio programme entitled" The Sphinx
Talks" said on 4 December 1958:
"Listeners will recall our warning when we declared
that Syrian guns will return heavy fire <Ind that the
settlers in Israeli colonies near the border will suffer. , .
It is possible that such incidents will grow and turn
into larger affairs and then the big city dwellers of
Israel will suffer , •• Yesterday the north-€astern.
border areas of Israel tasted Arab gun fire, but it
can be said that this taste is not bitter enough and
surprises await the citizens of Israel if they follow
Ben-Gurion into provoking the United Arab Republic . .. The Arab giant has reached ltis full stature
and he will not bear a trial of strength by a little bug
which he can tread down ..."

28. Radio-Le Caire declnraiL le ,1 decembre 1958, dans
son programme intitule ({ The Sphinx Talks 'j :
~ Nos auditeurs se sOllviendront que nOlls aviOllS
prevenu les iuteresses que les canons syriens riposteraient par un feu concentre et que les populatioDs
des villages isracliens voisins de la frontiere en
supporteraient Jes consequences•.. Il se pent que les
incidents deviellmmt des affaires plus importantes et
aient nIDI'S de graves consequences pour les habitants
des grands ccn Lres israeliens", Hier, les regions
frontieres du nord-est d'Israel ant eu un av:=mt·gout
de Cl'. qu'est le tir des canons arabes, mais il semble
que eela ne suffise pas. Des surprises )lcnihlcs
<lttendent les citoyens cl'Israel s'ils continuellt de
suivre Ben Gnrion et provoquent la. Rcpublique
arabe unie.. , Le geant artibe se dresse maintenant
de toute sa taille, et n'admettra pas d'~tre d6tiC par
un insecte qu'il peut aiSfll1ent ecraser... )~

29, Now two problems are raised by this murky
stream of invective springing from the depths of dark
and tormented minds. At previous discussions, both
in the Security Council and in the General Assembly,
many delegations have emphasized the eiIect of virulent radio propaganda in increasing tension between
States. For months past the Cairo media of propaganda and the Egyptian President himself have been

29. Deux probJemes se posent, devant ce flot d'invectibes bOlleuses issues du trefonds d'esprits sombres et
tourmentes, Lors de debats precedents, au Conseil cc
securite et a l'Assemblee generale, de noml>reuses deJegation~ ont sOllligne combicn une propagnnde radiophonique virulente contribuait a accrottre la knsion
entre les Etats. Depnis des mois, les moyens de propagande dLl Caire et le President cgyptien lui-m~me ont

7

,

,I

,I

•
seeking to increase tensLon by publishing ridiculous clterche a augmenter la tension en l'epandant des fables
stol'ies of alleged troop concentrations against Jordan. ridicules quant a de pretendues Concentrations de
United Nations authorities, ill full agreement with us troupes menar;ant la Jordanie. Les autorites de l'Orgaon the falsity of such stories, have undertaken to try nisation des Nations Unies, parfaitement d'accord avec
to bring about a cessation of such reckless propaganda. nous sur la faussete de telles accusations, ont essaye
This propagandist incitement, however, is but a paren- de mettre fin a cette propagande insensee. Ces accuthetical aspect of the question. The Cairo broadcasts sations ne representent cependant qU'un aspect seconwhich I have quoted on the Galilee incident have a daire de la question. Les emissions de Radio-Le Caire
deeper and more substantive signiflcance. They indi- qlle j'ai citees a propos de l'incident de Galilio:e ant une
cate that far from repenting of the 3 December bom- Si~lification encore plus pl'ofonde. Elles signifient que,
bardment or promising the cessation of such acts, lom de regretter le bombardement do 3 decembre et
Cairo and Damascus are in a jubilant and self-satisfled de promettre de ne pas recidiver, Le Caire et Damas
mood, Indeed there have been two new Syrian attacks jubilent et sont lres contents d 'eux-mt>mes, Deux
since 3 December, the first on 6 December and the nouvelles attaques syriennes se sont produites depuis
second on 7 December. The aggressive posture of le 3 decembre, la premiere le 6 decembre, la seconde
Syrian forces had already been illustrated in a long le 7. L'attitude agrcssive des forces syriennes s'etait
series of assaults across the frontier, one of which took deja manifestee par nne longue serie d'attaqueg sur
the life of Mrs. Doran, the wife of the British Air la frontiere, dont l'une avait cause la mort de
attache in Israel on 17 November. The United Arab Mme Doran, femme de l'Attache de l'air britannique
Republie authorities seem to have convinced them- en Israel, le 17 novembre. Les ~utorites de la Repuselves - we know not how - that they may be able blique arabe unie semblent s'etre convaincues ~ nOllil
in the future to utilize an advantage of geography with ne savons comment - qU'elles peuvent a I'avenir
impunity in order to inflict injury upon ~ur people and utiliser impunement l'avantage que leur confere la
territory while they themselves are Immune from geographie pour attaquer notre peuple et notre terri'loire, alors qu'eHes-me-mes demeureraient a J'abri de
response.
touies represailles.

"Calls upon all States Members of the United
Nations to act strictly in accordance with the principles of mutual respect for each other's te1'ritorial
integrity and sovereignty, of non-aggression, of
strict non-interference in each other's internal affairs,
and of equal and mutual bencflt, and to ensure that
their conduct by wOi'd alld deed conforms to these
principles. "

30. 11 est indispensable que le Conseil de sccurite
fasse comprendre a la Republique arabe unie toute la
gravite de J:l situntion. Nous avons subi l'agression
du 3 decembre et notls avons coo[lcre avec l'Organisation ties Nations Unies pOUl' y metlre fin. J'ai le
devoir d'informer la Rcpublique arabe unie que le
bombardement des villages israeliens par l'artilterie
syrienne doit etre considcre corome un acte de gucrl'e.
Comment pourrait-on d'ailleurs voir autre chose dans
ce bombardement delibere? Nous demandons par
consequent au Conseil de securite de faire en sorte
que la. Republique arabe unie voie la situation sous
son vrai jour et avec toute sa gravite, au lieu de la
voir de la maniere satisfaite dont tcmoignent les
emissions mensongeres du Caire. Outre les dispositions
de la Charte et les clauses de la Convention d'armistice
general de juillet 1949, je veux mentionner la resolution 1237 (ESMIII), adoptee a l'unanimite le 21 aout
1958 par l'Assemblee generale. La Republique arabe
unie ctait l'un des anteurs de cette resolution, laquelle :
« Invite taus les Etats Membres de l'Ol'ganisation
des Nations Unies a agir en stricte conformite des
principes du respect mutuel de l'integrite territoriale
et de la souverainete de chacun, de non-agression,
de stricte non-ingerence dans les afIaires interieures
de chacun, et d'avantages egaux et mutuels, et a
faire en sorte qtle lellr conduite, en paroles et en
actes, soit conforme aces principes. ))

31. Israel is certain that the Security Council will
wish to deal with this problem bdore the chain of violence is renewed and extended. Israel's sole purpose
in bringing this item to the Security Council is to ensure
that assaults such as those of 3 December shall not be
repeated. The Government of tile United Arab RepUblic is able, by the exercise of its authority and the
issuanee of appropriate orders, to enslU'C this result.
Indeed, it is inconceivable that such a heavy and snstained artillery bombardment as that conducted by

31. Israel est convaincll quc le Conseil aUl'a a cceur
de s'attaquer au probleme avant que l'enchalnement
des violences ne se renollvelle et ne s'etende. Israel
a saisi de l'aITaire le Consei] de securite a seule fm de
prevenir la repetition d'attaques comme celle du
3 decembre. Le Gouvernement de la Republique arabe
unie peut. en exen;:ant son autorite eL en donnallt des
ordres appropries, rendre cc resultat possible. Il est
d'ailleul's inconcevable qu'un bombardement d'artillcrie
aussi intense et prolonge que celui auquel les forces

30. It is vitally urgent fol' the Security Council to
impress the United Arab Republic with the g~avity
of this position. We have suffered the aggressIOn of
3 December and have co·operated with the United
Nations in an effort to bring it to a halt. It is my duty
to inform the United Arab Republic that the bombardment of Israel villages by Syrian artillery must be
regarded as an act of war. How else can such deliberate bombardment be regarded? We therefore urge
the Security Council to induce the United Arab RepUblic to look at this sitnation in its true and grave light,
and noL in the complacent and mendacious manner of
the Cairo broadcasts. In addition to the provisions of
the Charter and of the General Armistice Agreement
of July 1949, I refer to resolution 1237 (Es.-llI) adopted
unanimously by the General Assembly 011 21 Au~
gust 1958. The United Arab Republic was one of the
sponsors of this resolution which:

8

r'
!

.)

,'
I

i
I

r
I

i
i

i
(

I

I
r
I

•

I

I

I

I,
/

T

l

Syrian forces on 3 December could have taken place
witholLt specific autharization on a high governmental
level. There are many problems arising between Israel
.and its neighbours. These arc not at issue here. Even
if the Middle East cannot have peace, it can at least
have security, There must be a basic internaLional
tolerance, There must be abste.ntion from violent
interference with farming, grazing and other development work - peaceful pursuits which will, of course,
continue in this as in other areas of Israel. All that is
required from the Syrian forces is - and surely tllis is
not too much to reqlLire - that they leave liS alone,
and stop nsing their topographical advantage to interfere with life and work in the valley below,

syriennes l;C sont livrees le 3 decembre puisse avoir eu
lieu sans l'autorisation expl'csse d'un echelon gouvernemeotal eleve, Bien des [lfohlemes se poscnt entre
Israel et ses voisins, Ce n'esL pas d'enx qu'j] est question
ici. M~me si le Moyen-Orient ne peut connaitre la
concorde, il peut au moins jonir de la securite. Un
minimum de tolerance interuationalc est indispensable.
11 ne faut pas que la violence entrave l'agriculture,
L'elevage et les autres taches de mise en valeul" - tdches
paciHques qui, bien entendu, se poursuivront dans
cette region COll1me dans les autres regions d' Israel.
Tout cc que nous dernandons des forces syriennes
- et ce n'est certaincmcLLt pas trop demander c'est qU'elles now, laisscut tranquilles, qu'elles cessent
de "Lirer parti de lellr avantage d'ordre topographique
pour gener la vie et le travail dans]a valJee en contrebas.

-32. Faced by acts thc continuance or repetition of
which would threaten international peace and security,
the Government of Israel, strongly desiring the maintenance and strengthening of peace in the Middle East,
turns to the Security Council to ensure an immediate
end to such aggressive acts,

32. En presence d'actes dont la persistance mcnaCe
la paix et la secUl'ite internationales, le Gouvernemcnt
d'Israe1, ardemment dcsireux de l1laintenir et de ren~
forcer la paix au Moyen·Orient, s'adresse au Conseil
de securite pour qu'il soit mis fin immediatement a
ces actes agressifs,

33. Mr. President, members of the Security Council,
it is onr feeling that a responsibility and an opportunity
lie in your hands. We confidently hope that by their
speeches and their resolution the members of the
Security Council will be able effectively to impress the
United Arab Republic with the vital necessity of
avoiding the recurrence of these grave events,

33, Monsieur le Pl'esident, messieurs les membrcs du
COllseil de se.curite, nons avons le sentiment qlle vous
avez a la fois le devoir et L'occasion d'agir. Nous
esperons l"Jue, par leurs discour:; et la resolution qu'ils
udopLeront, les membl"(,;s du COllseil sauront persuadeI'
la HepubUque arabe unie qn'eviter ]e retour de ces
evenemcnts graves est llne nccessite vitale,

34. Mr, LOUTFI (United Arab Republic) (Imnslaled
from French): On Thursday, 4 December 1958; the Security Council was seized of a complablt by Israel, which
you have before you /5'/4123], requesting you to consider a grave act of nggression allegedly committed on
3 December 1958 by the anned forces of the United
Arab RepubliC ngainst Israel territory in the Hnleh
area in north-east Galilce, This complaint called for
the convening of an urgent meeting of the Security
Council. Fortunately, the members of the Security
Council decided that the complaint was not an urgent
matter and they did not consider it necessary to call
an immediate meeting of the Council,

34, M. LOUTFI (Republique al'abe unie) : Le Conseil
de securite a ete saisi le jeudi 4 deccmbre 1958, d'llne
plainte d'lsrael, que vous avez sous les yeux [5/4123].
pour examiner un acte de gmve agression qui, parait-B.
aurait ete commis le 3 dccembre 1958, par les forces
armees de la Republiqnc arLbe unie contre le territoire
d'Israel dans la region du luc de Honle, dans le nordest de la Galilec. Dans telte plainte, OIl demandait la
convocatioIl c1'urgence du COllsei! de securitc. Heureusement, les memures du COnseU ont decide qu'ils
n'etaient pas saisis d'une plainte qui presentait un
caracLere cl'UJ'gence et n'ont pas estime qu'unc relution
immediate du Conseil s'im}losait.

3.5. This is not the first time that Israel has used the
Security Council, the highest authority of the United
Nations, for tendcntious propaganda purposes, in order
to distort the truth and stir up public opinion to serve
its well-lmown aims, This attitude on the part of
Israel can only detract from the Council's prestige.
Israel would have been better advised, instead of
coming here to claim that it was the victim of a grave
aggression, to keep quiet and let the world forget the
aggressions which it has itself committed dul'ing the
last few years, one of which OCCurred only recently and
is familiar to all of you, Israel appears to forget the
number of times it has been denounced by the Council
for its premeditated acts of anned aggression. Furthermore, this request for an urgent meeting of the Council
is based on the same policy of stirring up public opinion
and attempting to show that a very serious incident
has occurred.

35. Ce n'est pas la premiere fois qu'Israel utilise le
Conseil de securite, la plus haute autorite de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, a des lins de propagande
tcndancieuse. dans le but de deformer la verite, d'ugiter
I'opinion publiqllC, altn de servir des dcss('.ins bien
connus. Cette attitude d'Israel ne pellt que porter
atteinte all prestige du Conseil. Il aurait mieux vaIn
pour Israel, au lieu de venir pretendre qu'il est l'objet
d'une ngression grave, de se tenir tranquiJIc et de
faire oubher au monde les agressions commises par
lui pendant ees dernieres annec.~ - dont l'une n'est
pas Iointaine, et VOllS la corrnaissez tOilS. Israel semble
oubHer le nombre de fois qu'i! a ete condamne par le
COllseil pour ses agressions armees premeditees, En
outre, la demande de convocation d'urgence du Conseil
ptocMe de la meme iMe, it savoir agiter l'opinion
publique et essayer de mOlltrer que nons no us tronvons
en face d\m incident tres grave.

36. The incident of 3 December 1958 which is the
subject of the Israel complaint in document S/4123
and of which a distorted version bas been presented to

36. L'incident du 3 decelObre 1958, qui fait l'objet de
la plainte israelienne contenue- dans le dor-ument
5/4.123, et dont Hne version deformee vient de vous

9

!

I
j

J

.j

I

~1

.~

you by tbe previous speaker, should properly be placed
in the context of Israel's acts of provocation and the
violations of the terms of the Israel-Syrian Genera!
Annistice Agreement which are committed daily by
the Israel authoritilOS. This incident, which the authors
of the complaint attribute to innocent civilian activities
on the Israel side - the tending of flocks OIL grazing
grounds in Israel - should be examined by the Coundl
in fue light of the provocative acts by Israel which preceded and accompanied the cvents we are concerned
with here, The Israel authorities' tactics of posilLg
as t]le victims after having perpetrated acts of aggression, and of declaring the cause of the incidents provoked by their violations of the General Armistice
Agreement to lle innocent and normal civilian activities,
or minimizing such violntiOml when they are flagrant,
is a method which has become too familiar to the United
Nations to call for further evidence on our part.

Ctl'C presentee par l'oratcur qUi m'a precede, doit etrereplace dans le cadre des provocations israeliennes et
des violations des dispositions de la Convention d'armi~_
bee general syro-israelienne quotidiellnement commises
par les autorites israelienncs. Cet incident, que les
auteurs de la plainte attribuent a lInc artivite civileisraeiicnl1c innocente (la garde de troupc<LUX sur des.
ptlturnges israeliens), devmit etre examine par le
Conseil a lQ lumiel'e des actes de provocation israclieml
qui ont !Jl'eced6 et accompagne 1'inl;ident en qu('stion~
La tactique des autorites isnH~liennes de se pos~r en
victimes ap1'0S avoir perpetre des actes d'agression"
et de ramencl' iLL cause des incidents provoques par
leurs violations de la Convention d'armistice general
a des activilci\ dviles innocentes et normules, ou de
minimiser ces violations quand elles semt f1agrante.s~
est une methode qui est devenue trop familiere It
l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour nppeler un
supplement de preuves de notre part.

37. It would be superfluous to mention the long list
of complaints already addressed by the authorities of
the United Arab Republic to th(O Israel-Syrian Mixed
Armistice Commission and dealing with specific inci~
dents provoked by unlawful Israel activities, either
within tlle demilitarized zones, or on Arab land. We
shall spare the Council a detailed listing of these unlawful
activities which take muny dilTerent forms: military
activities, violations of Syrian air space, presence of
Israel police, various forms of trespass on Arab land and
property, penetration of !JiC border in the Syrian
region, expulsion of the Arab population, etc.

37, nest superflu de mentionner la loague liste des.
plaintes qui ont el6 jusqu'ici adressees par les autoritrs.
de la Hepublique arabe unie a la Commission mixte
d'armistice syro-israelienne, et qui portent sur des
incidents precis provoques par des activites israelielltleS
illegale.5, soit Et l'interieur des zones demilitarisees, soit
sur des proprietes arabes. Nous ferons grace au Conseil
de l'enumeration dCtaillee de ees activites illegales, dont
le caractere est assez varie : activites militaires, violations de respace aerien syrien, presence de la policeisraelienne, empir,tements de diverses sortes sur des
proprietcs el des terres arabes, penetration Et l'intericllr
des frontieres de la region syrienne, expulsion de la
population arabe, etc.

3&. We should. llOwever, like to mention one example
as an illustration of this type of activity; fortunately,
it appears in the Israel complaint itself, Among the
Israel villages which are alleged to have bcen bombarded by the Syrian artillery, the name of Dardara
deserves special comment, This village lies witllin the
central demilitarized zone. With its fortifications,
trenches and weapons, it now constitutes a starting or
termination point for intensive Israel military activities
which threaten the entire central demilitarized zone.
No military activity whatever is permitted within a
demilitarized zone. The existence of a fortified Israel
village to which United Nations observers do not have
access is, you will admit, a constant violation of the
General Armistice Agreement. During the month of
September 1958 alone, to mention only one example
among many, twenty-four complaints concerning Israel
military activities which originated in or tenninated in
Dardara were lodged with the Mixed Armistice Com~
mission,

39. As for tlle Israel civilian activities, we have emphasized on several occasions that these activities have
always been accompanied by military activities prohibited by the General Armistice Agreement and that, in
most cases, they have tended only to provoke incidents
which are useful for Israel propaganda purposes or
which provide the basis for extravagant Israel claims
inspired by an expansioni~t policy.

38. Nous vouurions cependallt citer un seul exemple
pour illustrer de telles activites. Cet exemple nous Q
lite heureusement foum! par la plainte i.'lraelienne ellememe. En elIet, parmi les villages israeliens mentionnes
dans ladite plainte, et qui auraient lite bombardes par
l'artillel'ie syrienne, le nom de Dardara merite un
commentaire special, que nous nous empressons de
faire. Ce village est situe a l'interieur de la zone demilitarisee centrale. Ii constitue a l'heure actuelle, de par
ses fortifications, ses tranchees et ses armements, un
point de depart ou d'aboutissement d'une activite
militaire israeIienne intense, qui menace toute la zonc
dcmilitarisee centrale. Dans une zone demiIitarisee,
ancune activite militaire n'est permise. La presence
d'un village israelien forti fie et dont l'acceB est interdit
aux observateurs des Nations Unies est, on doit le
reconnaltre, ulle violation quotidienne de la Convention
d'armistice gl:il1eral. Au cours du seul mois de septembre
1958, pour ne citeI' qu'ull exemple entre hien d'autres,
24 plaintes portrmt sur des activihis militaires israeliennes, paltant du village de Dardara ou y oboutissaut,
ont eM deposees aupres de la CommissiOll mixte d'armistice.
39. Quant aux activites civiles israeliennes, nous avons
eu l'occasion a plusieurs reprises de sQuligner, d'une
part, que ecs activites etaient toujours accompagnces
d'activites militaires prohibees par la Convention
d'armistice general, et, d'autre part, que ces activites
ne tcndaient, dans la plupart des cas, qu'a provoquer
des incidents qui s'averent utiles a la propagande
isnuilienne ou qui se prop0.'lent d'appuyer des pl'e-

10

\
r

(

II
(

I
f

I

I

r

I
f
I

i
(
(

I

\

I

r

i

I
I

I

I
(

I
('

I
I
I

i"

I

tentiomi israelienlL('~ cxtravagantes
poHtique expansionnist~.

in~pirees

par une

40, The incident of 3 December should be ccllsidered
by the Council in the light of these general comments.

,10. C'est dans le c~ldre de Cl'S ob.,etvations gcncrales
que l'inddent du 3 decemhrc dcvrait ctre examine
par ]e COl1sei!.

41. We regret having to make our commcnts on this
incident when the Ismel-Syrial1' Mix.ed Armbtice Commission, Lhe body competent to deal with such matters
in the jjr~L instance, lJas not been able to consider il
and ascerLain where the blame lies.

in. n HOllS repugne de fail'c nos observations sur cct

42. We have only just received the report of the
United Nations Truee Supervision Organization [SI.J124]
and I must confess that I have not yet had time to
study it.

42. ;\IOIlS venous mailltenrlllt de reccvoir le rapport
de rOrganisme des Nations Unics cllarge de hI. surveillance de la treve [8/41241, et je n'"i pas, je l'avoue,
l'.U le temps de l'etudier.

']3.

You will note, however, tnat nothing is lacking
in the Israel complaint contained in the letter of
4 December 1958 and in the Israel press release of
5 December published at the United Nations to create
the desired propaganda e{fect. Neither the premature
.and regrettable death of the wife of the British Military
Attache, nor the undoing of all the useful and peaceful
Israel work of several years, nor the Israeli children
miraculously spared by the Syrian artillery bombardments as they went to join their parents working in the
fields, are missing from the picture cleverly presented
by those two documents.

43. Observons toute.Eois que riell ne fflit defaut a la
plainte israelienne contenue dans la lettre {hl 4 decembl'c
1958 et all communique de presse israelien du 5 decembre
public it l'Orgaaisatioll des Nations Unies pour produire
l'efIet de propagande desire. Ni la mort prcmaturec et
regrettable de la femme de I'attache militaire britan~
niquc, ni le labenr salutrtire et pacifique israelien de
plusieurs annees l'eduit a nen.lIt, ni Ies enlants israeliens
miraculeusement epargnes par les bombardemel1ts de
l'artillerie syricnl1c alars qu'Us allaient retrouver leurs
parents travnillant aux champs, ne manquent au
tableau sa"nmment presente pnr ecs deux documents.

44. In view of the facl that the reporL has just
,been circulated, it is difficult for my delegation to
tnl,e a position on the investigation, but, from
the information availabl~ Lome, and from a quick
glance at the report, it appears that at 12.10 hours
(local time) on 3 December 1958, Israeli shepherds
clashed with Arab civilians and exchanged shots with
the local police. Thereupon, an Israel armed force
joined the shepherds; it later withdrew. The exchange
of small-arms 1lre during this first incidr-nl stopped at
15.08 hours (local time). Fifteen minutes after this
tIring had ended, Israel army posts opened artillery
fire on the Syrian villages of Ain MamOlln and Dar~
bashiya. The Syrian artillery had, in self-defence, to
return the fire, but it did so only after the Israel
artillery had opened fire. That is all I have so far
been able to find in this report, It says that Lhe action
was initiated by the Israelis and that the Syrians had
to retaliate in self-defence. That is what I read in
paragraph 5. 'fhe firing from tile Syrian side ended
when the cease-fire ordered by the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organizatioll had been communicated
to the competent authorities of the United Arab
Republic.

44. A eause du rapport qui vieElt d'etre distrihue. jJ
est dilTIcile a nUl delegation d~ prendre reellemeut
position sur l'enqtI.He, mais d'aprcs mes renseignemenls,
et aprcs un rapide examcn du rapport, le 3 decembre
1058, it 12 ll. 10 (h~llrC' locale), des hCl'gers israe!iclls
Se heurLen'.llt ii la population civil~ al'abe et cchangerent
des coups de feu avec la police loealc. Sur ccs entrcfaites, lJllC force armec israelienne vinl se joindre aux
bergers. Cctte force arm6c israelienne se retiI'a par la
suite. L'cchnnge de fen des "rmes legercs en cc premier
incident: s'flrrNa a 15 h. 8. Quinze minules apres eel
<lrret, les postes de I'armee israeliel111e ouvrirenL le feu
de leur artHlcrie sur les villages syriens de Aill Mamoun
et de Darbashyia. EI1 legitime defense, I'artillerie
syriennc dut riposteI', mnis eUe ne le ilL qu'apres
l'ouverturtl du feu pm l'artiLlerie israeIienne. C'~$t la
sr.ulc chose que je puis trouver dans ce rapport, pour
autant que faie pu l'examiner. II y est dit que l'illi~
wativc de I'action a cle prise par les Israeliens et qu'en
legitime uCfense les Syriens Ollt dO. repliquer. C'est
ee que je lis au paragraphe 5 dn rapport. Le tir cessa
du cote syrien quand l'ordlU de cessez-le-feu donne
par l'Organisme des Natiolls Unies charge de la suryeillance de la lreve eut ete communique aux autorit~s
competenles de la RepubJique arabe unie.

45. I should also like to point out that the delegation
of the United Arab Republic to the Mixed Armistice
Commission lodged a complaint and requested an inves~
tigation of the various aspects of these incidents.
Another major incident had occurred on 21 November 1958. Fifteen armed Israeli soldier$ inftltrated into Arab territory and clashed with the local
civil police with whom they exchanged gun-lire. At
05.42 hours (local time) on the same day, an anTIed
Israeli patrol crossed the demarcation line in front of

4,5. Je voudrais egalcment faire observer qlllJ la delegation de la Republique arabe unie a In Commission
rnixte d'armistice a porte plainte et a demande l'ouverture d'une cnqucte sur les divers aspects de ces incidents.
D'ailleurs, un incident important s'etait dc.roule le
21 novembre 1958. Quinze soldats armcs iraeliens
s'inf1ltrerent a l'intcrieur des terres arabes ~t se heurterent a la police civile locale, avcc laquelle ils echangerent. des coups de feu. Le m<Jrne jour, a 5 h. 42
(heure locale), un peloton arroe isniclien franchit la

11

incident alors que la Commission mixtc d'armistice
syro-iflraelienne, qui est l'organe de premiere instance
competent en la matierc, nOa pas encore eula possibilite
d'examinrL" cet incident et de departager les parties en
presence.

,
,

ligne de demarcation devant le poste syrien de Durcijat.
Se heurtant a la Mfense syrienne, il dut se retirer. A
14 h. 30, les IsrueIiens renouvelt~rent leur tentative
d'infiltration dans la region de Jalablna. Sur le terrain.
on troU\'a un appareil de transmission de TSF et des.
magasins de mitrailleuses israeIiells. La delegation de
la Republique arabe unie it la Commissi()n mixte
d'armistice deposa une plainte, demandant en m~me
temps l'ouverture d.'une eIl4u~le.

the Syrian post of Durcijat. It came up against the
Syrian defences and had to retire. At 14.30 hours the
Israeli~ repeated their attempt to infiltrate in the
Jalabina area. An Israel radio transmitter and machine-

gun magazines were found on the ground. The United
Arab Republic delegation to the Mixed Armistice Com-

mission lodged a complaint and reqnested tllat an
illquiry be held.

,

,

46. Israel has circulated here. ai the United Nations,
a press release which mentions a broadcast in Hebrew
by Radio Cairo. I would like to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to the fact that the
alleged text of the Hebrew broadcast by Radio Cairo
to which the Israel press release of 4 December 1958
referred has no basis in fact for the simple reason that
no programme in Hebrew was broadcast by Radio
t.:uiro 011 4 December. Tll(~ only broadcast made on
that date was an Arab-language broadcast, the tenor
of which does not correspond to the text of the Israeli
press release. ~oreover, the press release itself makes
reference to Israel provocations, which sometimes call
tor a r~ply.

40. Israel a distribue ici, a l'Organisation des Nations
Unies, un communique de presse dans lequel etait
mentionnee une emission emanant de Radio-Le Caire
et faite en hebrcu. Jc voudruts attit'cr l'attorrtion des
membres du Conseil sur le fait que le pretelldu texte
de l'emission en Mbreu de Radio-Le Caire, auquel le
communique israiHien du 4 deeembre 1958 fait allusion,
est denue de tOllt fondem(mt, pour la simple raison
qu'aucune cmissi()n en hebteu n'a He diffusee par la
radio du Caire le <1 decembre. La seule emission diftusee
a la date indiquee est une emission ell langue arabe
dont la teneur ne coincide pas avec Cl". que c()ntient le
communique iSl'aelien. D'ailleurs, ce communique luiml!me fait all11sinn Hl1X provocations israeliennes. qui
demandent quelquefois une reponse.

47. Since we are on tlle subject of radio broadcasts, I
should also mention that, in a broadcast by the Israel
radio Oil 5 December 1958 and a second })roAf!cast I'lt
13.30 hours on the same day, Mr. Ben Gurion stated
that the Israel Army would shortly move towards the
Negeb area; he thereby threatened to create a state of
tension in tlie Gaza sector. Tllese thrcats announcing
Israel troop ffilWp.ments are adequale proof of Israel's
aggressive designs and the desire of the Israel allthori-ties to increase tension in that part of the world.

47. En outre, puisque nous parl()ns d'emissions de
radio, je dirai que le 5 dccembre 1958, dans une emission
de la radio israelienne, et le meme jour, dans une
deuxi~me emission radiodifTusee a I3 h. 30, M. Ben
Gurion declara que l'armee israelienne se dirigel'a
prochainement vel'S la region du Neguev, et, par cela,
il lUenace de crecr un etat de tension dans le secteur
de Gaza. Ces declarations mena<;anles annon<;ant des
mouvemcnts de troupes isracliens prouvent snUisamment les desseins agressifs d'IsraeI et le dlisir des
autorites isracliennes de faire monter la tension darn
cettc partic du (;10nde.

48. The foregoing shows clearly that Israel does not
respect the Armistice Agreement signed with Egypt,
which Mr. Ben Gurion, incidentaUy, has referred to
several times as non-existent.

48. Ce qui precede montl'e clairement qu'Isra~l ne
respecte pas la Convention d'al'mistiee signee avec
l'Egypte - que, par ailleurs, M. Ben Gurion avait a
plnsieu:·s reprises considcree comme non existante.

49. Today, Mr. Eban lla~ used highly provocative
words and threatened us with reprisals. This idea
originates in the. same instructions from Mr. Ben Gurion.
I wish to inform him that the United Arab Republic
does not fear Israel reprisals and bat it is prepared to
repel any aggreSSion.

49. Aujourd'lmi, M. Eb;m luj aussi a prononce des
paroles pleines de provocation, et it nous menace de
represailles. Cette idee proeMe des memes directives de
M. Ben Gm'ion. Je veux lui dire que la Repllblique
arabe unie ne craint pas les represames israeJiennes et
est pretr.: lJ. rep0ll.sser toute agrcssi()n.

50. We are surprised to note that the Security Council

50. Nous sommes surpris de constater que le Conseil

has been seized of this matter before the Mixed Armistice Commission has had all opportunity to consider
it. Under article VII, paragraph 7, of the General
Armistice Agreement signed on 20 JUly 1949 between
Syria and Israel, it is to that Armistice Commission
that complaints of tllis type must be referred. This
paragraph reads as follows:

de securite a ete saisi de I'aiTaire avant que la Commission mixte d'annistice ait eu la possibilite de l'examiner.
EH eITet, conformemcnt flUX dispositions du paragraphe 7
de l'ar~icle VII de la Convention cl'armistice genernl
signee le 20 juillel1949 entre la Syric et Israel, c'est a
cette commission que des plaintes de Cl". genre doivenl
eLre referees. NOlls lisons a ce paragraphe :

"Claims or complaints presented by either Party
relating to the application of this Agreement shall
he referred immediatelv to the Mixed Armistice Commission through its Chairman. The Commission shall
tal{(, such action on all such claims or complaints hy
means of its observation and illvestigation machinery

« Les reclamaLions 011 les pJaintes pl'csent<tcs par
l'une all l'autre partie. rclativement a l'appHcation
de la presente Convention, devront etre soumises
immedintement a la Commission mixte d'armistice
pal' l'intermediaire de son president. La Commission
prendra, au sujet de ces rcelamations ou plaintes,

12

['

(
.

r
,
l

I

r
I

\(

"

I

[
(

r
I

(
j
I.

f

rI'
I

I
[

I.
I
r
i
r

,

I
"

. {:.

~

as it may deem appropriate, with a view to equitable
und mutually satisfactory settlemE!nt." 2

-Loutes lcs mesures qu'elle jugel·a flpproprlees, en
fais..mt usage de slos lnoyens d'observation et de
contr61e, en vue d'un reglement equitable et satisfaisant pour les deux parties 2. 11

.51. This text is perfectly clear and it is for this reason
that the United /\rab Republic referred the incident in
<{uestion to the Mixed Armistice Commission.

51. Ce textc est tL'CS clair, et C'Gst pour ce motif que
.a RepubIique arabe unie a saisi du meme incident
la Commission mixte il'arm;stice.

52. Accordingly, there is no doubt that, in bringlng
this matter before the Security Council in disregard of
the provisions of the Armistice Agreement, Israel is
seeking only to muke propaganda or is doing so only
for reasons of domestic policy into which I do !lot
want to venture.

52. Il n'y a pas de doute qu'en portant cette ufJaire
au Conseil de securite sans knir compte des dispositions
de la Convention d'armistice generlll, ISrll:el ne poursuit
quc d\l~ Iml.'.l de propugundc, DU ne le fait que POlll' des
motifs de politiqlle intericul'c dans IcsqueIs je ne veux
pas m'avclltllrer.

53. Furthermore, it has always been the Security
Council's praGlke to support the application of the
Agreement and to give the Mixed Armistice Commis"5ion an opportunity to consider complaints of this
type. I shall take the liberty of quoting a statement
made in tIle Security Council by Mr. Wads\V0rth, the
United States representative, in wllkh lie referred to
the Mixed Armistice Commission:
"We cannot stress too frequently or too strongly
the importance of the: parties using the ruacllinery
available to them for the settlement of their dif.ereUCles. In our view, the most constructive role the
Sewrity Council can play is to empll:lsize tile necessity fol' using this machinery, and then to reinforce
whatever decisions may result from resort to that
machinery." [&84ll1 m('('ling, pl/ra. 1.7.]
M. Other Council member3 expressed the same. point
of view on that occasion. Tl1is principle has been applied
when more important matters, such as tlle complaints of
aggression against Gaza, Qibya, Nahhalin, etc., have
been discussed in the Council.
55. In conclusion, my delegation cannot conceal its
surprise at seeing the Security Council seized of this
matter when no decision has been taken by the Mixed
Armistice Commis~ion. Israel's tennentious propaganda gives this incident proportions which it coes
not really have. We hav~ noted, together with the
Israel letk.rs, an organized press cD.mpaign which o]so
strives, by supporting tlte Israel view, to magnify the
illllJurtance of thi5 incident by distorting the facts.
Tltis very day tlte Israel delegation held a press conference only a few minutes before presenting its case to
the Security CounciL. Photographs were even produced.
We would have preferred Israel to have given the
United Nations ubservers jJermis~ion to visit the arcas
in person so tlIa t they could lcll us what actually
happened. For us these photographs are meaningless.
Above all, I fuil to understand how Israel, which bas
been condemned by tlle Security Council for very grave
acts of aggression in whlch many 11111Uall lives were
unfortunately lost, thinks that it can come and present
tlus complaint 'iil'ectly to the Security Council today.

53.

56. I ghould simply like to recall sev('!ral incidents
which occurred, in violation not only of the Armistice
Agreement, but o.lso of tl1e United Nations Charter.

De plus, la pratique de Conseil de securite a toujours ete d'n.ppuyer la mi,~e en ceuvre de ce textc et
de danner a In Commission mixte d'annistice l' opportunitc d'examiner les plaintes de ce genre. En e1et,
je vais me permettre de vous citer ce que, au cours
d'une discussion all Conscil oil il etait traite de la
Commission mL'\:te d'armi~tiee, if' l·('.nrt~:>.t".ntant des
Etats-Unis, M. Wadsworth, a declare: <l Nons ne: saurions rappeler trap frequemmeltt ou
trop fermement que les plllties doivcnt avoir recours,
pour regler kIrs diITerends, aux instances misr.s a
lem disposition. A llotre uvis, l~ rl'lh: le plus construetif
que le Conscil de ~ccllrite puissc jouer est de rappcler
qu'il est neces8aire de l'ecourir a ees instances et
d'appuycr de son autoritc les decisions qui pourraiellt
etre prises u cette occasion. )) [684- seance, par. 11.]
54. D'alltres memhres du Conscil, it cette occa5.ion,
ont exprime le meme point de VIIC. Ce principe a ete
mis en ceuvrr. quand des questbns plus importaatcs
ant ete discu16cs au Conscil, comme les plaintes Concer~
nunt les o.grcllsions contre Gaza, Qihyn, Nnll:Hl.lin, etc.
55. En. condusion, l:1a delegation ne peut cacher sa
surpri:se de vnil' le Conscil de securite saisi de cette
question sall.'> qu'f1ucune decision nit cite plisc pat· la
Commission mixte d'armistice. La propagande tendandense d'!sraiH donne a eet incident une proportion
qu'il est loin d'avoir. Nons avons COllstate, a c{)tI~ des
kttrcs israeliennes, line earnpagne de pressc organisee
qui essaie aussi, en soutenant le point de vue israeliell,
(1('. dOllner a eet incident line trcs gnmde importance,
et cela en dcformnnt les faits. La delegation d'Israel
vicnt, aujourd'hui 1l1~me, de tenir llne eonierence de
presse, quelques mimltes avant de wumeUre sa these
an COllsei] de sliCllrite. Des pl10toS ont mClll€ etl! produites. Nous :mrion~ prefere qu'Israel donne nux
observateurs des Nations Unies l'aulorisation de visiter
eux-m(~mes ccs localites a.nn de p(lliVOir nOllS dire ce
qui s'est vrniment passe. Pour nous, ces photo, ne
signiilent den. Ce qui, surtout, me dripasse, c'est
qu'Isracl
qui a He conrl8mne par le COllseil de
sricuritc pour des actes d'agression tres graves, ou
011 tl eu a de}lorer de !lombreuses pertes de vies
humaines - pensc pouvoir venir anjourd'hui presenter
directemen.t lei cette pl<linLe an Conseil de secudte.
5G. Je voudrais seukment rappeler quelques lllciLienLs
qut sont survenus, eL qui etajent en VlDlation non
seulement des conventions d'amtisllce mais aussi de
• llte'd.

Ibid.

13

These incidents constituted unprovoked, premeditated,
armed aggression by the Israel Government and were
so considered in the United Nations resolutions. I refer
to the incidents which began shortly after the signing
of the Armistice Agreements and which continued until
the end of 1956. They included the Israel attack on
the Syrian frontier near El Hula, which was denounced
by the Security Council on 18 1'1ay 1951 [S/21571. The
Qibya massacre is still present in our memories. The
8Ltack on Qibya was denounced by the Securily Council
in its resolution of 24 November 1953 [S/3139/Rcv, 2],
but this did not prevent a further aggression of equal
brutality and violence against the village of Nahhalin
on 28 ancl 29 March 1954. You will also recall the
aggression against Gaza of 28 February 1955, which
was denounced by the Council on 28 March 1955
[S/3378J and was recognized hy the Mixed Armistice
Commission as a premeditated attack organized by the
Israel authorities. I shall not dwell on the aggression
ngainst Egypt in October 1956, since the membel'S of
the COllUcil arc familiar with all its details. I should
merely like to remind yon of the premeditated armed
aggression againsl Syria, committed on 11 December 1955 in the Lake Tiberias area and considered by
the Council to be a flagrant violation of the te1'111S of
the Israel-Syrian General Armistice Agreement. (It is
that same Agreemellt which Israel alleges we have
just 'Violated by an incident ,,,hose proportions -Mr. Eban
is attempting to magnify by distortion of the facts,
without even awaiting tll{'. findings of the Mixed Armistice Commission.) As is wcll known, the Lake Tiberias
aggression took more than fifty Syrian live::;, In the
resolution which it adopted on 19 ,January 1956 [S/3638],
the Security Conncil was constrained to slate t11e
following:

.. Expresses its grave concern at the fnilure of the
Goyernment of Israel to comply with its obligations;
" Calls upon the Governmcnt of Israel to do so ill
the future, in default of whicll the Council will have
to consider w]lal further measures under the Charter
are required to maintain or restore the peace."

la Charte d:s NatiOl.Js Unies. Ces incidents constitnaient
une agresslOn arn:ee .n?n pr?voquee, premectitee par
le Gouvernemcnt lSrU!;1Jen. C est ce qu'ont retenu le
:es?lutiolls ?es Nations l!nies. .Te veux parler de:
mCldents qUi ant commeuce pen apres la signature des_
conventions d'armistice ct qui se sont prolonges jusqu"
la fin. de 195(). Il s'agit, Ilotamlllcnt, de l'agressio~
c~lllmlse pa!' I~r~rJ sur la .frontiere syrienne pres de
El I-Iulfl, <[Ill a ete condamnee par le Conseil de securite
le 18 mai 1951 [5/21.57J. Le massacre dc Qibya est
encore prcseut a to\]te;; les mellloircs. Ceite agresslon
contre Qibya a elc condan1llcc par le Conseil de secmite
par sa nfsolutioll du 24 novembre 1953 [S/3139/Hev, 2)
cc qui n'a pas empeche qu'l1ne nulre agrcssion, qui;
pris les memcs proportions de brutalit6 et de violencl'
ait lieu les 28 et 29 mars 1D54 conhe le village u~
Nahhalin. On se souvient, ensuite, de l'ngl'ession contre
Gaza du 28 fcvrier 1955, qui 0. etl!; condo.mnec pfll'le
Conseil le 28 mars de la meme annee [S/3378]. et 0(1
la Commission mix:le d'armistice a reconnu que cetlc
attaque prnmeditee avait ete organisee par les atltoriles
israelienllcs. .Te ne veux pas m'etendrc sm ]'agression
coutre I'Egyptc survenue en octobre 1956, car lrs
membres du Conseil en connaissent tous les dctnils
Je voudrais seulclllent rappelel' l'agression armL~
pl'cmeditee commise contre la Syric le 11 deccmhrc
1955 dans la region du lflc de TiberinJe, et qui a ct6
consideree par le Conseil comme une violation flagrante
des termes de la Convention d'annistice general syrotsraelienlle, (C'esl ceUe meme convention que, pretend
Israel, nOlls vcnons de violcr, avec un incident auqllcl,
en deformant les fails, ;yr. Eban essaie dc donner UIl!}
grnnde importance, snns meme altcndrc la decision
de la Commission mix:te d'a1'lllistice.) Cetie agression
du lac de Tibcriade, ainsi gU'OH le sait, a fait plus de
50 morts du c6te syrien. Aussi le Conseil de securite
a+il du, dans la resolution gn'il a adoptee le 19 jallvicr
1956 [S/3538], dire ce qui suit:
« Exprime la serieuse inquietude qu'il ressent devanl
les manqucments d'lsrueI a ses obligations;
«Invite le Gouvernement d'lsrael n y satisfairc
dans l'avenir, faute de <[uoi le Conseil envisagera leg
mesures ultericures, dans le cadre de la Charte,
propres a mailltenir Oil a retablir la paix. »

57. Finally, I should like to recall that the Arab
countries have never been denounced by the Security
Council for violations 01 the armistice agreements
and that Israel, although frequently denounced, continues to follow its aggressive atld expansionist policy,
which threatens peace and security in that part of the
world.

57. Je voudrais rappeler, en conClusion, que leg pays
arabes n'ont jamais eLe condamnes par le Conseil de
secllrite pour des violations aux conventions d'armistice,
et qu'lsrael, malgre de nombreuses condamnatiolls,
poursnit sa politiquc agrcssive et expansionniste, qui
porte atteinte a la paix et ;\ la securtte dans cettc
partie dn monde.

If peace and security are to prevail there, the
provisions of the armistice agreements must be implemented. We, for our part, shall continue to implement
them.

58. Si on veut que regnent la paix et la securite clans
cette region dll monde, II fnut que les dispositions des
conventions d'armistice soient mises en reuvre. Ponf
notre part, nous continuerons a le fa ire,

59. Mr. BEAN (Israel): I do not donbt that members
of the Security Council will wish to take under careful
study the complaint that has been put before them.
The observations of the representative of the United
Arab Republic do, however, require one brief word of
clarLfication and reply.

59. M, EBAN (Israel) [lrauuit de l'anglais] : Je sni~
sur que les membrcs du ConseU de secmite voudronl
etudicr soigneusement la plainte qui 'Vient de lellr
etre soumise. Les observations du representant de la
Republique arabe unie appellent ccpendant certnillS
commentaires et eclnircissemellts,

60. In the course of his long address the representative
of the United Arab Republic hl1s not denied or attempted

60. Dans sa longue declflratioll. le representant de)a
Repubhque ambe unie 11'a paR lIie .- (..1; n'a pa5 tent6

58.

14

(

r
I

r

(
(
r

I

\
i

r

fr
I

I.

I

r

i

(

I

I

I'

L

!

Lo deny the central fact, namely, that the forces of the
United Arab Republic on 3 December fired hundreds of
'shells across tllC frontier into seven villages in Israel.
He is not interested ill the havoc created by that bom~
bardment or in the pictorial depiction of this havoc.

de nier - le fait central, a savoir que les forces de la
RepubJique arabe unie ont tire, le 3 decembre, des
centnines d'obus .1 travel'S la frontiere sur sept villages
israeliens. I1 ne s'interessc pas nux deslrtlcLions causees
par ce bombardement Ou aux photographies qui
illustrent eGS destructions.

'G1.

The view that he has expressed appears to be
that, in order to uphold the armistice provisions, and
,especially to ensUI'e the demilitarized cllameter of Dardara, it is necessary and justified to shower that village
.and other villages with hundreds of shells. Because
the Government of the United Arab Republic has some
juridical theory about this village, it feels entitled to
·open fire from many guns and to shower shells and
mortar bombs and ammunition from recoilless guns
upon these seven villages.

61. 11 semhle l'essortir de ~a declaration que, pour
mettre ell ceuvre les clauses de l'armistice, et en parti~
culier pour assurer la demilitarisation de Darclarll, it
esL necessaire et juste de lJeverser des ccntaines d'abus
sur Cl". village et d'auhes villages, Prtrce que le Gouvcrnement dc la Hepublique arabe ullic a echaf:mde une
certaine theorie j uridiquc uu sujet de cc: village, il
estime avoir le droit de declenchcr un barrage d'artillerie
et de deverser dcs obus, des bombes de lllortiers et des
projectiles de canons sans l'celll sur ces sept yillflges.

'62. The only other point that emerges with clarity
from his address is that the United Arab Republic con'siders that events which he deems to have occurred in
1955 and in 1956 justify his Government in bombard~
ing seven Israel villages on 3 December 1958. I
Jihould like to point out that the complete absence of
relevance or of truth or of any statement of peaceful
intention in that address mWjt deepen the anxiety
which attends this discussion.

62, Le seut autre point qui se degage elairement du
diseours du representant de la Republiqlle arabe unin
est le suivant : III Rcpubliqne urabe unie considere
que certains evenements Sllrvenus selon cUe en 1955
et en 1956 tienaent lieLl de justification a son gOllvernement P0lll' le bombardement de sept villages israeliens
le 3 decembre 1958, Je tiells a dire que I'absence nbsolue
de toute pCltincnce, de toute verite, de toute declaration d'intentions paeiftques dnns le discour.., que nous
venom d'entendre ne peut qu'uugmenter notre anxiete.

63. My only other c()mment at this stage is to soy that

63. A Ce stade du debat, je me contenterai d'ajouter
que nous avans pu ctlHlier le rapport I'cdige par le Chef
d'ctat~major dc l'Organisme des Nations Unies charge de
la surveillance de la tr~ve. Cc rapport corrobore ehacune
des pril1cipales observations que j'ai fOl'lnulces qllant
a In succession des faits.

we have had an opportunity of studying the report
presented by the Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization. It hears out every
single one of the salient features in the development of
tbi:l situation which I have submittco to the Sccurity
Council.
64. Paragraph 3 of this reporL confirms that the firsL
use of fire was 011 tile Syrian side:
"At approximately 12.10 hours (local timc),
Israeli shepllerds and a herd were SCCll at approxi~
mately fiOO to 600 mctres cast of the United Nations
obsen-alion posts /.. ,] in Israeli-controlled territory.
A, few minutes later, small-arms fire was opened
from the Syriall side, and one shepherd was wouncled.
The other shepherds started to pull back wcstwards,
but were pinned dowr: by Syrian fire when trying to
remove che wounded man [. . . 1 Throughout this
firsl stage, the opet'ations officer of the Israel-Syrian
Mixed Armistice Commission was in continuous contact with the Syrian delegate, endeavouring to stop
the shooting." [8/4124, para, 3.]

64. Le paragnlplie 3 de ce docnment confirmc que
c'csL dn cClLe syrien qtlC les premiers coups de feu ont
6t6 tires :
~ Vel's 12 h. 10 (hemc locale), dtS bouvicrs isracliens ayec Jeur trol1PC~ll ant 6t6 VllS a cnviron ;;00
on GOO mdll'.S it l'est ,Ill poste d'obscrvatioll des
Nntions Ullies [...], en territoire israelien. Quelques
minntes plus Lard, un tir {le mOllsqnctl'.l'ie a ete
declenche dn cMe syrien et l'un des houviers a ete
blcssc. Lcs antres ont commence a se rctirer vers
l'ouesL, mu is ont cite immobilises par le feu syrien
lorsqu'i!s c!isayaient de I'amasser le blesse [... ). Pcndant tOllte cette premiere phase, 1'0 flicier charge des
operations de la Commission nJixte d'armistice
syro-israelienne est reste en contact permanent avec
le dc16gue syrien pour essayel' de faire cesser le feu. '!
18/4124, par. 3·1

65. I am forced to wonder whether the representative
of the United Arab Hepublic has received a copy of the
same United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
report as that which lies before my delegation.

65. Je sllis amene a me demander si le representant
de la Republique aralJe Ilnie a. re~l1 un exemplaire du
rapport de l'Organisme des Nations Unies charge de
la surveillance de la treve que j'ai eutre les mains.

66. Similarly, paragraph 5 or the report fUlly conftrms
the account that I gave of Israeli shepherds being
pinned down by Syrian ftre in that area, and it also
confirms the fact of the bombardment:
"The Syrians [, ..] answered with the same type
of fire and shelled the following villages: J-Iulata [, . ,]
Khoury Farm [, . .] Shamir [...] Dardara Farm [...]

fiG. De l11!mc, le paragl'aphe 5 du l'npport appuie
entierement cc que j'ai dit au sl1jet dc !'immobilisation
des bergers israeliens du fait du feu syrien dans cc
sectellr; il confirme egalement le fait du bombardement:
'( Les Syriens ant [.•. ] riposte et bombarde les
villnges suivants : Hulata [... 1, la ferme de Khoury
(...], Shrunir [...], la ferme de Dardara [... ], Lahavot

15

.1 which

Habashan [... ], et Noterah [... ], qui etait violemmcnt
bombarde. )) [Ibid., par. 5.]

67. Referring to the Syrian bombardment of Noterah,
the report states that the United Nations military
observers at the observation post in the vicinity of
Noterah .. were compelled to leave the post and take
cover (onc of them was slightly wounded)."

67. Au sujet du bombardement de Noterah, le rapport
declare que les observateurs militaires des Nations.
Unies qui se trouvaient au poste d'ohscrvation situc
dons le voisinage 1( ont ele obliges de quiiter le poste
et de se meUre a l'abri (I'un d'cux a ete legercment
bles~e) ".

68. The report also beal's out tlle point that, after the
establishment of the cease-fire, it was violated on the
Syrian side. The reference is to paragraph 7: "The
Israelis did not fire after 17,00 hours, On the Syrian
side small-arms fire again broke out [. . . 1." (Ibid.,

68.

69. In respect of the Israeli action, paragraph 5 confirms the account that I gave to the Security Council,
namely, that the only Israeli heavy fire was directed,
in
words of lhe Truce Supervision Organization
report, .. towards Syrian positions at Darbashlya and
Jalabina" -- after the initiation of this conflict by
Syrian forces as described in paragraph 3.

69. En ce qui concerne I'attitude israelienne, le paragraphc 5 confirme cc que j'ai dit au Conseil de sccurite.
a savoir que le seul feu concentre des Israeliens !I He
dirige, aux termes memes du rapport de l'Org,mismc
charge de la surveillance de la treve, «( sur les posjtjon~
sYl'iennes de DariJashiya et de Jalabina » - apr~ que
les Syriens eurcnt Mclenche I'incident de la mnnihe
rappelee all paragrnphc 3.

70. On the othe.r hand, in paragraph 13 of the report,
the United Nations observers fully bear out the result
of the investigation on the Israeli gide, while they say
that on the Syrian side there were no significant tracks
of men or cattle found. hl other words. they reject
the evidence on which the Syrian complaint Wll..-; founded.

70. D'autre part, au paragraphe 13 du rapport, lcs
observaLeurs des Nations Unies ronfirment absolumellt
les resultats de l'enquete menee par Israel, en dis[lIlt
que, dLl cot{~ syrien, its n'ont trouve aucune truce
discemable du passage d'hommes (lU d'animaux. En
d'autres termes, its rejettent cc qui fonnait la base de
la plainte syriellne.

II

71. Therefore, whatever our interest is in the history
which the representative of the United Arab Republic
has brought before tile Security Council, I would urgein all solemnity that what stands for illternationnl
discussion and judgement is the action on 3 December,
beginning with the attaek on Israeli civilians of Gonen,
and culminating in thig violent artillery bombardment,
a bombardment which falls jar outside the scope and the
range of any local skirmish, ana which bears the classic
impress of a characteristic act of war. 11lose are the
events which lie before the Security Council. They
are confirmed by the report of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization. They are in no sense undermined by the 11istorical irrelevancies to which wc IL'lve
just listened.

71. Par consequent, qllelque intcret que plLissc presenter l'!!istorique que vient de faire devant le Causeil
le rcpresentant de la Republique arahe nnie, j'affirme
solenncllement que cc qui est soumis a l'examen et au
jllgement de I'Organisatioll interuationale est I'incident
dn 3 decembre, qui a commence par J'attaque dirigec
contre des civils israeliens a Goncn et a atteint son
point culminani avec tin violent bombardement d'm'titlerie - bombardement qui a eu beaucoup plus d'amplcur
qu'uu engagement local et parte la marque classiqlle
d'un acte de guerre caractcrise. Tels sont les cvrnemellts
dont le Conseil de securite est saisi, et qu'atteste le
rapport de I'Organisme des Nations Unies charge de
la surveillance de la treve. Les digressions historiqucs
que nous venons d'enlclldre n'en diminuent. nullcment
la porMe.

!

72, And gravest of all, in the course of this debate so
far, is the absence of any hint of asurance from the
United Arab Republic tl1at irrespective of its view
on the past, it will abstain from such artillery bombardments in the future,

72. Enl1n, et ceci est plus grave encore, dans tontc
la discussioll qui vient de se derouler, nOIlS n'aVOM
rien entendn qui indique ou assure que la Republiqut:
ambe unie, quelIes que soient ses idees sur le passe.
s'abstiendra n l'avenir de tous bombardements de ce
genre.

73. Mr. LOUTFI (United Arab Republic) (translated
tram French): I have no intention today of discussing
with 1'11'. Eban the report which has just been circulated
and which requires some study. However, Mr. Eban
has alleged that I said something which I did not say.
I never said that Syrian artillery had bombarded localities in Israel. I said that Syrian artillery llad replied
to Israel artillery fire. That is an entirely aifTerent
thing. The responsibility for an action certainly rests
with the party which began it.

73. M. LOUTFI (Republique arabe unie) : Je n'oi
pas dn tont l'intention de discuter, aujourd'hui, ave~
tlL Eban du rapport qui \-1ent d'etre distribue et qui
demnnde une certaine etude. Mai:; M. Eban me fait
dire \lne chose que je n'ni pflS dite. Jc n'ai jamais dit
que I'artillerie syrienne avait bombarde des localites
israeliennes. J'ai dit que l'artillerie syrienne avait
repondll au tir de I'artillerie israelienlle. 11 y a unc
grosse difTerence. Les respollsabilites incombent certainemcllt a qui commence.

Lahavot Habashan [. . .] and Noierah [.
came tinder heavy fire." [Ibid., para. 5.]

para. 7.J

the

16

Le rapport conflrme egale1l1ent que lorsqu'un
cessez-lc-fcu eut ctc decide, i1 a ete viol~ du cote syriclI.
Je citerai a cc sujet le pamgraphe 7 :
«Les IsraeIicns n'ollt pas tin~ apres 17 heurlJll.
Du cOte syricn, un tir de mousqueterie a de nouveau
eclale [... ]. I1 [ibid., par. 7.]

~

I

I.

I
I
,

!

,>
A

(

I
I~

I

I

I

74. The PRESIDENT: The Council has heard the
representative of Israel and the representative of the
United Arab Republic. As I have no more speakers
on my list, I intend to adjourn the meeting.

74. Le PRESIDENT (tro.duil de l'anylais): Le Conseil
a entendu le representant d'Israel et le representant
de la Republique arabe unic. La li,o;te des orateurs
etant epuisee, je me propose de lever ia seance.

75. The time and. date for the next meeting will be
announced hy the Presid.ent of the Security Council.,
after consultation with those concerned.

75. La dah-, et l'heure de la prochaine seance seront
annoncees par le President du Conseil de securite,
apres consultation des interesses.

The meeting rose al 4.2b p.m.

La seance cst [cuee a 18 h. 26.

17

,•
SALES AGENTS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PURLlCATlONS· DES NATIONS UNIES
AIGtNTIN ...·AAGltllIN~
.dlloll.1 Sud.",,,I,•• o. , ...." "'1,I,a 500,

a,.••• AI",..

AU'iT~AlIA-AUIIRAU.

",.Ib.u". Unl""ity P,•• ~ 36VI711oo."
d.l. 51,.." M,lbau,•• C.l.
AtlSUI...•... UTRICHE
GOl.ld & Co,. G,ob•• 31. ViI,n. 1B. W~II ...t.,!I.Mo,t", Sltllk...I, .... In.
Sot,bole.
l!lGIUM-BHGJClU!
Ag••,• •1 ""'".g"I•• d. la P"....
5.A., 14>22. ". do ,.1011, a•• ~.II ...
BOllVIA·BOLlYIE
llb,.')o S.Io,,Io,.., C.,lll. ~'2, ta Po..
BR"'ZIl-BRe5ll
1I.,a,lo "'~I" R,. 11...
11&-8. C.1<a
, ••,.1 J2~1. AI. d. Jo"I"',
IURMA·B1RMANI&
Co,ala', GoYt. I •• k I).pal.
C... MAOOIA--<:AMBt)OGE
1.Ir.prl,. khmo,. d. II~",I,I., Ph..",·
Po.b.
CANAD",
Tn. QO"'"', Pdnt." Oil."., Onlo';o.
CEnON.cEYLAN
,,,~.
~ ~,h.p.....
• f Coyl,., P.O. I •• 244. C.l.mbo.
CHlli·CHItI
Edll.,I.1 d,l, ""<If I,., Ahom.d. ffl,
S•• tlog •.
lIb,.,lo I... ,. CoJII. 2nJ, SanlT.go.
CHINl-l:HlNi
Tno Wo,ld lool: Co .. ltd.. ~ ehuog
King R••d. 101 5.<1'." T.lp.h, Tol..o••
Th. "01",.,01.1 P,.". Lld. 211 H•• an
lid .. Sn.,ghaT.

1,.

"'''11'''''''

"'<. N,,..,.po"

110... ..

CO~OMBlA·COlOMB!'

L1b... I. a.,h~.I., llagol&.
11\,,,,,1. ",,,,.1'1'•• M.d.llln.
\lb,.rlo No,10,.I, Ltdo" lla"."q.Wa.
eOSPA RICA
Imp,..lo ~ Ub,o<lo T,.r.', ...... ,lod.
1313, Soo Ja".

C'-a.-.

l. C.,. 1.lg•• O·R.llly ~55, lo H.b....
CZiCH05LClVAKIA_TCHECOSlOVAQUIE
e:."ollavoo,~; 5pl...ol.l. Na,.d,1 #lda
9, P,.h. 1.

OINMAU·DANfl<\",RK
El••• Mu'''U••,d. Lld .. N~,IoG.d. 6.
Kfb.,h.\'II, K.
I>OMINICAN RliPUIUCREPUIlIOUE DOMINlo:AlIU
lib,.,). 0.011.1,",•• M"'.~" ~~, Cl.·
dad T,.lm.,
ECUADO~_~UATtUR

Go"".

Llb,.". CI."lln,o, C;.'y.q"'1 ..
n SAtVAIlOR·I ... W ...llOR
Ma,u.1 Na,a, 1 Cl••• 1..... ....,Ido '"'
37. Son S.I..
ETHIDPI..._ETHlO,IE
1".,oall","ol P.... .l;'.<Y'
120, Addl' Ab••••
fINUlNJ).fII'lUNDE
Ako,....I••• Kh\.~o"ppa, 2 K.,k••kolu,
lI.hl.kl.
fRANCE

d."

r.o. Ba.

QH"'HA
U.I.",lly Snot",P. U,I.."lty C.II,~,
0' Gh",o, P.O. DC>.< L.go,.
OUEC!-GAECE
K.ulfmo", A••b'.p. 2S S.. dlo, ~""'.
"'th".'.
GU",nM"'U
!o:l.dad "'onoml<o-Fina.,l.,•• 60 A,.
1~.~3, Gu.'.",ol. CIIy.
HAITI
LI.,.id. " I.
J.~. po".I.
111·S. P.If ·Pd,,,.
HOriWR"'S
lIb,,,I.
T.G.".ol~.
IIONG KotIG·1I0NG·KOIlG
Th. S~T"d •• loo. Co" ~~ Na'~ •• R,,,d.
K....loo•.
IClLANO.ISLANOI
Sat""."l,. 11.1"., f,",".d"a,or N.
f., A.'lu"" •• ~ ID. ~""I ..I1,.
INO'...·INOE
0,1••1 long""''', 1;.1,""., Do."boy, Mo·
d.." N.w O.IM .. H.d.,.ba',
Oxfo,d 5. . . . . 1,.110••,. C•.• N.w
D.I),1 11, C.I,a~o.
,. Y.,.d.,h.,y 11, Co.• M.d,.,.
IIlDOHElI....INDDNElIE
P."'.o"G.n"". lid., 00,0," S.h.,1 a~,

C.,."II....

h,.",,",""",

Dlok.~o.

I_AN
"C;.IIy", 411 ,.,,j.w,1 ......"., T."',,",.
IIlAO.IRAlC
M.,k•• d.', Aoo\,~.p, .~gbd.d.
IRHAND-IRlAND!
St"II••• '1' 0'11.., D••II•.
15RAfl
Slum",I.'. Soo....,.,. 35 .... 1I.,by Rd.
and ~B N..hl., ,",1.",1. l'•• T.I .... iv.
rrAIY.ITA1IE
lI'o..,I. C.....I..I.,.<1. So._I, VJa
GI•• C.P!"'.I 20. fllO.,", &, Y1~ O. A.
A,"nl 1".... R.....
1...' ...N,J...PON
Mo,"", C."'p.'y. llel., 6 T.<I.NI<l•• ~,.
Nlho.b.,h!, T.'y•.
JORDAN.)ORllANIE
J'.. ph I. I ....", &. C•.• 00,...1-1(.,,1:>.
So, a<l, "'Mm,,".
KOR!"'-CORli
f.l-Y"" Publl.~\.~ C•.• Lld.• 5, 2.k....
Ch.,""". 5...1.
tn"'NON-LIIAH
k),a ••I'. C~II.~. ""'.. Co.~".,r..
92·9~.

ru. 511.., ~.I,,'.

'.IBERIA
J. Momalu Kamo'o,
lU)L:EH.BOUAG
Ub,al,l. J. 5,h".. ~.,. l".",ba.'G'
M1XICO.MEJ:lllUe
Idll"I.1 H.,.. ,~ U, IGnocl. Mo,I".1
~1, Mhl",. D.F.
MOROC:CO. ""-'UOe
5u,.... d"'od" .1 d. pallldpotl."
Ind""d.II.,. g, '0' Mlcllaox·B.llalro.
Rabal.
HErH ER I'" NDl-P",VI,IAS
N.V. Monl." Ntlh.lf. lo.go V••,h.ul

Mo"."•.

PAKIITAH

10' i>okl",. (o-op.'oll... B,,"~ 50<10-1>',

Do,,,,. E.., ,,,'d.lon,
P,.II,n." U.hod, Ltd. t.hor.,
Tho,.". to Ho",.., Ka'ooM, 3.

PANAMA
M.n~nd .., ApD~... <I. 2Q!1, Av. 'A.

J."
,., 2MB, 'ono.,6.

PARAGUAY
Ag".d. d. tib,od., d. SoI <I •• Ni....,
con. Pt., fT."", No. JV.43 ".<16•.
PERU-I'EROU

['b,.rlo l.torooelon.1 .,1

P.,~.

5."'.,

11",••

PHILIPPINES
Alom"', Book 510'0, 769 1'001 A••n.o,

M.nll•.

PORTUO.u

lI"f.,I.

R.d,r~• .,.

lS6 RD, Av"'<I, Ur-

boa.
5INGAPORI·IIH.OA,OUI

lh. Clly Bo.' St.,., lid.,

,.lIy., Q • ...,..

SPAIN.ESPA~l

tlbrorlo Bo .. h, 11 Ro.d. Unl.... ,old.d,

Bo".I,,"".

lIb..rI. Mu.dl.r'...... C••,.1I.37, Mo_

A, "d.ft., l~, , ••. SoVffJoI,

'./

drld•

SW'DEN·SUEDE
C. ~' f,a,,', Ku"g!. Ho.b.kh••d.1 A.B,
,..d.o.'"" 7, S"',khol",.
SWlTlIRLAND-5UrSlE

lIb"hl. 'oy.t, S."'., la.",,"", o..,,~•.
Ho" R.unho,dt, KI"hgo". 17, ZDrI,b 1.
T~"'I\"'Kn.'H"'llANDE
P,o""on MI'. L,d •• ~5 "0"0_, ~.od.
T,I. ~"'G"ok.

W.,

TLlRKfY.TUIOllIE
Ilb,olrl. Hod,,'.. , .M? "lIkl.1 Caddod.
hyogl•• '''a.bal.
UNION OF SOUTH ARUC....
UNiON SUO.AfRICAINt
V.o s<n.lk·. ~.otd.,. IPIy.), lid .. e..
1l~. P'.'o>la.
UNiON 0' SOVIET SOCI... Uff
~IPUBIIC$oUN!ON DES RFPUIl.1QUES
10a... L1STES SOVIETIOUEl
Mo"d•• o,.dnayo Knyl.a. S"",I••• ~oy.
PI.,h,h.d.
UNtllD ARAB REPUBLIC.
~EfUBI\QUE "'RABE UNII
lIb'olrl. ··L. R.,a!l"'o," d'Egyp'o", 9
Sh. A,Hy Po,~o. CoT.a.
UNITED K1NGOOM-ROYAU.... E.UNI
H. M. 510110 ••" off"., P.O. Do. ~69.
Lood." S.~I.
UNITED STATU OF ... MUlo:A·
ET... rs·UNIS D·... MIAIQ.UE
1.1.,•• 01.,.1 D."", ••" S."'l«, e.laM·
bl. U"I.o"Uy P, .... '9~n a... d"oy,
Now Y.,k 27, N, ,.
URUGU... '
A.p''''.'.<l60 d. Edlto,I.lo.. P",F. 11.
O·II!•• Plo •• c.Goo,h. 13~2. I" gl"',
ld •••

M.,....

M,.,..

VI"nUELa.
lIb"rI, d,1 I"., A•. MI,•• d•• No. 52.
Idl. Gollp6n. C.,.,o,.
P.,I. (V.).
VIET.N",,,,
OIRMANY.....lltMAGNE
lIb,."I•.pn.,,,,I. J(.~" Tha, 18!. ,••
~. EI>,n"hmld~, S<~wCCIII"'I.. SI,.".
~, ·~G,·,,"~.g·,
T•.ll•• S.'. 21l, Sai••".
'9, F,•• kFu,t/MaI••
YUDOI'AVIA·YOUGOSLAVII
1I-"." &, M.u,." H~,p!o".'" lQl, NIW n""ANO·HoUV&!E.ZlLANDE
U.It"
N"l1.",
Alla,I"llon.r
N,w
Z,.·
Cont.,I••• Z.I.tbo, LI,bl~.a, SI•••ola,
I.,llo.!.U".bo,g.
p(O.".t.. J.g.,I.......ko
.o.1....d., !l.,n. Sptog.I..... g, 11'1... I.,d. C.P,O. 1011, W,II1,.'.".
NoRWAY·NORVEG'
K.jlg•• To,•• ll' 27/11, eootl",d.
~.o ••.
P..
,.I.'.,
5,
T,g B'ol...... I J.dl,,"'a.
Jah.. G".dl Too.m f.d'g, ~" ....
W. E. S••,ba.h, G.If'ud.......... ~D.
IoG",b.
1I.,I'lI'. 7A, 0.10,
~ar. 1\1.
100Rll
t .. ",mm.,d., .1 ~oMand.. J. , ....I.,."'••" Om.'." J.
0,<1." 0'. I,,~"J,I., 'rom ••uM,I.. .. ho" ,.1" .go". ~"'"
pay• • ~ I1 ,'••
1'0' '".ra d. dop.l/l.h., 1' ......1 .1..
n.' yot b••., o~p.J.,"d ~.y l>o '"., ,., 50'" .0. C:".lolI••
od"..h. " 10 50,11•• dOl ,.,10, .. J. I. dl",lbul".,
O'~o,;,."•• d" N."o., U,;.., N...·Yo,k (flab.U"I, ,,,",MO'
S.clfo., 1I011.d N"Io." N.w Vo,l, tI.S.A" " Sol., 5",1•••
,iqu.j,"a " I. hdl•• d.. """, O...-••I,,'/.n d., N".IIa~'
Lt.II.<I 101.11••, om". ,.101, <I., Noli.", G,.",o, Swll..,I••d.
U,I." Pal.r. d.. N.'i.". Cl..." IS.I...).
~dltlon'

I

'.

I

0,;.,...

1.,.

•

"

(

I.

t

PrInted in France

Price: $U.S. 0.35; 2/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or equivalent in other currencies)

17873-March 1960---1,675
