General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

74

Having considered the report of the Executive Board
of the United Nations Children's Fund on its session
held at United Nations Headquarters from 17 to 28
May 1976,81
Deeply concerned about the magnitude of the unmet
needs of children in developing countries,
Encouraged by the practica! and effective opportunities offered for improving the situation of children
through the expansion of basic services as part of development strategy,
l. Endorses a target for the United Nations Children's Fund of $200 million in annual revenue from
all sources;
2. Appeals, with a sense of urgency, to all Governments, especially those of the industrialized countries, and other potential contributors to increase their
contributions to the United Nations Children's Fund
so that it may rapidly augment its assistance to basic
services for children.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/169.

lnternational Year of the Child

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on measures and modalities to ensure the adequate
preparation, support and financing of an international
year of the child, 82 Economic and Social Council decision 178 (LXI) of 5 August 1976 on an international year of the child and the additional report of the
Secretary-General83 prepared in the light of the discussions in the Economic and Social Council,
Recognizing the fundamental importance in all countries, developing and industrialized, of programmes
benefiting children not only for the well-being of the
children but also as part of broader efforts to accelerate
economic and social progress,
Recalling in this connexion its resolutions 2626
(XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Deeply concerned that, in spite of all efforts, far too
many children, especially in developing countries, are
undernourished, are without access to adequate health
services, are missing the basic educational preparation
far their future and are deprived of the elementary
amenities of life,
Convinced that an international year of the child
could serve to encourage ali countries to review their
programmes far the promotion of the well-being of
children and to mobilize support far national and local
action programmes according to each country's conditions, needs and priorities,
A ffirming that the concept of basic services far children is a vital component of social and economic de81 [bid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No.
s2 E/5844.
83 A/31/323.

7 (E/5847).

velopment and that it should be supported and implemented by the co-operative efforts of the intemational and national communities,
Bearing in mind that the year 1979 will be the
twentieth anniversary of the Declaration of the Rights
of the Child84 and could serve as an occasion to promote further its implementation,
A ware that, for an international year of the child to
be effective, adequate preparation and the widespread
support of Governments, non-govemmental organization and the public will be required,
Believing that administrative costs far the international year should be kept to the minimum necessary,
T aking note of the statement made by the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund before
the Second Committee, 85
I. Proclaims the year 1979 International Y ear of
the Child;
2. Decides that the International Year of the Child
should have the following general objectives:
(a) To provide a framework far advocacy on behalf of children and for enhancing the awareness of
the special needs of children on the part of decisionmakers and the public;
( b) To promote recognition of the fact that programmes far children should be an integral part of economic and social development plans with a view to
achieving, in both the long term and the short term,
sustained activities far the benefit of children at the
national and international levels;
3. Urges Governments to expand their efforts at
thc national and community. levels to provide lasting
improvements in the well-being of their children, with
special attention to those in the most vulnerable and
particularly disadvantaged groups;
4. Ca/Is upan the appropriate organs and organizations of the United Nations system to contribute to the
preparation and implementation of the objectives of
the International Year of the Child;
5. Designates the United Nations Children's Fund
as the lead agency of the United N ations system responsible far co-ordinating the activities of the International Year of the Child, and the Executive Director
of the Fund to be responsible for its co-ordination;
6. Invites non-govemmental organizations and the
public to participate actively in the International Year
of the Child and to co-ordinate their programmes for
the Year as fully as possible, especially at the national
leve!;
7. Appeals to Governments to make contributions
or pledges for the International Year of the Child
through the United Nations Children's Fund to ensure
the adequate financing of activities far the preparation
and carrying out of the Year;
8. Expresses the hope that Governments, nongovernmental organizations and the public will respond
generously with contributions to attain the objectives
of the International Year of the Child and, through the
United Nations Children's Fund and other channels of
externa! aid, to increase substantially the resources
available far services benefiting children;
M Resolution 1386 (XIV).
85 Otficial Records of the

General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session. Second Committee. 60th meeting, paras. 28-32.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

9. Requests the Executive Director of the United
N ations Children's Fund to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session, through the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-third session, on
progress in preparing for the International Y ear of the
Child, includíng its financing and the level of contributions pledged.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976

31/170.

United Nations Fund for Population
Activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2211 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 in response to which a trust fund, subsequently named the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, was established in 1967 by the SecretaryGeneral,
Recalling further its resolution 3019 (XXVII) of 18
December 1972 in which it, inter alia, decided to place
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities
under the authority of the General Assembly and
established the respective roles relating to the Fund of
the Economic and Social Council and the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme,
Noting with satisfaction that the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities has become a most effective and viable entity in the United Nations system
in the population field, owing in particular to its increased resources and its assistance to the developing
countries,
l. Welcomes the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities
entitled "Priorities in the future allocation of the resources of the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities" ;86
2. Takes note of the views expressed on this matter at the twenty-second session of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme87 and at the sixty-first session of the Economic
and Social Council;
3. Endorses the following general principles to be
applied in making future allocations of resources:
(a) To promete population activities proposed in
international strategies, particularly the World Population Plan of Action; 88
( b) To meet the needs of developing countries
which have the most urgent need for assistance in the
area of population activities in view of their population problems;
(e) To respect the sovereign right of each nation
to formulate, promote and implement its own population policies;
(d) To promete the self-reliance of recipient countries;

75

(e) To give special attention to meeting the needs
of disadvantaged population groups;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities to apply the
criteria for establishing priorities and the other recommendations set forth in bis report, taking into account
the decisions made by the Goveming Council in this
regard, in clase co-operation with the specialized
agencies and the regional commissions concemed, as
appropriate;
5. Invites Governments to continue and to increase
their contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Population Activities in view of the rapidly increasing
needs of developing countries for population assistance;
6. Recommends that the Executive Director of the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities, for
purposes of continuity of the programme, should normally be appointed for a four-year term;
7. Urges continuing full collaboration and cooperation on operational matters between the Executive
Director of the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities and the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, as well as between the Executive Director and the executive heads of other organs
within the United N ations system in the field of
population.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976

31/ 171.

Operational activities for development

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Goveming
Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its twenty-first89 and twenty-second9 º sessions, as well as the statement of the Administrator of
the Programme91 and the views expressed during the
debate on operational activities at the thirty-first session of the General Assembly,
Reiterating the principie reflected in the consensos
on the functions and operations of the United Nations
development system as embodied in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Endorsing Economic and Social Council resolution 2024 (LXI) of 4 August 1976,
Stressing the continued need for a co-ordinated and
integrated approach to technical co-operation activities
carricd out by the United Nations system according to
the priorities of the recipient Governments, as well as
General Assembly resolution 3405 (XXX) of 28 November 1975 on new dimensions in technical cooperation,
Stressing f urther that the implementation of multilateral technical co-operation is a common endeavour
of the organizations and programmes of the United
N ations system,
1. Notes with appreciation that, pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 2024 (LXI), the

86 DP/186 and Corr.l.
8 7 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5846/Rev.1 ), chap.
XVI.
88 Report of the World Population Conference, 1974 (Unitcd
Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.XJIL3), chap. l.

89 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 2 (E/5779).
90 Ihid., Supplement No. 2A (E/5846/Rev.1 ).
n Oflicial Records of the General Asscmbly, Thirty-first
Session, Second Committee, 30th meeting, paras. 2-13.
