S/PV.8552

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8552nd meeting

Tuesday, 18 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-18174 (E)
*1918174*

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations; Lieutenant
General Leonard Muriuki Ngondi, Force Commander
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur; and Major General Cheryl Pearce, Force
Commander of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: It is my pleasure to open this
Security Council meeting on the occasion of the Head
of Military Components Conference here in New York.
I will be brief, as the purpose of today’s meeting is
for the Council to hear from the Force Commanders
about their experiences in implementing the mandates
negotiated and adopted by the Council.
This gathering of the Force Commanders of our
peacekeeping operations has become a yearly occasion,
and it is a very important moment for peacekeeping.
It directly contributes to our efforts to implement
the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. They will hold sessions on many topics of
critical importance to advance the initiative, from
performance to the protection of civilians, from
conduct and discipline to women in peacekeeping,
to name just a few. This week also provides them
with an opportunity to remain closely attuned to the
major discussions happening here in New York on
peacekeeping — in the Security Council, the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Fifth
Committee and other forums — and, ultimately, to our
common efforts to enhance the impact of peacekeeping
in the field.
I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Major General Francis Vib Sanziri, Head of
Mission and Force Commander of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), who passed
2/26

18/06/2019

away suddenly on 19 April. Through his distinguished
leadership, Major General Vib Sanziri led UNDOF in a
complex and challenging period. His passing away was
a tragic loss for his colleagues and fellow peacekeepers
in UNDOF, and for the whole United Nations family.
I want to thank the Council and all the Member States
that have expressed their solidarity and support in these
difficult times.
And through the Heads of military components, I
want to recognize the work accomplished every day in
very challenging situations by all the women and men
serving under the United Nations flag, for the cause
of peace.
The topic that the Security Council has chosen for
today’s discussions, cooperation with host States, is key
for the effectiveness of peace operations. I trust that
this meeting will be most informative and beneficial for
all of us. The Council will shortly hear from the Force
Commander of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, Lieutenant General
Leonard Ngondi; and the Force Commander of the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, Major
General Cheryl Pearce, whose experience, I am certain,
will be most useful to the Council in its work.
The President (spoke
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Ngondi.
Lieutenant General Ngondi: It is humbling to
make this presentation on cooperation with host States.
The Republic of the Sudan has been going through
a difficult political time since mid-December of last
year. We have seen a revolution that has led to the
dissolution of the Government and its militarization, as
well as the subsequent deposition of the President and
his replacement with the Transitional Military Council
in Apri1. Negotiations for a transitional arrangement to
transfer power to a civilian-led Government collapsed
following the events of 3 June. The Transitional
Military Council announced elections to be held in
nine months’ time. The African Union suspended the
Sudan from participating in the organization’s affairs
on 6 June. Efforts to bring negotiations back on track
are ongoing. The situation has impacted the operations
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID).
The importance of cooperation between
peacekeeping missions and host States for the successful
19-18174

18/06/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

implementation of mandates cannot be over emphasized.
For better communication and coordination, the
Government of the Sudan has in place a UNAMID
unit within the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, while
UNAMID maintains its Khartoum Liaison Office,
from which the Head of Mission operates.
This presentation will cover the cooperation and
relations between UNAMID and the Republic of the
Sudan with regard to mandate implementation, as
provided for in resolution 2429 (2018) and the status of
forces agreement, respectively.
UNAMID’s mandate includes four main pillars.
The first entails the closure and handover of team sites
for civilian use, the drawdown of the peacekeepers
and the eventual exit by June 2020. The previous and
current Governments of the Sudan assured UNAMID
of their cooperation and facilitation of the mission’s
operations and smooth exit. As part of the transition
process, UNAMID — jointly with United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes — is implementing
state liaison functions in four states of Darfur, covering
four priorities areas of the rule of law, durable solutions
for displaced populations and host communities,
human rights, capacity-building and immediate service
delivery to displaced people. These interventions are
aimed at addressing challenges facing the four Darfur
states, where UNAMID and the United Nations country
team have the comparative advantages to work together
based on analysis. These include land, enhanced
dispute-resolution mechanisms and awareness of tenure
rights, intercommunal conflict over water and other
scarce resources, and the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees.
The drawdown, closure of team sites and handover
to the Government have been proceeding in a timely
manner. However, not all team sites are being used
for civilian purposes, and authorities cite institutional
incapacities and the need for protecting the facilities.
Recently, the Transitional Military Council issued a
decree to the effect that in future team sites must be
handed over to the Rapid Support Forces, which are
part of the military wing. This led to the suspension of
the further closure and handover of sites until further
clarity is obtained.
The second pillar is the protection of civilians
and humanitarian personnel and the facilitation of the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. The Government
of the Sudan has largely cooperated with the Mission

S/PV. 8552

in the implementation of this pillar, especially in areas
under its control. However, there has been access denial
in the limited area controlled by the armed movements,
in particular the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid,
except on one occasion in September 2018, when a joint
humanitarian mission was successful in visiting and
assisting victims of a landslide incident in eastern Jebel
Marra. The Government cited its inability to guarantee
security to the peacekeepers as the reason for the denial.
The third pillar is about mediation between the
Government of the Sudan and the non-signatory armed
movements. Under the previous regime, two of the
non-signatory movements and the Government signed a
pre-negotiation agreement, while one armed movement
remained uncommitted. It is important to note that
the Transitional Military Council called on all armed
movements to join the national negotiations. However,
the current political situation has caused the process
to stall.
The last pillar is support for mediation of
intercommunal conflict, including measures to address
the root causes. While there has been tremendous effort
in promoting peaceful coexistence, the land ownership
problem that is at the heart of the Darfur conflict has
yet to be sufficiently addressed. Indeed, it is among
the main reasons for laxity in the return of internally
displaced persons return, while others are insecurity
and lack of basic services.
I now turn to the status of forces agreement, which
guides the conduct of peacekeepers and relations
between the Mission and the host State. There are
three main areas of cooperation. First is the provision
of premises and facilities for UNAMID to stay in and
operate from. It is commendable that the Government
granted UNAMID large spaces where team sites
and super camps were established. However, in the
recent past local communities have been demanding
compensation for their land from UNAMID instead of
engaging their Government.
Secondly, the status of forces agreement provides
for freedom of movement in the territory in execution of
the mandate. As mentioned earlier, the Government has
generally allowed free movement, including inter-state
flights, in areas under its control but denies UNAMID
access to areas under control of the armed movements,
citing security reasons.
Lastly, the Government is obliged to protect
UNAMID assets and facilities when requested by the

19-181743/26

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Head of Mission. Recently, fulfilling this obligation
proved challenging when the El Geneina super camp
in West Darfur was looted and vandalized during the
handover. Following that unfortunate incident, the
Mission and the Government are working together to
ensure that such an incident will never recur.
In conclusion, we are of the view that cooperation
between UNAMID and the Republic of the Sudan has
been cordial. The few setbacks that I have highlighted
can be rectified, as long as there is trust and political will.
The Sudanese authorities have assured their cooperation
with and support for UNAMID operations, including
the facilitation of a smooth exit, in accordance with
resolution 2429 (2018). It is reiterated that cooperation
with host States and other partners is crucial for
mandates to be implemented successfully. Trust and
political will are key ingredients of cooperation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Lieutenant
General Ngondi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Pearce.
Major General Pearce: It is with great pleasure
that I take this opportunity to address the Council on
the topic of cooperation with host States — one in
which I can offer a unique view of the long-standing
mission of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP).
Since its inception, UNFICYP has been mandated
by the Council to use its best efforts to prevent a
recurrence of fighting and, as necessary, to contribute
to the maintenance and restoration of law and order and
return to normal conditions. For decades, the mission
has successfully carried out this mandate, with the
military component playing a crucial role in this regard,
namely, by maintaining a stable military environment
in and around the 180-kilometre buffer zone.
Our efforts to prevent and defuse tensions before
they escalate, as well as to liaise between the sides in
the absence of any direct contact, remain essential,
particularly given the uncertainty of the current period
and the prevailing political climate on the island. It
is through these efforts that UNFICYP contributes
to creating the conditions conducive to a successful
settlement process.
Turning to the topic at hand, cooperation with host
States, as Head of the military component of UNFICYP,
my cooperation in this context lies primarily with the
opposing forces, which overall, is constructive. Since
4/26

18/06/2019

arriving in January, I have met with my counterparts
numerous times, in a spirit of professionalization,
collegiality and mutual respect. My engagement plan
puts a premium on a nuanced and regular interaction
that is underpinned by the principles of impartiality,
openness and transparency. Keeping the channels of
communication open, even in times of tension, is my
utmost priority.
Beyond my own personal engagement, the Force
maintains day-to-day contact with its counterparts
from the opposing forces on all levels to prevent the
escalation of tensions. Since the November 2017 strategic
review of UNFICYP, the mission has implemented a
more robust engagement and liaison effort, in close
coordination with our police and civilian components.
The guiding principles I mentioned a moment ago are
the basis of this interaction and applied at all levels, be
it at the level of general or that of private soldier.
Despite the generally positive relationships the
military component of UNFICYP has cultivated over
the years with the opposing forces, our cooperation is
not without its challenges. There is a trend of increased
violations of the military status quo along the ceasefire
lines and an apparent hardening of positions by the
opposing forces more broadly, potentially mirroring
the political situation on the island.
I should like to elaborate on specific areas
of concern.
First, UNFICYP’s authority in the buffer zone is
challenged regularly. In its latest resolution relating
to UNFICYP (resolution 2453 (2019)), the Security
Council, in evoking UNFICYP’s mandated authority
in the buffer zone, expresses serious concern at the
increased number of violations of the military status
quo along the ceasefire lines and calls on the sides and
all involved parties to respect UNFICYP’s mandated
authority in the buffer zone. Nevertheless, I regret to
note that there has been no improvement on the ground
thus far.
Similarly, despite years of urging by the Security
Council, neither side has yet accepted the 2018
aide-memoire or its predecessor of 1989, which is a key
guiding document with respect to UNFICYP’s rules
of the road in the buffer zone. Thus, with respect to
cooperation with the two sides in the area under my
remit, which is that of the military, there is significant
scope for improvement. In that regard, we would once
again ask for the Council’s support — also in the spirit
19-18174

18/06/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of the Action for Peacekeeping — in urging the sides
to heed what has been a years’ long call to work with
UNFICYP on the implementation of the aide-memoire,
as well as to respect our mandated authority in the
buffer zone overall.
With respect to the topic at hand, and in the Cyprus
context specifically, as Council members are aware,
UNFICYP has a status of forces agreement with the
Republic of Cyprus. At the same time, cooperation,
including on military and other operational matters,
is key also with the Turkish Cypriot community. We
continue to work closely with all the relevant actors to
ensure optimal cooperation.
In conclusion, the impartial execution of
UNFICYPs mandate is what allows me and the military
component to effectively maintain the military status
quo, prevent military-to-military tensions and ensure
calm and stability in and around the buffer zone.
Impartiality is a fundamental principle of United
Nations peacekeeping that, importantly, was reaffirmed
once again recently through the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping agenda.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Major
General Pearce for her briefing.
I remind all colleagues that the concept for this
briefing aims to keep it as interactive as possible — the
main added value being the question-and-answer segment
with the Force Commanders. Therefore, so as to take
advantage of this opportunity and hear more from
our guests, I encourage Council members to keep
their statements brief and focus on the question-andanswer segment.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I promise that I will be as
brief as possible.
First of all, let me offer our condolences on the
passing away of Major General Francis Vib Sanziri
and take this opportunity to pay tribute to all the brave
Blue Helmets — both the men and women — who,
unfortunately, sometimes pay the highest price for their
service to peace and to us.
I also thank all the briefers. This interactive debate
is a very useful exercise. This year’s Heads of Military
Components Conference is exceptionally timely.
We have been discussing peacekeeping over the past

S/PV. 8552

years. Only last March, we held the United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial, which highlighted some of
the key challenges and dilemmas that peacekeeping
operations are facing right now.
One of those challenges involves improving training
and capacity-building. We must acknowledge that
insufficient training of peacekeepers directly affects
the mandate implementation. We must work hard in
order to provide every tool to enable peacekeepers at all
levels of the chain of command to improve the effective
performance and security of mission personnel.
Needless to say, the security of peacekeepers is of
paramount importance for all stakeholders involved in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Nevertheless,
one must not forget that it is also one of the decisive
factors of a mission’s effectiveness in the course of the
mandate implementation.
Indeed, mandates are one of the topics for today’s
considerations. The importance of the re-evaluation
of missions’ composition and mandates, which both
need to be based on the situation and the capability
to implement them on the ground, has already been
discussed in the Council. The flexibility of the tools
used by the Force Commanders according to the current
security circumstances in order to act proactively is of
crucial importance.
I would like to ask the Force Commanders several
questions with regard to their missions. I think that this
should also be an opportunity for them to convey their
message to us, the members of the Council.
My first question, which is addressed to both
Force Commanders, is the following. From their point
of view, do the current mandates allow the Force
Commanders to operate actively and, if the situation
requires, proactively in order to fulfil the mission’s
tasks? If not, what are the key obstacles hampering
smooth mandate implementation?
Secondly, as we are concerned about the situation
of people fleeing from conflict zones, I would like to
ask Major General Cheryl Pearce if she has experienced
challenges posed by refugees and undocumented
migrants in areas of the buffer zone?
I would also like to ask Lieutenant General Ngondi
the following questions. How does the current situation
in Khartoum influence the mission under his command,
and what is his view regarding the suspension of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in

19-181745/26

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Darfur of the handover of camps for displaced civilians
to the Sudanese military against the backdrop of
worsening violence and insecurity across the country?
In conclusion, I would like once again to express
our deep appreciation for the Force Commanders’
work, their presence here today and their sharing of
their experience.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your guidance to limit today’s
meeting to questions. I will do so. I have to say that
following our Polish colleague’s intervention, that he
has already taken some of my questions. Therefore,
I think that, as you will speak last, Sir, that you will
have a difficult time and will really have to think of
something new.
I also thank the Force Commanders here today.
May I, like my Polish colleague, pay tribute to the men
and women who serve in blue the Security Council and
the United Nations. I pay tribute to those who have lost
their lives in doing so. I also ask the Force Commanders
to please pass on the thanks of the Council to their
own troops for all that they are doing in sometimes
very difficult circumstances. It is very helpful and
important for the Council to hear ground truth from the
Force Commanders. I therefore hope that they will feel
enabled and emboldened to answer all questions fully
and without any need to be diplomatic.
With regard to my questions, I would like to
ask a general question to either one or both of the
Force Commanders, which is what impact they are
seeing on the ground from the support provided from
Headquarters as a result of the Secretary-General’s
reforms of the peace and security architecture. My
second general question involves the great deal of focus
placed on improving the performance of uniformed
components in missions. Do they have access to the data
that they need to be able to drive forward performance
improvement efforts based on evidence?
Echoing the question that my Polish colleague
asked, I would like to ask General Ngondi specifically
to elaborate on the cooperation between the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the Sudanese authorities since the removal of President
Al-Bashir. I also want to ask him the following question:
After the looting at the camp in El Geneina, what
lessons-learned exercises were carried out and what has
he taken away from that, recognizing, of course, as he
6/26

18/06/2019

says, that there has been a suspension of handing over
of team sites for now?
Finally, with regard to the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), General
Pearce mentioned the work that UNFICYP does in
liaising between the two sides. The most recent mandate
calls for the establishment of a mechanism for direct
contact between the two sides to resolve security and
other issues, as is fairly commonplace in other United
Nations mission settings. I wonder if she could tell
us anything about how those efforts to establish that
are progressing or, if they are not, what the blockages
might be.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the holding of this meeting and the
briefing by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, as well
as the extremely interesting briefings by the Force
Commanders of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP).
I too would like to begin by paying tribute to
the men and women who have given their lives to
the cause of peace, and to the thousands of troops,
police and civilians who every day represent a symbol
of hope, contribute to the protection of vulnerable
populations in various parts of the world and advance
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes
in the multiple and complex missions to which they
are deployed.
We believe that this dialogue is particularly
relevant. We will also be brief. The representative of
the United Kingdom touched on the same question
that I have, but I will do my best to approach it from a
different angle. One of UNFICYP’s key elements is its
work in establishing mechanisms and measures aimed
at building trust among the parties, which contributes
to the efforts to find a just and lasting solution. In that
context, we believe that it is essential to ensure positive
interaction between the mission and civilians, including
by developing preventive approaches and eventually
mediation, as well as instituting communication
strategies suited to both communities. In that regard,
we would like to ask Major General Pearce to share the
lessons learned in that context, and also if she believes
that the capacities of her staff should, or indeed must,
be included in the training offered to troop-contributing
countries, or if they can be learned on the ground, based
on the unique nature of each context.
19-18174

18/06/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

As a troop-contributing country, Peru strongly
supports the priority that the Secretary-General gives
to the safety and security of Blue Helmets. Among
other measures, we believe that this requires training on
specific challenges and performance evaluations that
should be designed to correct any shortcomings that
are detected rather than being punitive. In the case of
Darfur right now there is a critical situation with regard
to human rights violations, including numerous cases
of sexual violence, many of which have been attributed
to the Government’s own forces. In that regard, we
would like to ask Lieutenant General Ngondi how the
Security Council can help to establish better channels
of communication with the local authorities in order to
address such serious problems.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, as well as the Force Commanders of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
and the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) for their briefings on the situations in their
missions. I too want to join my colleagues in expressing
our gratitude to all peacekeepers for their dedicated
service, often in extremely difficult conditions, as well
as honouring the memory of those who have laid down
their lives in the service of peace.
I have a few questions I want to ask, but before I do
so, I have a few comments to make about peacekeeping
that we are all familiar with but that are still important.
The success of any United Nations peacekeeping
operation depends on peacekeepers’ constructive
day-to-day interaction both with the authorities of
the countries to which they are deployed and with the
parties to the conflict, and following through on the
mission’s tasks that are key in the host country without
pursuing secondary or marginal mandates.
We know that host countries bear the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians, establishing
the political process, addressing the root causes of
crises and promoting post-conflict reconstruction.
We believe there is potential for countries hosting
peacekeeping operations to connect fully with the
triangular cooperation between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries,
which would certainly improve the effectiveness of
the mechanism in question. Peacekeeping operations
clearly should not be a substitute for the authorities
of host countries, but should rather provide them with
the assistance they need at the implementation stage of

S/PV. 8552

the strategy for dealing with a crisis, and the priority
should be to increase the capicity of the authorities
themselves in order to avoid relapses into conflict.
It is in countries where missions have been able to
achieve credible and effective cooperation with the
host Governments that they have been able to establish
conditions conducive to ensuring national reconciliation
and post-crisis reconstruction. I would like to address
the Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and mention that
we believe it is important to assure a smooth transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, and we hope that
this will be happening in Darfur in the context of the
drawdown and full withdrawal planned for 2020.
Needless to say, the problems related to improving
peacekeeping missions’ effectiveness and ensuring
Blue Helmets’ security are as pertinent as ever. The
effectiveness of a peacekeeping operation depends
directly on how well the consensus-based agreements of
States on peacekeeping issues are carried out, including
by both the Secretariat and the missions on the ground. It
is those agreements that reflect the shared commitments
that the States have expressed their willingness to
assume. In that connection, I want to remind the
Council that the action plan for the report on Improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers by former
United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General
dos Santos Cruz should be implemented only within the
parameters agreed on by the General Assembly Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. Intelligence
in peacekeeping, information-gathering and analysis
can be used only to ensure the safety of peacekeepers
and the protection of civilians. Any misuse of those
instruments, including for political purposes, risks
undermining trust in United Nations peacekeeping
activities. In that regard, in line with your request,
Sir, I would like to ask the Force Commanders if they
are guided in their activities by the recommendations
outlined in the Cruz report and if so, how they are
guided by them.
We would also like to note that the mandates of
some Security Council missions, including those of
UNFICYP, have already incorporated the performance
policy framework strategy even before the Secretariat’s
finalization of the document. Has it already been
incorporated into the mission’s work? We hope that
before it is put into practice by the Secretariat and
the missions, it will go through all the necessary
coordinating procedures in the Special Committee on

19-181747/26

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Peacekeeping Operations. In the spirit of partnership
all interested States, including troop-contributing
countries, should take part in the discussions on
it. We hope that UNFICYP will also be guided by
that approach.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We
thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Force
Commanders for their briefings, as well as for their
service. Today I will focus on the two issues of hostcountry cooperation and peacekeeping performance.
The consent of the parties is indeed one of the core
principles of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
but underlying that principle is the parties’ commitment
to a political process. We have seen an inextricable link
between the two, as reflected both in the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative
and the United States’ own peacekeeping principles.
Peacekeeping operations must support the achievement
of political solutions, and peacekeeping missions
must have host-country cooperation. The two go hand
in hand. For peacekeeping missions to effectively
implement their mandates and successfully support
political efforts to achieve stability and a durable
peace, they must have the full cooperation of the host
countries, and mission personnel must have complete
freedom of movement within their area of operations.
While the Security Council must not renounce its role
in the maintenance of international peace and security
mandated by the Charter of the United Nations, we have
seen that missions face a significantly larger number
of challenges in achieving their mandates when host
Governments choose to obstruct them.
The United States has championed peacekeeping
performance in the A4P initiative and through the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2436 (2018). A
key aspect of ensuring good performance is the
accountability of peacekeeping missions. More
accountable missions deliver better on their mandates
and increase the credibility of United Nations Blue
Helmets around the world. Resolution 2436 (2018)
makes it very clear that the Security Council needs
better information on peacekeeping performance
in order to make better decisions. From training and
capacity-building to ensuring accountability for
underperformance, we cannot fix what we do not know
about. We can no longer accept a business-as-usual
approach of not talking openly and honestly about
our own shortcomings. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to implementing an integrated
8/26

18/06/2019

performance policy, but much more must be done. We
will continue to work with our partners towards the full
and speedy implementation of resolution 2436 (2018).
Separately, host countries must embrace the
strategic goals of the United Nations, the peacekeeping
missions and the work of the United Nations
country teams. Without the host country’s understanding
and acceptance of the goals and assistance provided
by the United Nations, the completion of a Security
Council mandate cannot be achieved. Host countries
must cooperate with the United Nations and the
peacekeeping missions deployed in their country.
Without that cooperation, peacekeeping missions
will never achieve their goals or the Security Council
mandates contained in our resolutions.
With all of this in mind, I would like to ask a couple
of questions. First, what are the ways in which host
countries have rebuffed the good offices of the United
Nations country team and attempted to restrict freedom
of movement and access that our briefers might like to
highlight for the Council today?
Looking at the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the
Transitional Military Council recently stated its
intention to withdraw all armed forces from team
sites formerly operated by UNAMID. To whom will
these sites transition, and how would this transition be
expected to take place, logistically?
For the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus, we know that the leaders of the Greek Cypriot
and Turkish Cypriot communities have different views
on the issue of host country consent. What types of
challenges has the mission faced that stem from that
issue directly?
Finally, the United States expresses our appreciation
to all the Force Commanders and for the continuing
service and sacrifice of their teams around the world.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this interactive
meeting on a particularly pertinent and important
issue, namely, cooperation with host States, which,
as we all know, is a crucial component of the success
of peacekeeping operations. I would also like to pay
heartfelt tribute, through Lieutenant General Leonard
Muriuki Ngondi and Major General Cheryl Pearce, to all
their military components carrying out their missions
in often highly challenging and adverse conditions.
19-18174

18/06/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

I would like to make two preliminary remarks.
First, cooperation with the host State is crucial and
sine qua non to ensure that peacekeeping operations
can achieve their objectives, respecting, of course, the
sovereignty of the host State and taking account of the
need to protect the Blue Helmets and all United Nations
personnel in general, both civilian and uniformed.
Secondly, cooperation with the host State is not an
option but a pressing necessity enshrined in the guiding
principles of peacekeeping. Such cooperation entails
rights and duties for both the host State and the United
Nations. In that connection, I would like to highlight
three principal points, followed by questions pertaining
to these for our briefers.
First, the host State’s consent to the deployment of
a peacekeeping operation must be sought not only as a
matter of principle, but also for operational purposes.
The political dialogue between the United Nations and
the host State is essential, but it must also be pursued
on the ground between the Blue Helmets, on the one
hand, and the military and police of the host State on
the other. It is clear that such respect and dialogue are
a means of guaranteeing the mission’s effectiveness
and its acceptance by the local population. This
cooperation can take many forms, such as the exchange
of information on the risks and threats that affect the
civilian population as well as peacekeeping personnel;
or operational coordination, if provided for in a
mission’s mandate.
Here I would like to ask our briefers a question: what
feedback can they give regarding their experiences at
these two levels of strategic and operational cooperation
in the context of their respective missions?
The second point that I wanted to highlight is that the
host State must respect its commitments under a statusof-forces agreement, which ensures the freedom of
movement and protection of the Blue Helmets deployed
on host State territory. There is no context in which
violating a status-of-forces agreement is acceptable. I
believe that the Security Council must monitor this and
ensure that dialogue between a deployed mission and
host State authorities is ongoing, in order to resolve, at
an early stage and as rapidly as possible, any difficulties
that may emerge.
Thirdly and finally, the principal mandate of a
peacekeeping operation, as we know, is often the
protection of civilians. Nevertheless, it is the host
States that have primary responsibility for protecting

S/PV. 8552

their people. Peacekeeping operations can help States
in difficulty to protect their populations against a
particular threat, but they cannot replace the host
State, which must do everything in its power to protect
its civilians, including through the police and the
military as well as the legal system, by systematically
prosecuting perpetrators of violence against civilians
and attacks on the rights of the population, even if such
perpetrators were to be found within the ranks of the
security forces themselves.
I have another question for our two briefers: what
do they expect from the Security Council in terms of
supporting cooperation with the host State, particularly
in the area of the protection of civilians?
Another remark I would like to make on this point
is that while the Security Council demands exemplary
conduct from its peacekeepers, similar behaviour is
expected from the security forces of the host State
receiving United Nations support. This is a major
requirement that is sometimes difficult to meet in
areas where a State may have been destabilized or have
limited capacities. France stands ready to provide all
necessary support to such States to help them achieve
this goal.
Finally, cooperation between the host State and
the peacekeeping operation may involve helping to
strengthen the host State’s security and defence forces,
particularly in terms of training personnel and providing
equipment. The goal is then to shift the responsibility
to protect onto the security and defence forces so that
the host State is able to fully ensure the security of the
civilian population.
I wish to pose one last question here: what options
could we collectively explore, in terms of the capacitybuilding of security and defence forces, to bolster
cooperation between a force and the host State? We
are often told that a United Nations force can withdraw
once the host State’s defence and security forces are
fully operational.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all to add my delegation’s voice to the welldeserved tributes paid to the late Major General Francis
Vib Sanziri. We extend our deepest condolences to his
family, to the Government and the people of Ghana and
to the United Nations.
Turning now to the issue that brings us together
today, I would like to welcome the holding of this annual

19-181749/26

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

interactive, informative meeting with the Heads of the
military components of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix,
Lieutenant General Leonard Muriuki Ngondi and
Major General Cheryl Pearce for their enlightening and
highly useful briefings.
The issue of cooperation between a peacekeeping
mission and the host State is of particular importance
to my delegation. Indeed, my country’s recent history
has been characterized by exemplary cooperation with
the entire United Nations system, which served as a
catalyst for the success of the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI).
Peacekeeping operations, as we all know, are not
intended to be a substitute for the authorities of the
host State, but rather to support them as part of a crisis
exit strategy that is based on an inclusive and credible
political process. In that connection, the experience
of UNOCI provides us with sufficient insight into the
fact that dynamic cooperation, based on mutual trust
and the pursuit of consensual objectives between a
United Nations peacekeeping mission and host State
authorities, is essential. It creates the necessary
conditions for a successful transition that paves the way
for lasting peace and stability.
The military components of peacekeeping missions
are a key part of such cooperation. Their exemplary work
with the host country Government relies on the latter
taking strong national ownership of all United Nations
action, ensuring that local authorities are involved in
the peacekeeping mission’s main tasks. UNOCI and
the Government of Côte d’Ivoire worked together
to improve the protection of civilians by, inter alia,
combating human rights violations and gender-based
violence, leading the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process and reforming the security sector,
as well as advancing the national reconciliation process.

18/06/2019

between UNAMID and the Sudanese authorities? What
effects might the current sociopolitical situation in the
Sudan have on the UNAMID reconfiguration and troop
drawdown process?
Initiatives to promote national reconciliation are
an indispensable step on the road to peacebuilding,
especially in a context of deep resentment between
local communities. With regard more specifically to the
situation in Cyprus, what actions is UNFICYP taking
to promote reconciliation between local communities?
With regard to the zero-tolerance policy on
sexual violence, I wish to seek clarification on the
actions carried out in the framework of UNAMID and
UNFICYP to ensure exemplary conduct by their troops.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation’s congratulations and encouragement to
the UNAMID and UNFICYP Force Commanders, as
well as to all of their staff, for the outstanding work
they are doing in spite of numerous constraints and in
particularly difficult deployment environments. My
delegation also wishes to commend the thousands of
men and women of the military and police components
of the United Nations missions, and to pay tribute to the
soldiers who have made the ultimate sacrifice for peace
and security in the world.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I also
wish to thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and the Force Commanders
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus for their briefings. Through them I wish to
pay tribute to all military personnel deployed in the 14
United Nations peacekeeping missions.

I would like at this stage to ask Lieutenant General
Ngondi for his insights on the following points.

Further to your proposal, Mr. President, in my
statement today I will first elaborate on China’s views
on peacekeeping operations. Following that I will ask
the Commanders two questions.

What is his assessment of cooperation between
the United Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur
(UNAMID) and the Sudanese authorities, in particular
with regard to the protection of civilians in those regions
affected by violence perpetrated by armed groups, or
to the curbing of communal violence? Will the current
political context, which is marked by tensions between
the Transitional Military Council and the demonstrators
from the affected sociopolitical strata, affect relations

United Nations peacekeeping operations are
an important method of maintaining international
peace and security. They play an irreplaceable role in
helping to stabilize the situation in host countries and
in strengthening their security capacity. They help to
create favourable conditions for political settlement.
Therefore, peacekeeping operations overall have been
well recognized by Member States. To further improve
the performance of peacekeeping missions in terms of

10/26

19-18174

18/06/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

implementing the Council’s mandates and to deepen
cooperation with the relevant host countries, China
wishes to share the following points.
First, it is imperative to adhere to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
fundamental principles for peacekeeping operations,
as well as to respect the sovereignty and leadership of
host countries.
Secondly, attention must be paid to communication
with host countries and the relevant parties so as to
win their trust. Peacekeeping operations must ensure
smooth communication with host countries at all stages
of deployment, and relevant issues must be addressed
through timely consultations.
Thirdly, it is necessary to assist host countries in
building and improving their national mechanisms and
enhancing their force generation capacity. Peacekeeping
operations must prioritize capacity-building in host
countries when conditions permit. Moreover, at the
request of host countries, peacebuilding operations
should provide support in the establishment and the
improvement of national mechanisms.
I would now like to ask the two Force Commanders
two questions. First, peacekeeping operations take
political settlement as a priority. Based on the
experience of the two Force Commanders, which areas
of peacekeeping mission mandates require further
adjustment? Secondly, to improve the safety and
security of peacekeeping personnel, how have their
two missions cooperated with host countries? What are
some areas for further improvement?
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, I wish to
commend you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate.
You have been very successful in terms of holding the
shortest and most interactive briefings ever.
Germany wishes to pay tribute to the peacekeepers,
soldiers and police deployed worldwide and recognizes
their actions, achievements and the sacrifices they must
often make.
Turning to Major General Cheryl Pearce, those
who do not follow the developments in Cyprus on a
daily basis might have the impression that the situation
there is rather quiet. She helpfully pointed out that there
has been an increase in violations and a hardening of
positions, which certainly has an impact on the overall
situation in Cyprus. She mentioned in particular that
the authority of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force

S/PV. 8552

in Cyprus in the buffer zone is questioned. Given that,
what more can be done to re-establish or strengthen
the authority of the mission? What can be done
internally, perhaps with the Secretary-General or with
Mr. Lacroix? Perhaps she could tell us a bit about the
“internal cuisine”. Also, what action can the Security
Council take?
Turning now to the situation in the Sudan, I do not
think anyone perceives the situation there to be quiet.
I would like to commend Lieutenant General Leonard
Muriuki Ngondi for his briefing, which was very precise
and very much to the point. I understood from his
statement that he finds the situation worrisome. I also
understood that the handover of team sites to civilians,
as foreseen by the mandate, is not taking place, but that
there is an order by the Transitional Military Council
to give the team sites to the Rapid Support Forces
(RSF). We all know that the Rapid Support Forces
were previously known as the Janjaweed, who were
responsible for the mass atrocities in Darfur.
The Lieutenant General mentioned looting at team
sites and said that the Government is not fulfilling its
obligation to allow access. Furthermore, he said that
land ownership was the major issue at the root of much
of the conflict, which had not been addressed. In that
context, I have of course listened to all of those who
said how important it is for peacekeeping operations
to have good relations with the authorities and that
host authorities have the main obligation to protect
civilians. The challenge, then, is what happens if the
authorities do not fulfil their obligations? Two weeks
ago, in Khartoum, the authorities were responsible for
the death of over 100 people. Sexual violence was once
again used. What happens in such cases, or when the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights is violated by
the authorities?
I would like to ask the Lieutenant General what
military consequences he expects if we continue with
the drawdown of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), a decision
that was made when the weather was fair. What
consequences are expected when the Rapid Support
Forces, as the Transitional Military Council decrees,
takes over the team sites? What can he tell us about his
experience on the ground? How is the RSF accepted by
the local African population? Does he expect renewed
clashes in Darfur? Perhaps he can tell us something
about the situation in Darfur over the past week.

19-1817411/26

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Lastly, I would like to add on to what my colleague
from Peru said with regard to sexual violence. Two
weeks ago, we again witnessed sexual violence being
used in Khartoum. Khartoum is no longer UNAMID’s
area of operation, but what can the Lieutenant General
tell us about sexual violence in the area where UNAMID
is operational? What can be done? What has Lieutenant
General Ngondi been doing to fight sexual violence
in conflict?
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, we would like thank the
briefers for their briefings today.
We express our most sincere condolences following
the death of Major General Francis Vib Sanziri.
There is no denying the important role played by
peacekeeping operations, which are a vital tool for
achieving international peace and security, as set out
in the Charter of the United Nations. Peace operations
are conducted in the context of daily life and therefore
involve several disciplines. We must stress that it is
important for missions to strictly adhere to the basic
pillars of peacekeeping: consent of the parties to the
conflict, impartiality and the non-use of force, except
in cases of legitimate self-defence and in defence of
mandates. The consent of the host country is key for the
effective discharge of mission mandates. At times, we
have seen the use of tactics that obstruct and affect the
performance of mandate activities or delay the political
process that the missions must support.
We thank Lieutenant General Ngondi for his
briefing and note with concern the impact recent
political developments in the Sudan could have on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). Such developments are marked by
the lack of cooperation between the Sudanese State and
the mission. A successful exit requires close cooperation
between the host country and peace missions and
allows for the effective transfer of responsibilities from
the mission to the State. In the Sudan there is a need for
an inclusive and transparent political process, led by
civilians, that allows for the restoration of democratic
order and good governance. That would ensure that
the State is committed to cooperating closely with
UNAMID and implementing the proposed exit strategy.
Such cooperation would make it possible for both the
mission and the State to have the tools needed for the
transfer of responsibilities.
12/26

18/06/2019

Our delegation would like to take this opportunity
to express the following concerns.
The first pertains to the work with communities
in countries affected by conflict. How do they think
we could strengthen the mandates of peacekeeping
operations to ensure closer collaboration with
communities and, specifically, with young people and
women? Secondly, we acknowledge the crucial role
played by peacekeepers deployed in highly dangerous
missions. That sacrifice requires that the necessary
measures be taken in order to equip personnel with the
skills that would enable them to develop and thereby
ensure efficient and effective performance on the
ground. In that regard, what additional measures or
programmes are being considered to strengthen the
training of peacekeepers prior to deployment in order
to ensure optimum performance as they carry out their
functions and the effective fulfilment of mandates?
It is important that peacekeepers be trained on
gender issues, which requires the deployment of gender
advisers and women’s protection advisers and the
strengthening of zero-tolerance policies for sexual and
gender-based violence committed by peacekeepers.
With regard to the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus, we note that incursions into the
buffer zone continue, in violation of resolution
2453 (2019). What other preventive measures do the
Force Commanders think could be taken to reduce
such violations?
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
peace missions are a vital tool in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping and that only with will and joint efforts
will we succeed in achieving lasting peace.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Let me start
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
Lieutenant General Ngondi for their briefings. It is
good to see a fellow brother from Africa speaking to us
today. I would also like to thank Major General Pearce
for her briefing.
Let me also extend condolences to the families
of all peacekeepers, men and women, who have made
the ultimate sacrifice in their duty to keep the peace
and help communities and societies achieve peace
and find a way forward. We appreciate their sacrifice
and acknowledge the difficult circumstances in which
peacekeepers work and the challenges they must face
and overcome.
19-18174

18/06/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

My delegation would like to reaffirm the
importance of peacekeeping as one of the most effective
tools available to the United Nations as it promotes and
maintains international peace and security. The briefers
gave us quite a challenge — coming here without
prepared statements and fielding questions. We really
appreciate that.
As we have stated before in the Chamber, we remain
of the view, especially with regard to the two missions
represented here today, both for the Sudanese people
and the people of Cyprus, that the solution to their
problems lies with the communities themselves. In our
view, peacekeeping operations create an environment to
find the peace they need to find. It would be helpful to
hear from our colleagues whether or not they think that
that approach plays a positive role in specific missions.
We are referring to the drawdown and withdrawal of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). It will be interesting to hear the
perspectives of Lieutenant General Ngondi about that
issue. With regard to Cyprus, it is one of our longestrunning peacekeeping missions. It is one we think of as
“business as usual”. As we know, things are not always
that easy. It would be good to hear her perspective.
Much has been said about trilateral cooperation.
We would like to hear from our briefers about the value
of trilateral cooperation. As members of the Council,
we always provide our views regarding how important
it is. Could we perhaps have a practical example of how
it works in both missions, because the two missions are
very different?
As an African member of the Council, the situation
in the Sudan is very important to us. We are also well
aware of the operational and financial challenges being
faced. Funding is constantly an issue as it pertains to
ensuring success and that peacekeepers are safe and
peacekeeping operations effective. It is vital to ensure
that, with respect to peacekeeping operations, there is
no reversal in the gains made. The Force Commanders
are probably well aware of the decision that the African
Union Peace and Security Council made regarding the
drawdown of UNAMID and some of the concerns that
have been raised, such as, in particular, not leaving
a vacuum and, as some of the other members have
already mentioned, the handover of sites. How is that
kind of situation managed, especially as it pertains to
agreeing with the host State, when a certain decision
runs counter to the original view, for instance the

S/PV. 8552

handover of sites to civilians? How is that situation
managed? What assistance is needed from the Council?
As we have just done, we extend condolences
following loss of life. However, there is a trend. We
believe that, with regard to the safety and security of
peacekeepers, they are increasingly coming under
fire. It is becoming increasingly dangerous. What does
Lieutenant General Ngondi think could be done to
ensure the safety of peacekeepers? What do we need to
enhance their safety and security? It is technology or
equipment? We know that situations differ in terms of
how dangerous they are, but what is his view with regard
to what we can do to try to curb the rising death toll and
the increasing number of attacks on peacekeepers?
Turning to Major General Cheryl Pearce, South
Africa is a great supporter of women in peacekeeping
operations. We are very glad to see her here, in
particular as a woman in a leadership role. Since most
of the other questions around the topic on which the
President asked us to focus have already been asked,
I will take a slight liberty and request, from her
perspective, an understanding of the challenges faced
by women in uniform, especially those in leadership
positions, and we hope to see an increasing number of
those positions going to women. We are very proud of
our own progress, for example, with regard to the Force
Intervention Brigade in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Some of her perspectives in that regard would
be much appreciated.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, let me
present Indonesia’s views on the agenda item under
consideration. After that, we will pose questions to
both Force Commanders. I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and the Force Commanders
for their comprehensive briefings, which focused on
cooperation with host States and on the operational
challenges to the current mission mandates in the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP). Let me also extend our
condolences to the family of Major General Francis Vib
Sanziri and to all peacekeepers around the globe.
Consent is indeed one of the core principles of
United Nations peacekeeping. Peacekeeping missions
cannot deploy without the agreement and cooperation
of the Government of the host State. There are in
fact concrete actions that we could take as part of the
Action for Peacekeeping agenda and its Declaration of

19-1817413/26

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Shared Commitments to strengthen host-State consent
and cooperation.
The first action is strengthening consultation among
peacekeeping stakeholders on mandates and their
implementation. We need to collectively implement the
existing intergovernmental commitments on triangular
cooperation between troop- and police-contributing
countries, the Security Council and the Secretariat.
We also need to consider options for further direct
engagement between host Governments and the Security
Council. That should include cooperation in the pursuit
of Security Council mandates, including facilitating
access, and recognize national responsibilities related
to the safety and security of peacekeepers.
The second action concerns the contribution of
peacekeeping operations to the protection of civilians.
Our contingents in UNAMID have experienced
first-hand that quick-impact projects, community
engagement, mediation and facilitation, with close
cooperation with the host Government, are vital in
improving protection-of-civilian mandates.
The third action is better training and capacitybuilding for mission leaders to navigate issues related
to host-State consent and cooperation. It takes a regular
effort by mission leaders, with the assistance of Member
States and regional organizations, to maintain the
consent and cooperation of the host-State Government
counterparts through all the changes. Managing hostState consent and cooperation is, I believe, the most
important and difficult part of a mission leader’s job.
The fourth action is ensuring that missions have the
right tools to manage host-State consent and cooperation.
In that respect, possible guidelines are required to
navigate the cooperation with host-State Governments.
The guidelines can outline different consent scenarios
facing peacekeepers, response options and criteria for
identifying a serious deterioration of consent. Such
tools will be important when needed to elevate issues
to the Security Council before the situation becomes
a crisis.
Let me once again thank and pay tribute to the
Force Commanders for their exemplary commitment.
Indonesia, as one of the largest troop/police-contributors
to peacekeeping operations, will always support their
work and efforts, be it within UNAMID, UNFICYP or
other peacekeeping missions around the globe.
14/26

18/06/2019

I would like to end my remarks by posing some
question to both Force Commanders. I would like to ask
them, from their observations, the following. What are
the concrete impacts of the so-called Christmas-tree
mandates on the relationship between the peacekeeping
missions and the host countries?
I would like to ask the Force Commander of
UNAMID two additional questions. What are the
challenges being faced to achieve a responsible
drawdown and exit strategy? And what should the
Security Council do to ensure that the formulation of
the next mandate is clearly articulated and corresponds
to the operational challenges?
I would like to ask the Force Commander of
UNFICYP the following question. What should be
improved in terms of the current mandate to ensure that
UNFICYP can support the achievement of a political
solution and improve cooperation with the host country?
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking
Mr. Lacroix, Lieutenant General Ngondi and Major
General Pearce for their briefings. I will not read out
a statement, since it would be very similar to what
we have already heard. I will focus on some specific
African-related issues.
We underline the significance of peacekeeping
operations in the history of the United Nations. They
have played a very important role in bringing about
peace after many conflicts. At the same time, they face
serious challenges. I believe that one of the tasks of the
Council is to seek ways to streamline peacekeeping
operations to ensure that they are more efficient. Of
course, speakers have mentioned the importance of host
countries, relations between peacekeeping operations
and host countries and the consent of those countries,
which are very important to success.
However, I want to focus on the issue of funding
operations in Africa with United Nations financial
support. I think that for us as Africans that continues to
be a crucial issue. We know that there is not unanimity
in the Council on this particular matter. But we think
that this model of cooperation could be very valuable
in the sense that we as Africans know our environment
better than anyone else and Africa is where most of the
conflicts under the Security Council’s consideration
emerge. Many of our partners, many of whom are here
in the Chamber, and the United Nations itself have
the resources that we as Africans need to be able to
19-18174

18/06/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8552

deal with the problems and resolve the conflicts that
plague us.

grateful if Lieutenant General Ngondi could share with
us his assessment of that particular matter.

In that regard, I would like to ask a specific
question, which I think is directed more to
Mr. Lacroix, since the discrepancies that we have
in the Security Council on the issue are to do with
financing. Does he think that such financing by
partners and the United Nations is viable to ensure that
peacekeeping operations in Africa are more effective?
With regard to the issue of Cyprus, I would like
to know what the most serious challenges being
faced by the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus are given the complexity of dealing with two
different communities.

Secondly, missions can be served only through clear,
understandable, unequivocal and consistent mandates.
I have a question for the two Force Commanders: how
could the Council make mandates clearer?

Regarding the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, I would like to ask the following.
In order for the mission to be successful, what should
the Security Council do to ensure that the mandates are
fully implemented without being amended?
Lastly, I would like to know — I do not know if
someone asked this question before I arrived — if
peacekeeping operations, specifically the two cases that
we are considering, have any programmes in place to
promote reconciliation, including confidence-building
measures to improve coexistence in such complex
situations, should the local populations become hostile
towards the troops that are basically in their countries?
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I will start by paying tribute to the men and women who
serve the flags and the values of the United Nations on
the ground. The Security Council owes it to them to
continue the work it is doing as part of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.
Today I would like to raise a few questions and
underscore two points: first, our responsibility to
support political processes and, secondly, the quest for
performance by the operations themselves.
I would like to start by affirming our commitment
to focusing on sustainable political solutions. I see
many ways to achieve that. First of all, peacekeeping
operations must be dynamic and adapt to the realities
on the ground. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur is a prime example of that.
Pursuing withdrawal without taking into consideration
the political developments under way in Khartoum
would be unrealistic. In that regard, I would be very

Thirdly, with regard to providing appropriate
mandates and adequate resources, Belgium is very keen
on ensuring that adequate resources be made available
to United Nations missions.
My second point concerns performance. The
performance of missions is key to improving their
acceptance by local populations and the renewed
commitment of police- and troop-contributing
countries. We all have a shared interest in effective
performance. The host country is both a key player
in terms of performance and the primary beneficiary
of that.
Performance, however, does not depend solely on
adequate capacity and the training of troops, it also
depends on how United Nations missions function
and use their capacities over and beyond the necessary
command and control relations of the military
component. What we are talking about is the way in
which all capacities and components are deployed
and the so-called integrated function of the mission.
In that regard, I have a question for the two Force
Commanders. How do they see the integration of their
respective missions?
Finally, the performance of missions involves the
people within the missions. We were pleased to hear
from Major General Cheryl Pearce today and we
commend the Secretariat for the action undertaken
on gender equity in the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), which makes the mission
a model of gender equity with regard to its leadership.
How is Major General Pearce experiencing that aspect
of UNFICYP?
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix, Lieutenant General Ngondi and Major
General Pearce for their briefings. We welcome their
presence with us in this meeting and the dialogue
currently under way. We express our deep gratitude for
the Force Commanders’ efforts and endeavours in the

19-1817415/26

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

service of peace, and we honour their colleagues who
sacrificed their lives for peace.
We might not be one of the regular troopcontributing countries. However, Kuwait hosted a
United Nations peacekeeping Mission for more than
10 years, and we are fully aware of the importance
of peacekeeping operations. I am of course referring
to the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission (UNIKOM), which was an example of the
successful missions.
I would like to thank Member States for agreeing
that this meeting would have the format of an interactive
dialogue with each other. In my statement today I
will focus on three basic points: first, best practices;
secondly, initiatives to enhance cooperation and,
thirdly, what is needed to enhance cooperation.
It has been more than 70 years since the establishment
of the first peacekeeping operation. We now have at our
disposal a wealth of best practices, foremost among
them the three peacekeeping principles, including the
primacy of political solutions and national ownership.
The first peacekeeping principle is the consent
and approval of the parties concerned. Continuous
communication between the mission and the host
country contributes to implementing the mission’s
mandate and defusing any dispute before it erupts.
Moreover, designing missions based on the primacy
of political solutions contributes to promoting national
ownership through robust national institutions that host
countries can use to fulfil their primary responsibility
of protection. We have seen the success of that approach
in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Haiti.
On initiatives to enhance cooperation, we have
listened to the briefers about some examples of
cooperation. We recall our own national experience in
hosting UNIKOM for more than 12 years, during which
we shared the burden. We would like to note some
commendable initiatives that need to be followed.
We thank Côte d’Ivoire for its interest in the topic
at hand, as illustrated by the holding a meeting of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations prior to
today’s meeting. We also commend the Cairo road map,
which advanced the concept of trilateral cooperation
and turned it into quadripartite consultations by adding
the perspective of the host country.
Coordinating in advance with host countries and
ensuring their participation in drafting resolutions
16/26

18/06/2019

to establish or modify a mission are not a periodic
requirement but a necessity, as those countries are
part of making peacekeeping a success. In addition,
peacekeepers must receive the necessary training,
including on discipline-related matters as well as
language training. That responsibility is not shouldered
only by a mission, but also by host countries through
continuously abiding by agreements — from the
establishing of a mission until its departure. We thank
the Republic of the Sudan and the Republic of Cyprus
for their cooperation with the two missions.
Many questions have been directed to the briefers.
That is why, before I conclude, I will raise only a
general question. The Security Council designs
missions, while those in the field implement them.
This is an opportunity to ask the briefers about any
advice they could provide, especially when there is
disagreement between the parties during periods of
transition. What kind of advice could the briefers give
the Security Council on what action to take when there
is disagreement between the parties concerned and in
periods of transition?
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would now like to turn the floor over to the
briefers to respond to the questions posed or make
further comments.
I give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I will be very brief. I certainly do not
want to turn the discussion into one primarily between
the Security Council and myself. Most of the questions
were addressed to my colleagues the Force Commanders,
and they will be answering those questions.
First, a question was posed directly to me regarding
the financing of peacekeeping operations in Africa. I
think there are two different levels for doing that. On
one hand, the issue of making sure that United Nations
operations in Africa have enough resources to deliver
on their mandates is very important. I think, just to be
very concise on this issue, there are three points there.
The first is that we are committed to continuing
our efforts to find efficiency and to make the best use
of the resources that are given to us. There are a number
of efforts that were made to that effect, and we feel it is
our duty to continue.
19-18174

18/06/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Secondly, we need adequate resources to continue
implementing our mandates in environments that I
think everybody around this table recognizes are very
challenging and very difficult.
Thirdly, it may be the case in some instances that
our peace operations can be faced with unexpected
situations that may have financial implications. I just
want to mention one, which is the challenge posed
by the support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) to the Ebola response, which
draws heavily on MONUSCO’s resources in terms of
logistical support, the use of our security and police
and military forces to support our colleagues who are
dealing with Ebola, and a number of other resources
dedicated by MONUSCO to that support, including
some of our colleagues, especially after the decision
that was made to strengthen the Ebola response
in Butembo. That is just one example of a case where
an unexpected situation has an impact on the financial
resources required by peacekeeping operations.
The second part of the question was about financing
operations in Africa, and the Council is no doubt aware
of the position that the Secretary-General expresses
regularly in support of providing those operations with
predictable and sustainable financial resources, which
we think is an important condition for their success. I
want to reiterate that position here.
With regard to the questions that had to do with the
relations with the host Government, I want to say that
this key principle of peacekeeping remains entirely valid
and that it is incumbent on us to seek the best possible
interaction and cooperation with the host Government.
Sometimes that is challenging. Our Force Commanders
and Heads of missions make great efforts to address
issues that have to do with clearances or freedom of
movement, but in some cases we have to escalate those
issues. My colleagues and I have done so on occasion
when some of those issues needed to be addressed with
representatives of the host Governments, and in some
cases we do need the support of the Council in making
sure that whatever difficulties we encounter can be
resolved. I want to emphasize that it is a top priority
of our missions to ensure the smoothest possible
cooperation and interaction with host Governments.
The issue of performance was also mentioned.
In that regard, I want to comment on the efforts we
are currently making to enhance performance. It is a

S/PV. 8552

multifaceted effort that includes putting in place various
performance assessment mechanisms, including the
military-unit and police-unit performance systems,
along with the systematic investigation of cases where
we believe we have not performed to expectations. We
now systematically investigate those cases and I think
that has resulted in a number of lessons learned and
useful improvements.
The issue of the prioritization of mandates was also
raised. I believe that we still need the Council to focus
on our mandates’ key priorities, but those priorities are
evolving, and situations where at least in some cases we
might once have considered the extension of a mandate
to be a routine procedure no longer apply. All missions
are more or less in a situation of transition. I have two
comments to add in that connection, the first being that
prioritizing mandates is also our responsibility as the
United Nations, because we make recommendations
to the Council that should be adequately prioritized.
Secondly, our missions want the Council to decide their
mandates so that their financial and human resources are
allocated to the implementation of those priorities. That
is easier said than done, because it requires constantly
changing operations and seeing their structure evolve
on a permanent basis.
Last but not least, we are committed to continuing
our efforts to generally increase the role and positions
for women in peacekeeping, including in the senior
leadership of both our military units and civilian
components. The trend is encouraging, but we are
certainly committed to doing more.
Finally, regarding peacekeepers’ safety and
security, we are also committed to continuing the
implementation of our dedicated plan for improving that.
We had encouraging results last year, with a decrease
in the number of fatalities due to hostile attacks, and
this year so far only one mission has had fatalities as a
result of hostile attacks. We are aware that more must
be done, and that has to do with training, equipment,
performance and medical support. We are working very
hard on all of those issues.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for the clarifications he has provided.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General Ngondi
to respond to the questions and comments.
Lieutenant General Ngondi: I thank the speakers
and the members of the Council for their kind words

19-1817417/26

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and commendations. We appreciate the encouragement
we have heard today.
There have been a lot of questions. I think it would
be unfair to the Council members who have taken the
time to ask them if I did not answer them all, and I
will therefore try to respond to each and every question
addressed to me.
First, with regard to the question posed by the
representative of Poland as to whether the current
mandate will allow us to work pragmatically, the short
answer is yes. The four aspects that I mentioned as
the main issues of the mandate are very clear and are
functioning well, with the exception of the political
pillar, which, because of the current political situation,
has stalled. The rest are going well. The problem of
denials of access in terms of visiting the entire area,
particularly the limited area that is under the control
of the armed movement, is the only area that is an
obstacle to the full implementation of the mandate.
I would therefore answer that the current mandate
as outlined in resolution 2429 (2018) can indeed be
implemented pragmatically.
The situation in Khartoum does have some impact
on operations in Darfur, but not as much as in other areas.
That is because whatever is happening in Khartoum,
in Darfur there are those who support the Government
and those who support the opposition. So it does have
an effect, now more so given the militarization of the
Government and the fact that the State is being run by
people in uniform, which creates a disconnect with the
management of the population itself and which is what
we see as having a big impact in the area.
With regard to the suspension of the handover of
the camps, it is our own camps that we are withdrawing
from. I believe that this is something that will be
worked out. From what I have gathered from what the
Transitional Military Council has said, those that are
with the Rapid Support Forces will be given to the
communities for civilian use and not kept for the Rapid
Support Forces. I therefore think the suspension is just
a matter of time while these issues are sorted out. I
think that is because of the response not only from the
mission itself, but from the international community,
including here at Headquarters, to the decree that
was issued.
Moving to the question posed by the representative
of the United Kingdom regarding the impact of
reforms and what we are seeing on the ground, I say
18/26

18/06/2019

that decentralizing resources and decision-making is
always good. It makes it easy for us to operate with our
resources and to make decisions.
As for the lessons we can learn from the looting
of El Geneina, that was an unfortunate incident. The
investigations are going on right now, but the El Geneina
incident was unfortunate because the substantive
section stopped operations in El Geneina as far back
as 1 December 2018, and the facility has therefore
remained there without people working with the
communities. The substantive sections of components
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) work with the communities.
Based on the experience of seeing team sites handed
over to benefit the men in uniform, I tend to think that
it is they who are also benefiting from that.
Lastly, as I said, the militarization of the Government
has given the leadership of the State to uniformed
officers who perhaps do not have the necessary channels
of communication to the population to explain to them
the usefulness of those team sites if they are left the
way they are and handed over. This was an unfortunate
incident, and the lesson that we have learned is that we
must ensure that we have adequate capacity to protect
ourselves to the best of our ability, depending on what
we have at our disposal, and then to engage. We should
not detach ourselves from the community again. The
civil-affairs and rule-of-law personnel and all the other
components that reach out to the communities and
educate them on the beneficial purpose of our presence
there must engage with them and the Government with
regard to their primary responsibility to ensure peace
and order in the area — which they are doing — so as
to ensure that such incidents never recur.
Turning to the issue of violations of human rights
raised by the representative of Peru, it is a major
challenge. Our priority is to increase rule-of-law and
human rights capacities, particularly with regard
to monitoring human rights issues in the territories
and, more important, educating the people and the
Government on capabilities for ensuring law and order
and respect for human rights. It is especially important
to realize that the Sudan is a vast area, and that it is
therefore vital to expand State authority to reach all the
people, as well as the institutions that are responsible
for the rule of law and maintaining order and justice.
Lastly, with regard to development, while it is
not an immediate part of peacekeeping, the poverty
19-18174

18/06/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in Darfur has a direct influence on the incidence
of violations, as they are what results when people
struggle for their livelihoods in the absence of proper
governance throughout the country and have to compete
for resources, with all of that compounded by arms
proliferation and weapons falling into the wrong hands.
That is what makes the situation especially difficult.
Turning to the issue of the peaceful transition
of power raised by the representative of Russia, the
arrangements for that transition are quite elaborate.
That is why the State liaison functions are there. We
believe that it will be a peaceful transition, and it is
being carried out as well as possible on the ground.
As far as our safety is concerned, there are indeed
valuable lessons to be learned from Lieutenant General
dos Santos Cruz’s report on Improving security of
United Nations peacekeepers. I should start by saying
that the situation in the Sudan is somewhat better than
in other areas, because the Government has always
dominated the area, and unlike in other missions, we
do not see deliberate attacks on the mission itself. The
Government is in full control of the area, and it is very
difficult for concentrated armed elements to attack
our camps without the Government identifying their
signature. The problem we had was with the people
themselves wanting to loot. We have said how we are
tackling that and have put an adequate number of troops
at every team site to ensure that we can do whatever
is necessary.
With regard to the question by the representative of
the United States, the Transitional Military Council has
indicated that it will rescind its decree, although that
has not been officially communicated. The question
was about how we proceed from there. From the outset
it has been agreed with the authorities that the team
sites will be for civilian use. Working with communities
and other non-security Government institutions, with
the exception of the police, we have some idea of
who the appropriate people will be to take over those
team sites for civilian use. That will be put back on
the table once we can ensure that the team sites will
benefit the communities in which they are located and
can be used by the communities, including universities,
polytechnic institutions, hospitals and anything else
that the communities have in mind. While we are
supposed to hand back the spaces to the Government,
which is where UNAMID got them from in the first
place, the arrangement is that they will be returned to
the community and not to the people in uniforms. That

S/PV. 8552

is why the decree has to be contested so that we can go
back to where we were.
The representative of France asked what the
Security Council can do to help us enhance our work
there in terms of cooperation. In that regard, it is
important to ensure that both parties, UNAMID and
the Government and its authorities, respect the mandate
and the status of force agreement. It is as simple as
that. As I said, there are two essential elements for that
cooperation — trust and political will. We need that to
ensure that our work can be done, and that is where we
need the help.
With regard to the behaviour of the peacekeepers in
the area, this mission has been perfect. For instance, we
have not had a single allegation of sexual exploitation
or abuse on the part of our uniformed personnel for the
past four years, which is quite excellent.
With regard to the question from the representative
of Côte d’Ivoire, as I said in my briefing, in terms
of cooperation with the authorities regarding armed
groups in the areas under their control, that is the only
area in which people are not benefiting from UNAMID
services, because of the denial of access. The area
where the armed groups are is limited and contained.
There was an exception to the denial of access on one
occasion, in September of last year, when there was a
landslide in that area and the Government allowed us
access to it to help the victims of the landslide. The
argument would be that as we are enemies neither
of the Sudanese Liberation Army (SLA) nor of the
Government, UNAMID peacekeepers should be
allowed to go anywhere without problems, given that
we negotiate and talk neutrally.
The representative of China asked what we should
change in the mandate to ensure our success. As I said,
the only issue relates to the political pillar, which is
not very clear owing to the ongoing political situation
and whether or not we might have to exit before it is
resolved. We need to find an arrangement that will
enable us to address that pillar through negotiations. As
far as I can see, within the current political situation,
in my honest opinion it would be better to consider the
Darfur issue as part of the Sudan situation as a whole
rather than separately, but that is up to the Sudanese
people to decide. As far as our mission is concerned
right now, that is the only area where we see no clarity of
direction. We leave it to the Security Council to decide
how to proceed on that pillar as we move forward.

19-1817419/26

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

18/06/2019

The representative of Germany mentioned a number
of important things, but to start with, the possibility
of handing over the team sites to the Rapid Support
Forces is something that will be worked on but will not
happen. There are two sides to the coin with regard to
the Rapid Support Forces. There are areas where the
people themselves say that it is better to have them
around because it is keeps the peace and protects them
from armed groups in a defined area. They therefore
feel that there are areas where the Rapid Support Forces
are useful to the people and are embraced because
they help them, particularly the farming communities,
because they do not have their own weapons, while
there are nomads who roam about and do have weapons.
The farmers feel all right about the presence of the
Rapid Support Forces in certain areas because it means
there will not be any armed people there. On the other
hand, based on the Rapid Support Forces’ history, some
people are not very comfortable with them.

in further areas where they cannot move with civilian
components, they can still advocate and propagate for
issues of civil society, gender and human rights and any
others that can help communities. That is something
that can be discussed with Member States to ensure that
their troops are well trained on those issues even before
they are deployed to mission areas.

Are new clashes possible? I look at this issue from
two perspectives. My concern is a military threat from
clashes between the armed group that has a political
agenda, the SLA, and the Government. Those are
possible, and they break out once in a while. The other
aspect is banditry activities — the cattle rustling,
looting and criminality that happen everywhere. With
the drawdown, those clashes might or might not happen,
and the same goes for banditry. Without the rule of law
and governance, those crimes are likely to continue.
There could also be clashes between the SLA and the
Government, but they would be contained within a
certain area of Jebel Marra.

The representative of Indonesia asked what
challenges we see and what we need for a responsible
drawdown. I think that the mandate has always been
clear for us uniformed personnel. We listen to what
we are told and implement it. The drawdown has been
responsibly conducted since we began it. We have been
clear on that. We began in peaceful areas and are now
left with the problematic area, although there are no
problems on its outskirts, and that is a problem that
requires a political solution rather than a military one.
As I said in my briefing, the tripartite coordination
mechanism invited everyone to the table, including
the armed movements, but one of the movements has
remained persistently uncommitted. Getting people to
the table is an area that requires political effort, because
everything must be sorted out through dialogue and
the way forward must be agreed on. That is what we
are seeing. But as far as the drawdown is concerned, I
believe it has consistently been responsible, especially
because we have seen no recurrences of hostilities
within the areas where the mission has drawn down. I
believe that even in the final stages it will continue to be
done responsibly and will be supported by the greatest
possible diplomatic efforts to ensure that the people
reach agreement on the way forward for their country.

With regard to sexual violations and human rights
violations generally, I believe that it is important to
have human rights monitoring capability in the area.
The representative of the Dominican Republic
mentioned collaboration with young people and the
general population, which I agree is important. As I
said before, when we started the drawdown, most of the
components whose job it is to interact with the people,
particularly civil society, among others, were removed.
It is important to interact with the population, including
young people, and promote capacity-building measures
for their livelihoods. The governance section does a
lot of good work in that regard. As for the military,
what we need from the international community is for
the troops to be trained on a variety of cross-cutting
aspects, which is important in the areas of gender and
human rights, for instance, so that when the troops are
20/26

The representative of South Africa asked whether
we leave a vacuum when we hand over sites. I want to
repeat that I have already discussed the issue of sites.
With respect to the safety of the peacekeepers, the
Cruz report has been important for us. As Mr. Lacroix
said, it is important for the Department of Peace
Operations to be provided with enough resources to
ensure that it can perform. I just want to say that if a
time came when it seemed as if UNAMID could replace
the Government, it would be time for us to exit and
leave the country to take ownership of itself.

The representative of Equatorial Guinea asked
about the peacekeeping force within the communities,
and I will say again that our uniformed troops do not
have skills in other areas such as civil affairs. They
are more concerned with physical security. But as a
19-18174

18/06/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

mission, we are integrated with civilian components
and experts in other areas, and we work together so that
we engage the communities, as well as the Government,
in various areas. That collaboration should continue so
as to ensure that the communities are engaged and well
educated on what they need to do in various areas for
their own survival and welfare.
The representative of Belgium asked about pulling
out without political success, for lack of a better word. In
my assessment, the political pillar is somewhat stalled
and should be jump-started. The current situation is
a little challenging in that regard, and work needs to
done there. Otherwise, all the UNAMID components
are well integrated. We have an integrated approach to
addressing issues, and we trust that we are all doing
our part in a coordinated manner, from the leadership
to the tactical level. However, I have to say that since
we started the drawdown, some of the civilian elements
and their useful services have been terminated, and
we are really missing them, particularly the civilaffairs staff, who have eyes and ears on the ground in
the communities.
I will turn lastly to the question of what we do
when there are differences between parties, which I
believe is in reference to the parties to the conflict. I
want to underscore the most important aspect, which
is dialogue and diplomatic effort, because it is through
diplomatic efforts — people sitting down together and
discussing the way forward — that final settlements are
reached. Political dialogue, agreement and togetherness
are crucial. It is the people themselves who are causing
the problems, and they are the same ones who can
solve problems by sitting down together, talking and
agreeing on a way forward, which is how everything
will be okay. Therefore, when parties have differences,
they should seek each other out, discuss from their
different points of view and come together until they
reach an agreement.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now give
the floor to Major General Pearce to respond to the
comments and questions raised.
Major General Pearce: I thank Council members
for their kind words regarding our peacekeeping efforts.
They are much appreciated. I shall answer all questions
as I heard them, and ask members to correct me if I
captured them incorrectly. Some will be practically
aligned to myself as Force Commander, but there are
a couple that are more politically aligned. My Special

S/PV. 8552

Representative of the Secretary-General will be here in
a month and I will make some comments and defer to
her those that I sense she is better able to answer.
In regard to the question posed by the representative
of Poland with respect to whether the current mandate
is working well and what our approach is, under the
current mandate we are able to support the mission
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral’s political outcome. We are proactive in the
buffer zone. We have a small force now of only just
over 800 personnel. We are fully committed, through a
strong patrolling and engagement liaison programme,
to achieving the mission to de-escalate tensions within
the buffer zone.
The obstacles for us are actually twofold. As
I indicated in my statement, it is about the lack of
respect for our mandated authority in the buffer zone
and the fact that neither side acknowledges or accepts
the 2018 aide-memoire. It is a very loose and difficult
environment in which to communicate and engage
when we do not have a base level from which to operate.
In response to the question on migration, we have
a whole-of-United-Nations approach to migration in
Cyprus. The past six months have seen a continual
increase in arrivals of asylum-seekers and applications
to Cyprus. Cyprus remains in first place among
European Union members in terms of applicants per
capita. New arrivals from the north of the island are
mostly Syrian nationals arriving from Turkey and
Lebanon, while persons of African origin are entering
as students or to seek employment and crossing south in
steadily increasing numbers.
We recorded fewer actual arrivals in the buffer zone,
as there is a small area on the west of the island where it
is possible to enter by boat. However, smuggling routes
across the island are increasingly being used. The buffer
zone is porous and there are insufficient forces to be
able to take on the responsibility of irregular migration.
Having said that, we are working closely with both
sides to address the issue and identify opportunities to
support those that are coming through, as well as those
who will have to return to their home countries.
I thank the representative of the United Kingdom
for his questions. Regarding impact on the ground and
the peace and security architecture, I wholeheartedly
welcomed the directed architecture, which allows for the
synchronization of the work that we are currently doing
within Cyprus. Through the performance measures,

19-1817421/26

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the mission concept that we now have operating and
the comprehensive performance assessment system
that we are developing and trialling this year, we can
monitor the performance of our troops; ensure that our
resources are expended in the best way possible; and
ensure that the training we are conducting is aligned
with the outcomes of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative (A4P) and, where there are gaps, allows us to
focus on them.
In terms of performance, we certainly engage
through our sectors in addition to a top-down approach.
We have long-standing troop-contributing country
commitments and that national line with the troopcontributing countries ensures a short feedback loop
in terms of training; that we see optimal performance
and training in our individuals when they first arrive;
and that we have the opportunity, where gaps exist, to
conduct mission training and address those gaps.
Mandate mechanisms, which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General will speak
about in more detail, have certainly been a work in
progress. The concept of mechanisms within Cyprus
has been uncharted and so we are attempting a cold
start. Some are working at a faster pace than others, and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has done a lot of work with both sides to identify
mechanisms that we can move forward with. She will
indicate that rapport when she comes here next month,
so I will leave this matter for her to expand on then.

18/06/2019

to the report authored by former United Nations Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers, we take performance seriously.
Training and safety are certainly my primary priority
in everything we do within the mission. It is articulated
in our mission concept; we have our work force plans,
our comprehensive performance assessment system
and the A4P outcomes, as well as my own concept of
operations and my priorities for the Force. We have
continual evaluations and, as I said, a close feedback
loop, which we continue to review, analyse and
implement going forward.
I thank the representative of the United States for
his questions. Regarding freedom of action around
the island, we do have, and are very fortunate to have,
freedom of action around Cyprus. We have a couple of
areas that are disputed on the northern ceasefire line,
where that freedom of action is challenged at times. I
am currently working closely with my opposing force
commanders on those areas of challenge with the
intention of de-escalating the situation to support the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
achieve the political outcomes. I keep an eye on that
what we have done as a United Nations over time and
there are certainly some cyclic approaches that we
have taken. In order to understand the opposing force’s
position, aligning to what the political outcomes are is
really important.

With regard to working at the community level,
we believe that a bottom-up approach and bicommunal
engagement across the island to build the confidence of
the communities — the Turkish Cypriots and the Greek
Cypriots — will help us to successfully identify a way
forward. That is a whole-of-mission approach and we,
as a military, work closely with the civil affairs section,
the United Nations police and the political component
to address that on a number of levels.

As for the second question of the United States
representative regarding host country consent and their
view of the buffer zone, both sides have completely
separate views. The Greek Cypriots see the buffer
zone as Republic of Cyprus territory, despite us having
mandated authority, and they encourage Greek Cypriot
civilians to pursue activities there, whereas the Turkish
forces see it as an area that should remain sterile until its
status is determined as an agreed part of the settlement
and those territorial adjustments. That creates a tension
in itself, in terms of their own understanding of what
their position on the buffer zone is. Without accepting
or even reading and acknowledging the aide-memoire,
it is really difficult. We do not have rules of the road on
which way to operate, so it certainly creates tensions
near and close to the northern ceasefire line, between
us and the Turkish forces; the farmers and the Turkish
forces; and us and the farmers.

In response to the representative of Russia, as I
have already mentioned and touched on with regard

I thank the representative of France for her
questions. In regard to the internal and external

In response to the representative of Peru, we have
been working on confidence-building mechanisms
politically at the civilian, military and police levels.
Many of these measures are therefore stemming into
the military and the policing components. For us, this
involves demining and suspected hazardous areas,
where we are certainly making progress and looking to
complete early next year.

22/26

19-18174

18/06/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

strategic and operational feedback, as a small mission
we are very fortunate that we can work in a really
integrated approach, and the political nuances and what
I do as a military force have political implications. It
is probably the first time for me as a Commander that
small and what I would consider to be very tactical
incidents on the ground have political implications. I
was surprised but now, having a better understanding
of the environment in which I work, I can understand
those tensions tactically at the small level on the ground
and what that means to both sides. The Council has
seen that through some of the reporting that we have
done in the past six months.
In regard to the representative of France’s second
question concerning freedom of movement with respect
to the status of forces agreement, as I indicated we have
no concerns about that. We do have the freedom of
action for that.
We do not have protection of civilians within
our mandate, so I will not respond to those questions
directly, but in regard to the behaviour of peacekeepers
I have zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse and for any unacceptable behaviour by my
peacekeepers. I will hold every individual accountable
for his or her actions in the mission. The reputational
risk, not only to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus (UNFICYP) but to the United Nations as a
whole, is sometimes disproportionate to the incident
but is also unacceptable to the United Nations when
they are serving under the flag, and I know that they
are also held to the highest standard by the troopcontributing countries.
With respect to the question from the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire regarding reconciliation
among communities, we work closely with a lot of
non-governmental organizations working with the
communities in the bicommunal space. We have a civil
affairs unit, and across the board we are all working
together to engage not only along the buffer zone and
the communities that straddle it, but across the island
more broadly. It is becoming a bit of an issue just along
the buffer zone, and there are a lot of areas outside of
that where it is business as usual. They are not really
focused on or aware of the Cyprus problem as it
certainly does not connect to them individually.
Again, we have zero tolerance for sexual
exploitation and abuse. We have just had an evaluation

S/PV. 8552

team come through, and we are always looking for
continuous improvement in that space.
As to the question posed by the representative of
China in regard to performance improvement, I am on a
continuous improvement programme, whether it be with
the Force, with our training, with our safety or with our
engagement and liaison. It is a constant evaluation of
what we are doing. How can we improve? How can we
engage better? One issue of having troop-contributing
nations that have contributed to UNFICYP for decades
is that complacency can creep in. It is therefore really
important that we remain focused to ensure that training
remains relevant for the mission. I will not address the
question concerning which areas of the mandate require
adjustment directly. There is a situation of tension with
UNFICYP. The mandate was established in 1964. The
current environment is one in which the two sides
differ in opinion as to what is in the buffer zone. We
now have tension in terms of maintaining stability
and calm within the buffer zone and maintaining the
normal conditions of the buffer zone. What do I mean
by normal conditions? To the Greek Cypriots, that
means opening the zone up to farming, which actually
has an effect on security. So, we are seeing tensions
between different components of the mandate, but we
are currently working through them.
Regarding the question on engagement with the host
countries, we recognize that we have a status of forces
agreement with the Republic of Cyprus. For myself as
Force Commander, I need to have engagement with both
the opposing forces and I need to be impartial. I need
to demonstrate impartiality. I need to have proactive,
honest and direct conversations in a respectful way
with both my counterparts to ensure that we can find
measures and that we can find ways to tackle the issues
of concern with a view to de-escalating those areas
of tension.
Turning to the representative of Germany, who
referred to the hardening of positions, there were
reports in 2018 concerning this. CCTV captured the
hardening of positions, as well as construction, at the
northern ceasefire line. We had a lot of violations in
that area, although there was a slight decrease in 2018.
They are still there and they are still manned. However,
where we are seeing the violations now is actually in
the disputed areas, where we have a difference in what
the United Nations and the Turkish forces recognize as
the ceasefire line. It is those areas of dispute that are
creating many of the violations. There are also farmers

19-1817423/26

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

who choose to farm close to the position of the Turkish
forces, and that is also creating some tension, prompting
some moves of the Turkish forces from the north.
Regarding what support the Security Council could
provide, acknowledgement of the aide-memoire and the
continued support of our mandated authority, allowing
us to continue to work towards progress with both sides
will give us a baseline on which to communicate and
on which to make progress in terms of de-escalating
the environment.
In regard to the question asked by the representative
of the Dominican Republic on collaboration with the
communities and strengthening the mandate, we have
a really strong programme with women and youth.
We are taking a bottom-up, bicommunal approach, as
I indicated. We actively engage with the diplomatic
community within Cyprus, and they are all on board to
support and empower the women and youth in Cyprus to
have a voice, both in the educational and in the political
environments. We have a gender adviser who is focused
solely on that area. It is still sometimes disappointing
to see the lack of results, but we will continue to persist
in that area.
In regard to peacekeeping staff dealing with gender
issues, we do have gender advisers. I would also like to
say that we have strong female leadership within the
mission, and we continue to focus on that area. I would
say, though, that an inclusive and diverse environment
in which females feel that they can thrive and operate
on an equal footing with their male counterparts is one
that must be created. They will then spread the word.
We are very fortunate with our troop-contributing
countries from both Slovakia and Argentina, which do
not send formed units. They send individuals who are
volunteers. We therefore have the opportunity within
UNFICYP to target, engage and try to increase the
number of females within the mission.
It is about the voice. I know through my own
experiences that word of mouth and understanding of
the working environment can encourage people to want
to go there. People will want to come to UNFICYP
if the right environment is created. On top of that
we have a gender parity action plan that allows us to
provide a voice to the sectors. That is led by our female
peacekeepers, who inform headquarters on what is
working and what is not, and what resources should be
provided in order to create that right environment.
24/26

18/06/2019

I have covered the question concerning incursions
in the buffer zone. That is really about the farmers
working close to the northern ceasefire line. They will
continue to be problematic because the issue pertains
to European Union subsidies. They will continue to
seek the use of more land. Permits account for perhaps
20 per cent usage of the buffer zone. They have our
approval to be there. Unauthorized personnel account
for 80 per cent of the buffer zone. There are also Turkish
Cypriots who are not authorized to farm there, creating
farmer-on-farmer tension, which can escalate and
become violent. We target that issue through hotspot
targeting and try to de-escalate the situation by using
civilian mukhtars and mayors and by working through
Civil Affairs back to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
With regard to the issue of opposing force on opposing
force, that has not been as problematic in my time as
Force Commander.
With respect to the question from the representative
of South Africa about the communities, we have
continued to focus on our bicommunal, bizonal
approach. We work along the buffer zone, within the
communities, to find opportunities going forward. It is
a long process in achieving even few gains concerning
ownership by both sides to work together and be
bottom-up driven. It continues to be a priority focus for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
In the absence of political dialogue, our focus is on
community-led opportunities at the moment, which
will become significant in trying to achieve a positive
environment on which we can build going forward.
The question regarding women in leadership is in
line with comments I have already made. The challenges
are about creating, as I said, an inclusive and diverse
environment in which both men and women can thrive,
allowing everyone to have a voice. In my own career,
I recognized that in 1995 when I first joined, it was
the first year that we had integrated training. In sum, it
is a generational change in which women can come to
fill some of the senior leadership. Those opportunities
must be grown. They are not opportunities that you can
bring in in the military generally at different ranks.
It is something you have to nurture from the start. If
you create the right framework, open up the trades and
employment opportunities for females and provide
initiatives and policies to allow periods of part-time
work for those who choose to have families so that they
can enter and exit the service, you can create some really
great leaders. Fifty per cent of society can be targeted
19-18174

18/06/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and, in that there are many very talented individuals
who can really be a capability force multiplier if the
approach is right.
For me, it is not about females advocating for other
females. It is he for she. It is the male champions of
change approach that must be emphasized. I know
that the Military Adviser sitting behind me is a great
champion of change on that issue and is focused on
it. Certainly, I think there is great opportunity going
forward for the United Nations, especially in the
military force, where we can remain focused on it. In
time and through targets, I believe that we will continue
to improve. It will not happen quickly but it will happen.
We all understand at the higher level, but at the
lower level my priority is not to disenfranchise our
young males or our males within the units. Females
do not want to be singled out, in the main. They just
want to get in and do the job. Whatever we do as we
go forward, we must create an environment that allows
everyone to thrive and grow within that framework.
With regard to the question from the representative
of Indonesia about concrete methods in the mandate for
host countries and understanding their interpretation of
those methods, for us that is about the aide-memoire and
that mandated authority. Without that, it will remain
difficult for us to make progress. It is crucial for us to
de-escalate and reduce tensions. At the moment — and
it is a very colloquial term — we are playing whack-amole. We are taking on every issue. We are proactive.
We know where the hot issues will be and we target
them. They are the same every year. We really need to
get at the cause and not purely treat the symptoms of
what we are dealing with. What should be improved in
the current mandate? I spoke about the tension between
the normal conditions and security in the buffer zone.
Regarding the question from the representative of
Equatorial Guinea about the most serious challenges
with the two different communities, we started with a
group of Cypriots. We had the Turkish Cypriots and the
Greek Cypriots. Over time, the longer we take to come
up with a solution, the more culturally diverse the two
communities become. We are now seeing permanent
residents from Turkey establishing themselves in
the north. There is a whole community in the south.
If they are not along the buffer zone, they have little
relevance to what is occurring. The education systems
for both have a different narrative, as Council members

S/PV. 8552

are aware. As time goes on, both groups become
increasingly culturally diverse.
It is really is about trying to encourage those
communities to want to come together to create a
bicommunal, bizonal federation. For that, we have to
work really hard to bring the groups together, develop
initiatives and determine how to communicate with
them. Creating the outreach programmes and building
confidence within the community is significant in that
regard, but we have to keep thinking about more than
just the same groups that we deal with now, because
they are already on board. It is about finding new
communities and encouraging and engaging with the
broader community to work together.
The representative of Belgium asked how the
Council could further improve the appropriate
resources. As Council members are aware, we had our
strategic review in 2017. We have implemented all those
recommendations. As a Force Commander, I would say
that I have the minimum number of troops I need to be
able to carry out my component of the mandate. The
strength of UNFICYP lies in the number of troops on
the ground. It is the patrol and engagement activities,
day in and day out. It is our liaison and engagement. We
are porous and stretched. Any reduction in resources
for UNFICYP would require consideration of a change
of mandate or change of what the Force would look like.
With regard to the performance of the missions and
acceptance by the communities, because of our normal
day-to-day activities, we are always actively engaged
with the communities through our active patrolling.
That relationship is being built over time. As a longestablished mission, we have been actively involved
with both communities and have established very
strong relationships with all of them.
With respect to the integration of the mission, we
are a small mission and we work closely together as
the three components. There are still challenges but
we often have solid approaches. My assessment is that
through the comprehensive performance assessment
system mission concept and a focus by the current
leadership on conducting an integrated approach, we
will continue to improve in that area.
Concerning the question from you, Mr. President,
about our challenges, there is confliction of the
mandate with regard to normal conditions and security
and stability within the buffer zone. We must also
work to ensure that we do not have a recurrence of

19-1817425/26

S/PV.8552

United Nations peacekeeping operations

fighting. The void when we are not there could lead
to farmer-on-farmer conflict, which would be backed
by opposing forces or it would certainly be between a
Greek Cypriot farmer and one of the Turkish forces,
which would also create tensions. For us it means being
in the buffer zone and continually engaging with our
counterparts through the very strong engagement plan
that we have implemented.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Germany has asked to make a second statement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First, I wish very briefly
to thank both Commanders for their responses to the
questions, their level of detail and their commitment to
their tasks, as reflected in their answers.
I want briefly to come back to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). I am somewhat afraid that we are too
much on autopilot with respect to the drawdown of
UNAMID. From what I heard about the challenges that
the Force Commander faces, we are aware that he and

26/26

18/06/2019

his troops are able to handle most of those, but they are
still challenges.
From my perspective, the most important of these
was perhaps not sufficiently highlighted, and that
is the fact that we now have a new environment in
Khartoum. The Transitional Military Council is now
in control, and the strongman General Hamdan is the
head of the Rapid Support Forces (RSF). They have
decided that the Rapid Support Forces should take
over the sites where UNAMID is stationed. I believe
that we cannot accept that. We fully support what the
Force Commander is planning with regard to the team
sites being taken over by universities, hospitals or civil
society. But to have them as outposts of the Rapid
Support Forces, which were responsible for what is
now being called the “Khartoum massacre” on 3 June,
is unacceptable. We cannot accept that the UNAMID
team sites will in future be the sites of the RSF, which is
the follow-up organization to the Janjaweed, who were
co-responsible for the outbreak of the Darfur conflict
from the very beginning.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

19-18174
