II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

damental human rights and the establishment of a new
international economic order;
3. Notes with satisfaction the establishment of relations
of co-operation between the specialized agencies and other
bodies of the United Nations system and the Organization
of the Islamic Conference;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and other bodies of
the United Nations system to send to the Organization of
the Islamic Conference studies and experts in their areas
of specialization, including the combating of desertification and the elimination of poverty, hunger, iilness and
ignorance;
5. Notes the effective participation of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference in the financing of a number of
development projects in co-operation with the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the United Nations
Environment Programme;
6. Considers it necessary to strengthen co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference for the achievement of the goals set
forth in the Charter of the United Nations;
7. Takes note of the appointment by the Secretary-General of a special representative to participate in the work of
the Twelfth Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held
at Baghdad from I to 5 June 1981, 17 and to study the best
way of establishing machinery for co-ordinating the activities of the various units of the secretariats of the United
Nations, the specialized agencies and other bodies of the
United Nations system which co-operate or may co-operate
with the Organization of the Islamic Conference;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on the
state of co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Co-operation between ttJ.e United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference' ' .
49th plenary meeting
9 November /98/

36/24.

Co-operation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 477 (V) of I November 1950, in
which it requested the Secretary-General of the United Nations to invite the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States to attend sessions of the General Assembly as an
observer,
Recalling also the pertinent articles of the Charter of the
United Nations which encourage activities through regional
arrangements for the promotion of the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Recognizing the efforts made by the League of Arab States
for the promotion of these purposes and principles,
Noting that the Charter of the League of Arab States has
envisioned co-operation with international bodies in order
to guarantee peace and security and to promote economic
and social relations,
Noting with satisfaction the co-operation that has developed for more than thirty years between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States in areas of common
endeavour,
17

See N36/421-S/!4626 and Corr.I.

15

Taking note of the effective participation of the League
of Arab States in the work of the United Nations system.
I. Reaffirms its resolution 477 (V) and decides to invite
the League of Arab States to participate in the sessions and
the work of the General Assembly and of its subsidiary
organs as an observer;
2. Notes with deep appreciation the increasing participation of the League of Arab States in the work of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies and its constructive contribution to that work:
3. Recognizes the continued efforts of the League of
Arab States to promote co-operation among Arab States and
to seek solutions to Arab problems of vital importance to
the international community and takes note with satisfaction
of the increased collaboration of various organizations of
the United Nations system in support of those efforts;
4. Recognizes the importance of continued close association by th.:: United Nations and the specialized agencies,
where appropriate, with the efforts of the League of Arab
States in order to promote social and economic development
and to advance intra-Arab as well as international cooperation in that vital field:
5. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations
to work closely with the League of Arab States towards the
establishment of the new international economic order in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
6. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts to maintain contacts with the League of Arab
States and requests him further to strengthen those contacts;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation at the
political, economic, cultural and administrative levels between the United Nations and the League of Arab States in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution and on the development of co-operation between the League of Arab States
and the organizations concerned within the United Nations
system.
49th plenary meeting
9 November 198/

36/25.

Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency

The General Assemhl_v,
Having received the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year 1980, 18
Taking note of the statement by the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of IO November
I98 I, 19 which provides additional information on developments in the Agency's activities during 1981,
Conscious of the urgent need to develop all sources of
energy, with a view to helping both developing and industrialized countries to mitigate the effects of the energy crisis,
and bearing in mind the fact that nuclear energy remains
the main readily available alternative to fossil fuel for the
generation of large amounts of electric power,
'" International Atomic t.·nergv A!;'encv. The Annual Report fi>r /91/0
(Austna, July 1981): transmitted to the members of the General Assembly
by a note of the Secretary-(ieneral (A/361424)
·
'" Official Records of the G,·11era/ Assemblv, Thirtv-Iixth Ses.1w11. Plenarv Meeti11v. 50th rrieetin~. para,. 1-45
·

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

16

Recognizing the importance of enhancing the role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency in the promotion of
the application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
Considering that the International Atomic Energy Agency
will be called upon to play an increasingly important role
in making the benefits of nuclear energy available to all
nations, in particular the developing countries,
Conscious of the continuing need to protect mankind from
the perils resulting from the misuse of nuclear energy and
noting with appreciation in this connection the work of the
International Atomic Energy Agency in the implementation
of the relevant provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 20 and other international treaties, conventions and agreements designed to achieve similar
objectives,
Noting the excellent safety record of nuclear power generation, but aware of the need to pay continuing attention
to the questions of nuclear safety and waste management,
Bearing in mind the special needs of developing countries
for technical assistance by the International Atomic Energy
Agency in order to benefit effectively from the application
of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes as well as from
the contribution of nuclear energy to their economic development, and the need to assure a satisfactory and effective source of financing to implement adequate and effective
technical assistance programmes,
Considering that the premeditated Israeli air attack on
Iraqi nuclear installations on 7 June 1981 constitutes a serious threat to the entire International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards and to the development of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes,
Conscious of the importance of developing ways and
means in which supplies of nuclear material, equipment and
technology and fuel cycle services could be assured on a
more predictable and long-term basis, in accordance with
mutually acceptable considerations of non-proliferation, and
of the importance of the role and responsibilities of the
International Atomic Energy Agency in that regard,
Noting that the present Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Dr. Sigvard Eklund, will
retire on 30 November 1981 after twenty years of service
as Director General and that the General Conference of the
Agency has decided to confer upon him the title of Director
General Emeritus of the International Atomic Energy
Agency,
Noting further that the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency approved the appointment
by the Board of Governors of the Agency of Dr. Hans Blix
as Dr. Eklund's successor,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency;
2. Notes with satisfaction that:
(a) The International Atomic Energy Agency is continuously making efforts to strengthen its activities in the field
of technical assistance to the developing countries;
(b) Assistance provided by the International Atomic
Energy Agency is playing a significant role in the introduction of nuclear power for peaceful purposes as well as
in the application of nuclear science and technology, particularly in the fields of agriculture, medicine and industry
in the developing countries;
(c) The International Atomic Energy Agency is considering appropriate measures for funding technical assistance
through predictable and assured resources and for enabling
progress in technical assistance to keep pace with progress
in other main activities of the Agency;
20

Resolution 237:\ (XXII). annex

3. Commends the International Atomic Energy Agency
for its continuing efforts to enst1re the safe and secure use
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes throughout the
world, notes with satisfaction the steady improvement of
the Agency's safeguards system and welcomes the conclusion that in 1980, as in previous years, nuclear material
under Agency safeguards remained in peaceful nuclear activities or was otherwise adequately accounted for;
4. Notes with appreciation the steps taken by the International Atomic Energy Agency to expand and strengthen
its programmes in nuclear safety and enhance its ability to
deal with emergencies;
5. Urges all States to continue to support the endeavours of the International Atomic Energy Agency, pursuant
to its statute, in furthering the peaceful uses of nuclear
power, improving the effectiveness of safeguards and promoting nuclear safety;
6. Urges all States that have not already done so to
ratify the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material, which was opened for signature on 3 March 1980;
7. Calls upon all States to respect fully their obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations and to refrain from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State, including in particular
any armed attack on its nuclear installations;
8.

Notes with satisfaction that:

Substantive work has commenced in the Committee
on Assurances of Supply, established by the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency in June
1980, and expresses the hope that progress in the work of
the Committee will greatly contribute to the success of the
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy,
to be held in 1983;
(b) The International Atomic Energy Agency will convene a conference on nuclear power experience at Vienna
in September I 982, which could also provide a useful technical input to the United Nations Conference;
(c) The International Atomic Energy Agency is prepared, in response to paragraph 5 of General Assembly
resolution 35/ 112 of 5 December I 980, to fulfil its appropriate role within the scope of its responsibilities at all stages
of preparation of the lJ nited Nations Conference, and during
the Conference itself, by contributing to the discussion of
relevant issues, by providing technical data and documentation as needed, particularly in relation to the progress of
the work of the Committee on Assurances of Supply, and
by participating in the secretariat of the Conference;
(d) There is continuing progress in the studies by the
International Atomic Energy Agency aimed at establishing
a system of international storage of plutonium and the international management of spent fuel;
(a)

9. Notes that the matter referred to in paragraph 8 of
General Assembly resolution 35/ 17 of 6 November 1980
was considered by the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at its twenty-fifth regular
session and expresses the hope that it will be brought to an
early conclusion;
10. Pays tribute to Dr. Sigvard Eklund for his distinguished service in guiding and directing the successful evolution of the International Atomic Energy Agency during
the past twenty years and for the outstanding contribution
he has made to the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy and the cause of peace;
11. Extends its congratulations and good wishes to Dr.
Hans Blix who has been appointed to succeed Dr. Sigvard
Eklund:

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

12. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
the records of the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
52nd plenary meeting
I I November 1981

36/26.

Admission of Antigua and Barbuda to membership in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 10 November 1981 that Antigua and Barbuda
should be admitted to membership in the United Nations, 21
Having considered the application for membership of
Antigua and Barbuda, 22
Decides to admit Antigua and Barbuda to membership
in the United Nations.
53rd plenary meeting
I I November 1981

36/27.

Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave consequences
for the established international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled ·'Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its
grave consequences for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security" ,
Expressing its deep alarm over the unprecedented Israeli
act of aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations on
7 June 1981, which created a grave threat to international
peace and security,
Recalling its resolutions 33/71 A of 14 December I 978
concerning military and nuclear collaboration with Israel
and 34/89 of 11 December 1979 on Israeli nuclear armament,
Further recalling Security Council resolution 487 ( 1981)
of 19 June 1981 and noting with concern Israel's refusal to
comply with that resolution,
Taking note of the resolution adopted on 12 June 1981
by the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency 23 and of resolution GC(XXV)/RES/381 adopted
on 26 September 1981 by the General Conference of the
Agency, in which the Conference, inter alia, considered
that the Israeli act of aggression constituted an attack against
the Agency and its safeguards regime and decided to suspend
the provision of any assistance to Israel,
Fully aware of the fact that Iraq, being a party to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 24 has
subscribed to the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards regime, and that the Agency has testified that these
safeguards have been satisfactorily applied.
Noting with concern that Israel has refused to adhere to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
21
Official Records of the General Assembh. Thirtv-sixth Session. Annexes, agenda item 20, document A/36/666. ·
·
22
Ibid., document A/36/642-S/14742.
23
See GC (XXV)/643.
24
Resolution 2373 (XXII I, annex.

17

and, in spite of repeated calls, including that of the Security
Council. to place its nuclear facilities under International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards,
Alarmed by the increasing information and evidence regarding Israel's activities aiming at the acquisition and development of nuclear weapons,
Gravely concerned over the misuse by Israel, in committing its acts of aggression against Arab countries, of
aircraft and weapons supplied by the United States of
America.
Condemning the Israeli threats to repeat such attacks on
nuclear installations if and when it deems it necessary,
Affirming the inalienable sovereign right of all States to
develop technological and nuclear programmes for peaceful
purposes, in accordance with the internationally accepted
objectives of preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons,
I. Strongly condemns Israel for its premeditated and
unprecedented act of aggression in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and the norms of international conduct, which constitutes a new and dangerous escalation in
the threat to international peace and security;
2. Issues a solemn warning to Israel to cease its threats
and the commission of such armed attacks against nuclear
facilities;
3. Reiterates its call to all States to cease forthwith any
provision to Israel of arms and related material of all types
which enable it to commit acts of aggression against other
States;
4. Requests the Security Council to investigate Israel's
nuclear activities and the collaboration of other States and
parties in those activities;
5. Reiterates its request to the Security Council to institute effective enforcement action to prevent Israel from
further endangering international peace and security through
its acts of aggression and continued policies of expansion,
occupation and annexation;
6. Demands that Israel, in view of its international responsibility for its act of aggression, pay prompt and adequate compensation for the material damage and loss of life
suffered as a result of that act;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep Member
States and the Security Council informed of progress towards the implementation of the present resolution and to
submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its
grave consequences for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security'·.
56th plenary meeting
13 November 1981

36/34.

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "The situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and
security'·.
Recalling its resolutions ES-6/2 of 14 January 1980 and
35/37 of 20 November 1980, adopted at the sixth emergency
special session and the thirty-fifth session respectively,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the obligation of all States to refrain
