S/PV.8202

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8202nd meeting

Wednesday, 14 March 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Oosterom. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopiav. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Ms. French

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2018/154)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-06980 (E)
*1806980*

S/PV.8202

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). It is particularly important that we review
the progress made so far following the first phase of
the reconfiguration, in particular in the light of the
forthcoming strategic review of the mission in April.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2018/154)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeremiah
Kingsley Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative
for Darfur and Head of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, to participate in
this meeting.
Mr. Mamabolo is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from El Fasher.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/154, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Mamabolo and Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka, Permanent Representative of Poland, in her
capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan.
Recalling the Security Council’s latest note 507 on
its working methods (S/2017/507), I wish to encourage
all participants, both members and non-members of the
Council, to deliver their statements in five minutes or
less. Note 507 also encourages briefers to be succinct and
to focus on key issues. Briefers are further encouraged
to limit initial remarks to 15 minutes or less.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mamabolo.
Mr. Mamabolo: I am honoured to once again
have an opportunity to update the Security Council
on the situation in Darfur and on issues concerning
the implementation of the mandate of the African
2/10

14/03/2018

The report of the Secretary General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2018/154) covers the period from 16 December
2017 to 15 February 2018, during which UNAMID
started phase two of its reconfiguration.
Under the second phase, the Jebel Marra Task Force
is being operationalized. To that end, since January, the
Mission has embarked on the redeployment of military
and police personnel, as well as civilian staff, in order
to strengthen the operations of the Jebel Marra Task
Force. In addition, the construction of the temporary
operating base in Golo is under way. However, we
continue to face challenges in accessing Golo through
Kabkabiyah. One of our engineering contingents is
providing assistance in improving the condition of
the road. The mission force is currently organized in
two sectors, namely, the Jebel Marra Task Force, with
its headquarters in Zalingei, and the State Security
Assistance Force, which covers areas outside the area
of operation of the Task Force.
Furthermore, the reconfiguration in phase two also
entails a further reduction in the number of military
personnel to 8,735 and of police personnel to 2,500. We
have also reduced the number of civilian by 422, and are
expected to reduce it by approximately 158 more. The
deployment of formed police units to team sites from
which the military has withdrawn or rotated started at
the beginning of this month. We expect that the formed
police units will be fully operational at the Saraf Omra,
Korma, El Sherif and Masteri team sites by 30 March.
It is too early to make a realistic assessment of
the impact on the overall security and protection-ofcivilians situation in areas from which UNAMID
withdrew under phase one of the mission’s
reconfiguration plan. Although there are some
administrative restrictions regarding access imposed
by the Government, nevertheless the mission continues
to engage with the Government to overcome those
challenges and to do everything within its mandate to
access and monitor the situation in those areas. We are
in the process of finalizing an assessment of the impact
caused by the closure of the various team sites to enable
18-06980

14/03/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

us to determine the potential and actual impact of our
disengagement in those areas.
Intra- and inter-communal clashes persist in some
areas of Darfur, albeit at a relatively reduced scale. We
have also experienced instability in some traditionally
restive camps for internally displaced persons (IDP),
such as Korma, Hassa Hissa and Hamadiya. Those
clashes are mainly fuelled by traditional and longstanding unresolved socioeconomic and political
issues that have been the root causes of Darfur’s
conflict landscape over the years. UNAMID has been
intervening in a constructive way within the framework
of the mission’s protection-of-civilians strategy.
The stalemate in the Darfur peace process persists,
despite our numerous efforts in support of President
Mbeki in our collective efforts to persuade the parties to
the conflict to sign cessation-of-hostilities agreements
and commence direct negotiations. The framework
for the negotiations continues to be the main issue of
contention. I maintain contact with the Darfur armed
movements, with the most recent meeting taking place
on 1 March in Addis Ababa. We continue to urge them
to accede to negotiations on the basis of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. I therefore call upon
Council members’ respective countries to use their
bilateral channels to exhort the parties to the Darfur
conflict to sign cessation-of-hostilities agreements
and resume negotiations, including to use leverage
with Abdul Wahid to prevail upon him to acknowledge
the futility of war and to join the peace process. That
would be the only way whereby the people of Darfur,
and indeed the international community, could have
any realistic hope of achieving durable peace in Darfur.
The situation in Darfur now is not the same as it
was in 2003. Except for the sporadic clashes between
the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid in the Jebel Marra area, there is
general absence of war in Darfur. I believe that the
adjustment of UNAMID’s mandate and posture over
the years, from resolution 1769 (2007) to 2363 (2017),
was a clear recognition of that evolving reality. The
fundamental question is: What do we do with those
conditions of relative peace and stability in Darfur?
Over the past several months I have visited various
parts of Darfur to get first-hand information on what
the people of Darfur say and want. In a nutshell,
they say there is relative peace and stability; they
commend UNAMID for contributing to that state of
affairs; and they acknowledge the positive impact of

S/PV. 8202

the civilian weapons-collection exercise initiated by
the Government. Nevertheless, there have been some
complaints from some members of the IDP communities
relating to the perceived lack of fairness of the civilian
weapons-collection exercise. That notwithstanding,
IDPs do want to return to their areas of origin, but
under conducive conditions. Most important, they
want resources for post-conflict reconstruction
and development.
Pursuant to resolution 2363 (2017), in collaboration
with the United Nations country team, the mission
continues to give priority to activities geared towards
supporting the stabilization of the situation through
economic, social and political initiatives and assistance
designed to consolidate the prevailing relative peace
and stability. Consultations with stakeholders are
being undertaken on the conceptual framework and
policy for implementing the stabilization mandate
in Darfur. Despite the relative stability, concerns
persist nonetheless that, owing to insecurity and land
occupation issues, many IDPs are not able to return
to their areas of origin. In that context, we have been
engaging with stakeholders, including the Government
of the Sudan, in search of durable solutions to the
problems of IDPs.
Without question, a significant amount of
resources is required for post-conflict reconstruction
and the development of Darfur. I therefore appeal to
all Council members to play their part, either through
bilateral commitments of resources by their respective
countries or through much-needed advocacy for early
recovery and development in Darfur. As the mission
engages in the stabilization phase, we are duty-bound
to do it in a manner that consolidates, not compromises,
the gains that our presence has achieved over the years.
Such actions should include the injection of resources
by the international community in order to assist with
socioeconomic development and the establishment, as
well as consolidation, of State authority throughout
Darfur. In the same vein, I would urge the Council to
ensure that adequate resources are mobilized and that
they are commensurate with the pace of UNAMID’s
drawdown of its personnel to drive continued stability.
In conclusion, on behalf of UNAMID, let me
express our gratitude to the Council for its important
support. Especially as we embark on this critical stage
of UNAMID’s engagement in Darfur, we will need
more, not less, of the Council’s generous support.

18-069803/10

S/PV.8202

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The President: I thank Mr. Mamabolo for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Wronecka.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In accordance with
paragraph 3 (a) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have the
honour to brief the Security Council on the work of the
Sudan Sanctions Committee, covering the period from
8 December 2017 to 14 March 2018. I am pleased to
deliver this first briefing as Chair of the Committee
back to back with Mr. Mamabolo’s briefing on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), which will help increase synergies
between the Committee and UNAMID.
On 28 December 2017, under the stewardship of
my predecessor, Ambassador Volodymyr Yelchenko of
Ukraine, the Committee met to hear a presentation by
the Panel of Experts on its final report (see S/2017/1125)
and to discuss the Panel’s recommendations. I will not
repeat the findings of the final report, given that it was
transmitted to the members of the Council immediately
after the Committee’s meeting. On the following day,
the Committee issued a press release with a summary
of the meeting.
Let me now turn to the three recommendations
addressed to the Committee in the final report of the
Panel of Experts.
In recommendation (a), the Panel of Experts
proposed that the Committee continue to monitor the
presence and activities of Darfuri rebels in Libya and
South Sudan. As a follow-up to the recommendation,
the Committee agreed to encourage the Panel of Experts
to continue to cooperate with other relevant sanctions
committees and their panels of experts. The Committee
also agreed to consider organizing joint meetings with
other committees as necessary.
With regard to recommendation (b), the Panel of
Experts informed the Committee on 30 January that the
proposed amendments to the sanctions list contained
in the final report had inadvertently omitted identifier
information and subsequently provided the Committee
with revised proposed amendments. Such amendments
to the list and the names of three individuals are
currently under consideration by the Committee.
With regard to recommendation (c), on 30 January the
Committee sent a letter to the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan, encouraging the Government of the
Sudan to instruct its border control agency to monitor
4/10

14/03/2018

the cross-border movement of the individuals listed.
On 2 February the Committee held its fifth meeting
with the Sudan and States of the region to discuss the
implementation of the measures. The Sudan and eight
States of the region — the Central African Republic,
Chad, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Libya, South Sudan and
Uganda — participated in the meeting. It focused on
the final report of the Panel of Experts. Following a
briefing by the Panel on its final report, the Sudan and
States of the region shared their views on the findings
of the Panel. The States invited also stressed their
commitment to the implementation of the Council’s
resolutions. The Committee and the States invited
agreed to build on the spirit of cooperation through
constructive dialogue. A summary of the meeting was
made available in a press release issued on 8 February.
During the Committee meeting on 2 February, I
informed it of my intention to conduct a visit to the
Sudan in April. I had discussed it informally with the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan and received a
positive response. That will be the third Chair’s visit to
the Sudan, following the first one in January 2014 and
the second in May 2017. The draft terms of reference of
the visit were approved by the Committee on 12 March.
It will now await the consent of the Government of
the Sudan.
On 22 February, the Committee received a letter
from the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
proposing five individuals to serve on the newly extended
Panel of Experts pursuant to resolution 2400 (2018), of
8 February 2018. The Committee had no objections to
four of the candidates proposed, but the fifth candidate
was placed on hold by three members of the Committee.
On the same day, the Committee received from the
Panel of Experts a draft implementation assistance
notice on the requirements for end-user documentation
under resolution 1945 (2010). The notice was prepared
as a follow-up to recommendation (a) of the first report
of the Panel of Experts. The proposed notice is now
under consideration by the Committee.
The Committee received two quarterly updates
from the Panel of Experts during the reporting period,
on 6 February and 12 March, and an implementation
report from a Member State. The Committee issued its
annual report for 2017 as document S/2017/1081, which
is available on the Committee’s website.
The President: I thank Ms. Wronecka for
her briefing.
18-06980

14/03/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8202

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.

the supply of weapons and the funding of rebel groups,
as well as submitting timely requests for exemptions.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
today’s meeting. We also thank Ambassador Jeremiah
Kingsley Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative
for Darfur and Head of the United Nations-African
Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID), and Ambassador
Joanna Wronecka, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the
Sudan, for their briefings.

Nonetheless, such measures must be complemented
by other steps to address the root causes of the
conflict if we truly desire lasting peace in Darfur. The
vulnerabilities, weak institutions and poverty in Darfur
must be addressed so as to prevent another outbreak of
conflict. We believe that it is essential to implement the
provisions governing land tenure, ensure food security
and create decent employment opportunities for the
population. We must resume the political process and
encourage more women and young people to participate
in it. It is vital to make headway in implementing the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and broker an
agreement on a permanent ceasefire.

We take note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (S/2018/154) and the report of the Panel of
Experts on the Sudan established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) (see S/2017/1081).
We believe the relative calm and stability in Darfur
are encouraging. Nonetheless, we remain concerned
about the humanitarian situation, which has led to
more than 2.7 million displaced persons, and about the
human rights situation, which primarily affects women
and children. We welcome Pramila Patten’s first visit to
the Sudan as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We also
commend the progress made in the implementation of
the action plan to end and prevent the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict, signed in March 2016
by the Government of the Sudan, as well as the visit
by Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
The Government of the Sudan should continue its efforts
to protect its people from such dreadful crimes, allow
victims access to justice and punish those responsible.
With regard to security, given the relative stability,
we would like to welcome the decrease in the number of
intercommunal clashes and the various reconciliation
initiatives, as well as the establishment of a joint
mechanism to regulate agriculture and prevent the
theft of livestock. We also welcome the signing of the
memorandum of understanding between UNAMID
and the Government of the Sudan for the opening of a
temporary base in Golo, the subsequent transfer of land,
the visit of the Vice-President of the Sudan to Darfur
and his commitment to carrying out development
projects in the area. The Government of the Sudan and
all Member States must collaborate more effectively
with the Sanctions Committee through, among other
things, ensuring adequate border control, preventing

In conclusion, we would like to underscore the
efforts of UNAMID and the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel in achieving those goals.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin my statement by paying
well-deserved tribute to and thanking Mr. Jeremiah
Kingsley Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative
for Darfur and Head of the United Nations-African
Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID), for his excellent
briefing on the bimonthly report the Secretary-General
on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (S/2018/154) and his tremendous efforts at the
helm of this important mission. We also congratulate
and thank Ambassador Joanna Wronecka of Poland
for her substantive and insightful briefing as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan.
Based on the briefings we have just heard, there
has been a marked improvement in the overall security
situation in Darfur with very few, if any, clashes
reported between the Government and armed groups
in Darfur during the dry season, which is encouraging
and highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report. The
Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
commends the Sudanese Government for creating an
environment and conditions conducive to ensuring
lasting improvement in Darfur, and urges it to
continue working towards that end. We fully support
it in its search for a definitive solution that will bring
irreversible peace to Darfur.
In order to achieve that objective, the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea believes that in the current
phase, both the United Nations and the international

18-069805/10

S/PV.8202

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

community must enhance their support for the
Sudanese Government and UNAMID so that they may
in turn address the root causes of the crisis which, at
times, can spark isolated clashes that could potentially
escalate. That is the case of intercommunal attacks,
which require mediation and reconciliation efforts to
prevent and put an end to such conflicts.
Additionally, there is an urgent need to support
the Sudanese Government in its weapons-collection
programme. The full implementation of that programme
is critical not only to maintaining the current peace in
Darfur, but also to restoring definitive peace to the
region, especially since that critical programme is
being carried out in the Jebel Marra zone, controlled by
the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid.
While the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
commends the Sudanese Government for these actions,
it also urges the Government to closely monitor the
activities of the Rapid Support Force during the
weapons-collection operation. It must urge the Forces
to abstain from interfering with internally displaced
persons, especially in Central Darfur, so as to prevent a
resurgence of tension in the zone.
Parallel to the security situation in Darfur
which, according to the report presented today by
Mr. Mamabolo, has been constantly improving, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like to see similar
improvements at the political level, accompanied by
significant progress in the political process and the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur to secure a total ceasefire. In that regard, greater
support must be provided to the political process led by
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel.
In order to facilitate all of those aspects, we must
eliminate all obstacles. That is why we once again
thank Ambassador Wronecka, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan, for the work of the Committee
in monitoring the activities of rebel groups in Darfur,
Libya and South Sudan with a view to updating and
imposing new sanctions to serve as a deterrent to
activities that derail peace efforts.
In conclusion, we once again applaud the Sudanese
Government and UNAMID for their peace efforts in
Darfur and urge them to redouble their efforts for the
sake of the Sudanese population in general and the
people of Darfur in particular, and to appeal to the
international community to lend all necessary support
6/10

14/03/2018

to the establishment of peace and peacebuilding in order
to ensure the rebuilding of Darfur and the launching of
a plan for its development.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Bolivia) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Joint Special Representative for
Darfur and Head of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, for his comprehensive introduction of the
Secretary-General’s bimonthly report Organization
(S/2018/154). Through him, we also commend the work
that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur is conducting on the ground. Finally, we thank
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka for her 90-day report on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan. As this
is the first time she has spoken in the Chamber in her
capacity as Chair, we wish her every success in her
duties, and we express our support for this session of
the Committee’s work.
At the outset, we stress the positive aspects
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report, mainly
in the field of security, which has remained stable,
as in past reporting periods. The fact that no major
confrontations have occurred between the Sudanese
Government and the rebel groups of Darfur is essential
to maintaining stability and focusing the efforts of the
Government and UNAMID on consolidating peace and
advancing the political process in order to address the
root causes of the conflict, including land ownership,
and driving development in Darfur.
We also note the progress made in the Governmentled weapons-collection campaign. We believe that
this process helps to improve the security situation
in Darfur. Its success is critical to bolstering security
in communities and to stable and sustainable
peacebuilding. To that end, we must avoid division and
promote the commitment of the civilian population and
the militias. This Government campaign, which is in
line with UNAMID’s peacebuilding process, requires
the decisive support of the international community
In that regard, we welcome the timely visit of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict to Darfur, Ms. Virginia Gamba. We join her in
recognizing the encouraging efforts of the Government
of the Sudan in the implementation of the action plan to
end and prevent the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflicts. We are aware that there is still a lot of
work to be done, but there has been significant progress.
18-06980

14/03/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Regarding the humanitarian situation, we regret
that clashes between factions of the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid have produced new displacements
in Jebel Marra. However, we note improved access
of humanitarian assistance to this area, which was
previously inaccessible. Nevertheless, it is evident that
the situation of internally displaced persons in general
is worrisome and, despite the intense efforts of the
Government, UNAMID and humanitarian workers, it
still presents several challenges. It is urgent that the
international community support the development
of projects that enable internally displaced persons
to access basic services and to improve their quality
of life.
We note that no new cases of obstruction of
humanitarian assistance have been reported, which
reflects the good relationship between and joint
work of the Government and the various United
Nations agencies. We hope to continue improving
the operational environment of UNAMID. We also
express our appreciation for the work carried out by the
World Health Organization, UNICEF, the World Food
Programme and other humanitarian agencies.
On the other hand, although human rights violations
and other types of crimes have decreased compared to
the previous period, we must redouble efforts to put an
end to illegal detention and violence against women
and girls, particularly sexual gender-based violence,
and must bring those responsible to justice.
Bolivia believes that the political situation remains
one of the main challenges facing the Sudan. We welcome
Government efforts to promote the implementation of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We stress that
the only possible solution to the situation in that area is
a political process that can address the root issues of the
conflict and its attendant consequences.
We must enhance efforts to resolve differences over
the Doha Document and we call on the non-signatory
movements to engage constructively in dialogue with
the Government with a view to achieving a definitive
cessation of hostilities. In that connection, we welcome
the efforts of the Joint Special Representative for Darfur,
Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, UNAMID and the members
of the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel responsible for the implementation of the
recommendations for the Sudan and South Sudan.
We also commend the progress made in the
reconfiguration process of UNAMID, the successful

S/PV. 8202

completion of the phase one and the launch of phase
two. We must make sure to strengthen the capabilities
of the United Nations country team in order to ensure a
successful withdrawal from the Hybrid Operation.
In conclusion, we look forward to the next visit
of the Chairman of the 1591 Committee. We would do
well to review the measures imposed by the Council on
that country to ensure that they are suited to the current
situation on the ground.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing our deep appreciation to Joint Special
Representative Mamabolo for his comprehensive
briefing on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and to Ambassador
Wronecka for her first 90-day report on the work of
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan. My delegation endorses the
outcome of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/154)
and would like to offer the following observations.
Kazakhstan is encouraged by the continuing
improvement in the security and humanitarian situation
in Darfur, as well as the strengthened cooperation
between the Sudanese Government, the United Nations
and the African Union. We hope that the armscollection campaign, which positively contributed to an
improved security situation and an overall reduction in
criminal activities, will be inclusive and conducted in
respect of citizens’ rights. We welcome the extensions
of the unilateral ceasefire by parties to the conflict and
hope that they will undertake the necessary measures
to invigorate an inclusive political process led by the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel.
We hope that the recent meeting between President
Al-Bashir and the leader of the Sudan Liberation
Movement/Army-Second Revolution, Abu Al-Qasim,
will facilitate the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur and further contribute to ensuring
the voluntary return of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees. Kazakhstan is pleased to note the
timely conclusion of phase one of the reconfiguration
of UNAMID. We expect that its second phase will also
be successfully implemented in accordance with the
established timeline.
In view of the significantly improved security
situation, we now need to prioritize UNAMID’s
peacebuilding mandate, including support for
capacity-building and quick-impact and community
stabilization measures. Such efforts should focus on the

18-069807/10

S/PV.8202

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

implementation of the UNAMID Integrated Strategic
Framework for Darfur and the United Nations country
team for the period 2017-2019, which has identified
priorities related to bringing about sustainable peace
in Darfur. We express our support for the upcoming
visit by Ambassador Wronecka, Chair of the 1591
Committee, to Khartoum. We hope that the visit will
further contribute to the strengthening of constructive
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Sudanese Government.
In conclusion, we call on the international
community to provide the needed support to the
Government of the Sudan to address the root causes of
the conflict, including through providing basic services
in remote areas, finding durable solutions for IDPs and
making the arms-collection campaign a success.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): My delegation thanks Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo,
Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) for his excellent briefing on the
implementation of UNAMID’s mandate. It also thanks
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, in her capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, for her briefing on
the work of the Committee.
My statement will centre on the following issues:
developments in the security, political and humanitarian
situation in Darfur and the implementation of
UNAMID’s mandate.
Concerning the security situation, Côte d’Ivoire
commends the progress made in terms of security and
notes with satisfaction the commitment of the Sudanese
Government to working towards establishing a stable
and secure environment for the people of Darfur. Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the fact that the weapons-collection
campaign initiated by the Government has contributed
to a decrease in crime and intercommunal conflicts.
My country therefore urges the Government to pursue
that initiative by encouraging inclusiveness and respect
for human rights and prior commitments aimed at
ensuring stability in the Kalma internally displaced
persons camp. The Ivorian delegation welcomes the
extension of the ceasefire effected and agreed upon by
the Sudanese Government and rebel groups, and calls
on the latter to show a greater willingness to reach a
permanent ceasefire through dialogue.
8/10

14/03/2018

Concerning the political context, Côte d’Ivoire is
concerned about the stalemate in the implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. My
country encourages stakeholders to fully implement
the terms of the agreement with a view to finding a
lasting solution to the root causes of the conflict in the
interest of the Sudanese people. While we welcome
the initiatives taken by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel for the Sudan and South Sudan in
resuming the national dialogue and implementing the
Doha agreement, Côte d’Ivoire calls on non-signatory
armed groups to prioritize the interests of the people
of Darfur and join the agreement. Similarly, owing to
the importance of land management in the Sudanese
conflict, Côte d’Ivoire encourages the Government of
the Sudan to implement the “Right to land restitution
policy” so as to provide a solution to one of the root
causes of the conflict as quickly as possible.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
country welcomes the improvement of humanitarian
access in Darfur, including in Jebel Marra. It is
nevertheless concerned about the recent displacement
of persons during the reporting period, as registered
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/154),
as well as the heightened risk of food insecurity.
My delegation therefore calls on the international
community to provide assistance to those people in
need, and urges the Sudanese authorities to continue to
work to establish an environment that is conducive to
the return of people to their areas of origin. Likewise,
Côte d’Ivoire encourages UNAMID to maintain its
assistance in strengthening the capacity of judicial and
human rights institutions so as to address allegations of
human rights violations more effectively.
Concerning UNAMID, my country commends
its efforts to stabilize Darfur and congratulates the
Mission on the scheduled launch of phase two of the
reconfiguration pursuant to resolution 2363 (2017).
Accordingly, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes improved
cooperation between the Sudanese Government
and UNAMID. The opening of the Golo team site
demonstrates the Government’s willingness to assist the
Mission in that important process towards establishing
lasting peace in Darfur. Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls
on the Sudanese authorities to pursue their work and
ensure that the terms of the status of forces agreement
are respected so as to enable UNAMID to carry out its
mandate without hindrance.
18-06980

14/03/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, my country congratulates
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka for the work she has done
in her capacity as Chair of the 1591 Sudan sanctions
committee, and reaffirms its support for her upcoming
visit to the region. It also congratulates the Sudanese
Government on its work in improving the security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur.
The President: I wish to again encourage all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I would also like to express our thanks
to your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of Kuwait, for his able leadership of the Council in
February.
I hope that in the time allowed I will be able to
comment on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/154), the briefings of Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo
and Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, and the statements
of the other Council members who took the floor this
morning. I count on your understanding, Mr. President.
First of all, I would like to address the Joint Special
Representative for Darfur and the Head of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, and thank him
for his briefing and for his affirmation that the situation
in Darfur today is characterized by a general absence
of war. This is largely due to the adoption in June of
resolution 2363 (2017), which has transformed the
situation in Darfur and moved it into the peacebuilding
phase. In this phase, we are all joining efforts aimed
at successfully bring an end to tensions and return to
status quo before 2003.
Between 2003 and 2018, Darfur underwent a
great transformation, and I personally witnessed and
participated in all of the different phases and processes
in this time frame, always in search of peace — in
Chad, Abuja, Doha, Geneva, Addis Ababa, Bahir Dar
and elsewhere around the world. I am pleased and
honoured that we are now reaping the fruits of our
efforts to achieve peace. Peace is important and it is

S/PV. 8202

part of the beliefs and constituents of the Sudanese
people throughout history.
I also thank the members of the Council for
their concern for the situation in Darfur and for their
recommendations, which we will definitely implement.
We thank them for understanding the phase that the
peace process has reached in Darfur and in other parts
of the Sudan. We have reviewed the most recent periodic
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the UNAMID mandate in Darfur, which is presented
every 60 days. We continue to believe that limiting
the reporting period to 60 days is a constraint on
UNAMID and the Secretariat at a time when Darfur is
witnessing complete stability and significant progress
in all aspects, resulting in reports that look very much
alike and contain nothing new. I would like to add that
since there is nothing new in these reports, except some
petty crimes and incidents reported at police stations,
this proves that the situation in Darfur has indeed been
transformed.
With regard to the implementation of resolution
2363 (2017), which provides for the reconfiguration
of UNAMID and its gradual withdrawal, we affirm
that the Darfur situation has entered a new phase of
peacebuilding and working towards achieving stability,
security and peace in all states of Darfur. This is in line
with what the Sudanese Government has continually
called for since 2015, namely, that we must adapt to
the significant transformations that have taken place
in Darfur, by which the nature of the conflict has
changed. In fact, nothing remains of the conflict except
with respect to the two issues of displaced persons and
development, which are issues of importance throughout
the developing world and directly linked to the agenda
of peace. The time has come for the Secretariat to
change its approach and bring it into alignment with
the position of the Security Council.
The people and the Government of the Sudan are
now on the verge of a new phase of peace, stability and
serious work in which they are seeking development in
Darfur and throughout the country. As they embrace
peaceful coexistence, they begin the reconstruction
of their country with no difference between the State,
popular, collective or individual efforts. The world
saw the Sudanese girl Imtithal Mahmoud walk for 30
days from Fashir to Khartoum, covering a very long
distance, which heralded the arrival of peace cultured
in the Sudanese people. We hope that this will motivate
the international community to support and encourage

18-069809/10

S/PV.8202

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Sudanese Government as it moves forward with
the support of the people of Darfur to consolidate and
sustain peace.
One of the major projects is the campaign to collect
arms from the citizens now that the reasons that led
to the acquisition of these arms in 2003 no longer
exist. Reports indicate that as planned, this campaign
has been very effective, despite limited resources. We
are determined to carry on with the campaign. As we
have affirmed previously, it is necessary to collect
weapons in order to achieve stability and security.
The Secretary-General and everybody else have
seen the positive impact of the weapons-collection
campaign on the security situation in Darfur. The
Government will therefore spare no effort to make
this campaign a success. In this regard, we emphasize
the importance of our partnership with UNAMID and
the ongoing consultations and meetings with the Joint
Representative for Darfur. We congratulate him on his
continued efforts aimed at bringing peace to Darfur
and Africa.
We look forward to concluding phase two of the
UNAMID downsizing, closing some of its sites and
achieving staff reductions pursuant to resolution
2363 (2017). The Sudanese Government emphasizes
that it will continue to cooperate with UNAMID so
as to allow it to fulfil its mandate completely. We
also affirm the importance of this cooperation in all
areas, which has been documented in the report before
us and previous reports, particularly with respect to
unloading containers, issuing visas, giving movement
permission and access to the Mission and humanitarian
partners, as well as responding to UNAMID’s request
to open a temporary operations base in Golo. We would
ask UNAMID and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to reconsider the issue of constructing the
Zalengei-Golo-Rokero road, which would greatly serve
the people of the region and rehabilitate the service
facilities there.
We thank the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the

10/10

14/03/2018

Sudan for her report, and the Security Council for
reducing the number of members of the Panel of Experts
by one, who is Abhai Kumar. We confirm the statement
of the previous Chair of the sanctions committee, to
the effect that the sanctions regime must respond to the
positive developments in general in Darfur, in line with
resolution 2363 (2017), and that this can happen only
by reducing the number of members of the Panel of
Experts. The Panel must conclude its work and lift the
sanctions. We are pleased to inform the Council that the
Sudanese Government has approved the upcoming visit
to Khartoum of the Chair of the sanctions committee,
Ambassador Wronecka, in April.
As for what some members of the Council said
with respect to the number of displaced persons, I note
that the resident representative of the United Nations
in the Sudan, in coordination with the Humanitarian
Aid Commission, confirmed six months ago that the
number of displaced persons did not exceed 1.7 million.
We are hopeful that that number has fallen further in the
six months since that announcement. We would request
that the correct figures be promulgated, as issued by
the United Nations relevant bodies.
In conclusion, we commend all the strenuous
efforts made to consolidate the peace process. We
once again welcome the dawn of peace and the launch
of development, ending the conflict once and for
all. The delegation of my country thanks UNAMID
for its efforts in various fields and for the sacrifices
of its peacekeepers in the past years. We also thank
troop- and police-contributing countries and reiterate
the readiness of the Government of the Sudan to
cooperate with all regional and international partners
in all matters related to UNAMID so as to guarantee
its success until the last of its components leaves the
territories of my country.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

18-06980
