United Nations

S/PV.6740

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6740th meeting
Monday, 26 March 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-27487 (E)

*1227487*

S/PV.6740

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

basic services; fourthly, the restoration of core
Government functions; and fifthly, economic
revitalization.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President: Under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Susana Malcorra, UnderSecretary-General for Field Support, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous: I am indeed pleased to be here
today as the Council once again debates the important
issue of the role of peacekeepers in peacebuilding and
the related issue of transitions.
In the last three years, we have come a long way
in terms of sharpening our understanding of what
building peace entails. There is a consensus across the
United Nations and beyond on the broad priorities of
what is inevitably a complex and long-term effort.
Building
peace
means
helping
national
institutions reach a point where they are able to
maintain a sufficient level of stability and security, in
particular through respect for the rule of law and
human rights. It also means that such national
institutions are sufficiently representative to maintain
the consensus necessary to advance the peacebuilding
process. Peace is more likely to be sustained if tangible
progress is also made in addressing basic needs and
advancing economic recovery.
The consensus on peacebuilding has been refined
through the report (S/2009/304) of the SecretaryGeneral on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath
of conflict and further elaborated on in the 2011 World
Development Report. The Secretary-General’s 2009
report in particular provides a broad framework by
highlighting five recurring priorities for United Nations
engagement in peacebuilding: first, the delivery of
basic safety and security for citizens; secondly,
inclusive political processes; thirdly, the provision of

2

Building peace is an ambitious undertaking; it
reflects a generational effort that will continue long
after peacekeepers have left. Success depends on
national and international political will and decades of
support from a broad array of international and
regional actors.
What, then, is the specific role of peacekeepers in
this effort? Peacekeepers are seen as the guarantors of
the fragile shift from conflict to peace. When the
Council mandates peacekeeping operations, it is not
only to stabilize the country and keep the peace but
also to contribute to the building of a sustainable
peace.
Multidimensional peacekeeping operations are
fundamentally political tools. A study undertaken by
the Centre for International Cooperation on the
peacebuilding elements of peacekeeping mandates
found that peacebuilding tasks have been a steady
feature of peacekeeping mandates since the early
1990s. Over time, those tasks have become more
complex and wide-ranging. Most of the mandated
peacebuilding tasks focus on the first two priority areas
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General, namely,
support for basic safety and security, and support for
political processes. For instance, in resolution 1996
(2011), which set the mandate of United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the term
“peacebuilding” is mentioned nine times. Talking about
the role of peacekeepers in peacebuilding is not about
expanding peacekeeping or adding new tasks to
mandates. It is about making the most of the tasks that
peacekeepers are already being asked to perform.
In an effort to further clarify the role of
peacekeepers in peacebuilding vis-à-vis other actors,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support developed their “nexus
paper”, which states that peacekeeping operations have
three peacebuilding roles: first, we help Governments
articulate priorities by supporting consensus among
national counterparts and the broader international
community, and guiding overall strategy development
and implementation; secondly, we enable other
national and international actors to implement
peacebuilding tasks by providing a security umbrella,
logistical support and political space for reconciliation

12-27487

S/PV.6740

efforts and economic recovery to develop; and, thirdly,
we implement certain early peacebuilding tasks
ourselves, including through support for political
processes, security sector reform and by engaging in
early capacity-building in certain areas, in close
collaboration with other partners.
While we have developed a better and shared
understanding of what peacebuilding entails and our
specific role in it, the answer to successful
peacebuilding does not lie in terms and definitions. The
true challenge remains the question of how we build
peace. To give just one example, there is broad
consensus that strengthened institutions are a critical
element of sustainable peace. Yet after years of
engagement in such countries as Liberia, Sierra Leone,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Timor-Leste,
Haiti and others, despite undeniable and substantial
progress, national institutions remain fragile and we, as
well as our partners, are still grappling to find the best
approach that would allow us to improve our individual
contributions and yield the expected results.
To maximize the United Nations contribution to
building peace, and specifically that of peacekeepers,
three elements are critical. We must ensure that we
identify and address the specific priorities of a country
and its people. We have to clarify the roles and
responsibilities of the various United Nations actors
and strengthen our partnerships with non-United
Nations actors. We should periodically review and
adjust our engagement to best adapt to an evolving
situation on the ground.
Applying these elements continuously and
systematically throughout our presence will have the
added benefit of facilitating a more controlled
drawdown and withdrawal of our engagement, and
thereby help guarantee that our combined investment
will result in long-lasting progress.
We do not believe that peacekeepers should
address the full spectrum of peacebuilding activities.
Peacekeepers are best suited to prioritizing those
initiatives that advance the peace process or political
objectives of a mission. These initiatives may also
ensure security or lay the foundation for longer-term
institution-building in a few key areas. The DPKODFS early peacebuilding strategy guides peacekeeping
operations to use this political and security prism to
identify appropriate activities. For the rest, other
partners must come to the fore.

12-27487

As I mentioned earlier, this is not about
expanding the tasks of peacekeepers. In our
experience, the Council does not need to assign new or
more detailed tasks or mandates to peacekeeping
operations. Rather, our focus should be on translating
the broad goals of the Council into operational plans
and tools on the basis of national priorities.
Determining national priorities in post-conflict
countries is indeed a delicate task. When societies are
still too torn and politically polarized, and when
national consensus and reconciliation remain elusive,
formulating objectives and pursuing them in a
consensual manner is a political challenge. This is why
the role of the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General is essential to balancing the political
process and institution-building imperatives, in close
consultation with national actors. Also, institutional
capacity to formulate priorities can be weak or
non-existent. We must avoid overwhelming fragile
institutions, and we must provide consistent and
coherent support.
Strong national ownership and leadership in the
formulation of peacebuilding priorities are essential. In
Liberia, the host Government and the Peacebuilding
Commission adopted a statement of mutual
commitments in October 2010, which outlines
commonly agreed peacebuilding priorities: the rule of
law, security sector reform and national reconciliation.
In Timor-Leste, the Strategic Development Plan
provides the basis for international support to the
country and is coordinated through the national
priorities programme supported by the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste. The South Sudan
Development Plan provides the national priorities
around which the United Nations country team and the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan have developed their peacebuilding goals, called
for in Security Council resolution 1996 (2011).
In this context, I would like to also mention the
New Deal, which, as members know, was adopted at
the Fourth High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in
Busan, Republic of Korea, last year and aims at
aligning international development assistance around
five peacebuilding and State-building goals. The New
Deal stresses mutual obligations and strong national
ownership. Among the signatories, seven countries
playing host to United Nations missions —
Afghanistan, Liberia, Timor-Leste, South Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone and

3

S/PV.6740

the Central African Republic — have volunteered to
trial this new approach. The Government of South
Sudan has also requested the United Nations family to
orient its engagement around those goals.
The New Deal reflects a strong expression of
commitment by host countries to strengthening their
leadership role in the peacebuilding process. We are
working closely with relevant missions, the
Peacebuilding Support Office, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank
on the follow up to the New Deal at the global level.
We count on Member States to align their various
national policies behind those priorities articulated by
host countries, and to speak with one voice in their
multiple functions as Council members, representatives
to the Fifth Committee, members of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, or members
of executive boards of United Nations agencies, funds
and
programmes,
and
international
financial
institutions.
To help national actors transition from war to
peace, we have to work in partnership with United
Nations and non-United Nations actors. Integrated,
multidimensional United Nations missions help to
realize this partnership as they bring together, through
one leadership team, the whole spectrum of the
capacities of the United Nations system. Yet, differing
mandates, governance structures and financing
arrangements complicate effective coordination and
coherence focused on priorities.
An answer to this challenge lies in integrated
planning and leadership. The integrated mission
planning process provides a framework through which
the United Nations leadership on the ground can
articulate a joint vision and strategy for United Nations
engagement based on the mandate and national
priorities. A strong integrated plan would ideally
clarify the contributions of each United Nations actor
based on comparative advantage and actual capacity to
deliver.
Responsibilities may change over time as
priorities and capacities shift. Peacekeeping missions
have a restricted time horizon and must synchronize
their plans with those actors better suited to
undertaking long-term engagements. For their part,
United Nations partners often have limited capacities
in the early post-conflict period and need time to scale
up. In such circumstances, we try to bring our relative

4

strengths to bear. For instance, in the Sudan in 2005,
the peacekeeping mission provided bridge funding for
the
integrated
United
Nations
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme until the
United Nations Development Programme-administered
Multi-Donor Trust Fund became available.
We must do more to increase incentives across
the United Nations to work together. The international
review of civilian capacities (see S/2011/85)
recommended strengthening interoperability and
flexibility across the United Nations to make better use
of our own resources to support peacebuilding
priorities and harmonize service delivery across
agencies. DPKO is working within the SecretaryGeneral’s Steering Committee on civilian capacity to
see how best to take these recommendations forward.
The United Nations is only one of many actors
contributing to any peacebuilding effort. Building
strong partnerships with regional organizations,
bilateral partners and international financial institutions
in the early stages of our planning processes is also
necessary to ensuring a coherent and coordinated
approach. Likewise, as missions draw down, regional
and bilateral partners are critical as risks may persist
after mission drawdown, requiring the planning of
over-the-horizon security guarantees with the help of
partners.
This takes me to my final point. How do we know
when to move beyond a peacekeeping mission?
Clearly, there is no easy, one-size-fits-all answer to this
question. Just as the full impact of peacebuilding
cannot be measured quantitatively, it requires keen
judgment to know when it is appropriate for
peacekeepers to withdraw. A key consideration in many
cases is the need for the security assistance represented
by blue-helmeted troops. As they draw down, the
civilian elements of a peacekeeping operation may in
some cases continue in a follow on presence. Indeed,
the functions reflected in the mandate of peacebuilding
missions or integrated offices are largely the same as
those of multidimensional peacekeeping operations
because they are focused on the same goal, namely,
supporting a political process, assisting with
institution-building in specific areas and linking
through integration with the United Nations country
team to ensure a coherent approach.
In an ideal scenario, drawdown should happen
gradually and on the basis of a careful review of the

12-27487

S/PV.6740

situation on the ground, discussions with our national,
bilateral and regional partners, testing of the host
country’s capacity to assume responsibilities and, of
course, public perceptions. Benchmarks for drawdown
and exit should be included in our initial deployment
plans, and revised to reflect the evolving situation on
the ground.
It is clear that transitions do not follow a linear
process. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
mandate, size, components and structure of the Mission
have evolved over the last 12 years to reflect the
changes in the political and security situation. As part
of the last reconfiguration, we strengthened our
peacebuilding contribution in the west while
maintaining a very strong focus on the protection of
civilians in the eastern parts of the country.
In Liberia, in February 2012, we conducted a
technical assessment mission, the conclusions of which
suggested that the security situation would allow for a
reduction of the force component of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia over the next three years but
encouraged strengthening our police presence there,
potentially reconfiguring our civilian roles and
maintaining our political engagement.
That is why a regular review and adjustment of
our mandates needs to consider the roles of United
Nations and non-United Nations partners and their
contributions to the building of peace, along with what
we expect to be a possible follow-on presence. A
drawdown for a mission often means significant
adjustment and the start-up or surge of activities for
our partners. A transition is not, and should not be,
about simply reducing numbers in a peacekeeping
operation.
No matter how much progress a country has made
towards building peace, we have to be mindful that the
departure of a peacekeeping mission can be expected to
raise anxieties and may be destabilizing in and of
itself. Building confidence between the host
Government, key national stakeholders and the
international community and clearly articulating the
facts of a transition through continued dialogue and
communication strategies are critical to a successful
drawdown plan.
Efforts to build peace will continue long after a
peacekeeping mission has left a country. As
peacekeepers, we have a responsibility to countries

12-27487

emerging from conflict to help secure a peace that will
endure without our presence.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Malcorra.
Ms. Malcorra: I would like to join in
Mr. Ladsous’ recognition of the importance of United
Nations engagement in peacebuilding in our mission
areas and note the fundamental role of effective
transitions in ensuring that we leave behind a
sustainable peace.
Delivering an effective response to the
peacebuilding needs of post-conflict countries requires
from field support systems the same agility and
flexibility that is required for other peacekeeping tasks.
Indeed, the magnitude and extent of field missions and
the funding involved throughout the duration of a
mission’s life cycle can have a significant impact,
through job creation and local procurement, for
example, each of which contributes to the building of
peace. At the same time, it is recognized that their
impact on the socio-economic situation can also be
negative, for example, as a result of environmental
degradation or distortions made to the job market.
In the global field support strategy (GFSS), due
consideration has been given to the potential social and
economic impact of United Nations missions and the
need to support mission goals in peacebuilding. I
would like to take this opportunity today to brief the
Council on some examples where support given to
field operations has had a positive impact.
The
economic
impact
of
our
large
multidimensional field missions is significant,
especially when considering that deployment often
occurs in post-conflict nations without a stable
macroeconomic climate, which makes local acquisition
of goods and services very difficult. As part of our
strategy, we are introducing mechanisms that can
promote local and regional procurement, which is an
activity that can plant the seeds for private sector
development.
To that end, the GFSS will enable our teams on
the ground to target local vendors and clearly
communicate procurement requirements in the official
language of the country where possible. That can be
challenging in the start-up phase of a mission, and it
may not be feasible to rely on the local market.

5

S/PV.6740

However, over time, local vendors can get a sense of
the requirements of the mission, and hopefully their
business sense and ingenuity will encourage them to
start offering the goods and services required.
There are certain products and services for which
the local market can have a distinct advantage.
Although that may represent a low percentage of our
overall procurement, it can have an important impact
on the local market. The flow-on effect in the private
sector can be considerable and, if properly planned,
can generate a growing and sustainable process for
propelling individuals into long-term development,
thereby contributing to efforts to break the cycle of
poverty. It goes without saying that all such efforts
must be undertaken in the context of United Nations
rules and regulations.
Efforts have also been made to focus on a
mission’s ability to address critical social issues such
as unemployment. The United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) provided clear and positive examples
in that regard. High levels of unemployment and slow
economic recovery make it difficult for youth and waraffected populations to find legal income-generating
opportunities locally. As was explained in the 2011
World Development Report, such a situation presents a
serious impediment to war-affected populations’ ability
to establish alternative livelihoods and encourage
sustainable reintegration in local communities. In
response to that need, UNMIL and its partners — the
World Bank, the World Food Programme, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
Ministry of Public Works — designed a series of
labour-intensive road repair projects designed to
increase
accessibility
and
create
short-term
employment opportunities. The projects were
concentrated around vulnerable communities, such as
communities along borders and those in close
proximity to desirable natural resources.

security situation in communities established along the
roads improved, as there were real job opportunities.
Furthermore, income was reinvested in small
businesses, used to repay debt and put towards longerterm expenses such as education and housing. In other
words, the project was building peace.
From a Department of Field Support perspective,
the issue of transitions from one United Nations
presence to another is equally critical, often requiring
drawdown or sometimes a surge in operations. In
Burundi and Sierra Leone, for instance, the liquidation
of one mission coincided with the start-up of another.
One of the key lessons we have learned from such
transitions is the need to prepare contingency plans in
order to lay the foundation for adequate support for the
possible follow-on presence, in addition to building a
sustainable peace. Transitions may be inherently
political processes, but they can succeed only if they
are well prepared and executed. For that to happen, it is
crucial that the substantive side and the support side
plan in an integrated manner. That is particularly
important as we need to recognize that many support
issues, such as the question of asset liquidation, are
highly political, while also dealing with the issue of
expectations management and a fear of mission exit in
terms of socio-economic impact.
In many countries, peacekeeping missions
provide major support to national authorities with
regard to infrastructure maintenance, transport and
logistics, among others. As with our efforts in
peacebuilding, we also have to work with our national
counterparts to prepare for the impact that mission
drawdown is likely to have on national resources,
capacities and budgets.

Such projects created more than 75,000 jobs and
channelled almost $6 million into local communities,
with the workforce comprising representation from all
communities, ex-combatants, returnees and women.
Six hundred kilometres of primary roads and 300
kilometres of secondary roads were rehabilitated,
which improved year-round access to many parts of the
country.

The experiences of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste and UNMIL demonstrate how
joint planning with national counterparts can address
those challenges and, to the extent possible, mitigate
the impact of reduced logistical and infrastructural
support to our national partners through coordinated
planning and capacity-building. That being said, such a
reduction in peacekeeping resources has wider
implications for all partners, not only the national
Government, as it is likely to impact on those partner’s
programmes and require increased commitment by
them, both within the United Nations and beyond.

The impact of the projects was reviewed through
an independent assessment that concluded that the

Against that background and recognizing the
importance of integrating support services, we are

6

12-27487

S/PV.6740

working with our partners in the Integration Steering
Group and its sub-working groups to harmonize
support costs across the United Nations. That will
extend our services to agencies, funds and programmes
and create greater transparency on how a smaller role
of one United Nations entity will impact the resource
requirements of others on the ground. That will also be
facilitated through greater cooperation on the issue of
trust funds and support costs applied to them. In this
regard, the Peacebuilding Fund and the Secretariat
have signed a memorandum of understanding that has
overcome
past
funding
constraints
on
the
Peacebuilding Fund. The broader cost-recovery policy
directed by the Controller is well under way.
A different yet important contribution the United
Nations brings to post-conflict societies is in the form
of national capacity development. Several of our
missions have introduced specific strategies and
programmes, such as certification programmes, that are
aimed at strengthening national staff capacity. That was
done in the Sudan, Liberia, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Timor-Leste. That should be our priority
from the outset, given that national staff will play a
critical role in the development of their country beyond
our presence.
Our ongoing work on civilian capacities will be
another vital part of that effort. Accessing more
effectively the needed civilian experts and deploying
them into missions to support the development of
national capacities and to help us plan and execute
peacebuilding tasks and effective transitions will
depend on stronger partnerships between the United
Nations and external providers, principally Member
States. As such, we have to work together if we are to
succeed.
Critically, national ownership underpins the
entire civilian capacity initiative. That was identified
clearly in the recent regional consultations in Bali,
where the Finance Minister of Timor-Leste stressed her
country’s wish to lead its own peacebuilding process
and direct international support in accordance with the
country’s own priorities.
Better support to national capacity-building is
therefore a priority for civilian capacity, which in turn
must be a priority for peacebuilding and effective
transitions. UNDP is leading a system-wide group in
looking at how we can do better in post-conflict
contexts, and is carrying out a survey of United

12-27487

Nations field presences to understand what tools are
needed to do this more effectively. We expect that
UNDP will be able to make recommendations this
summer.
The situation does remain challenging, however.
We still fail to deploy timely, certain civilian capacities
in a timely manner to countries emerging from conflict
and face persistent capacity gaps in five core areas:
safety and security, the rule of law, inclusive political
processes, core Government functionality and
economic revitalization. Much like with our sourcing
of key enabling assets for peacekeeping, we are also
having difficulty in accessing niche capacities to
respond to specialized needs.
We are, however, working out how to tackle those
challenges. We are focused on building partnerships
with
Member
States,
regional
organizations,
non-governmental organizations and others, and on
South-South cooperation in this regard. We are also
recognizing the added value that comes from the real
world experience of post-conflict recovery, democratic
transition or building national institutions from scratch
or very low capacity. That is the sort of capacity that
those nations emerging from conflict find most
useful — the experience of those who have actually
confronted and worked through the same challenges
they are now facing.
We must ensure that we are working to our
strengths or, as we put it, delivering based on the
principle of comparative advantage. Missions do not
have to implement everything themselves and, of
course, other partners may be better placed to deliver
on the wide range of tasks that are expected. We will
continue to work towards realizing mechanisms and
modalities to best support that process.
Each of those activities — be they focused on the
building of peace during a mission, on effectively
transitioning to a sustainable and nationally owned
peace as we withdraw, or on the deployment of the
right civilian personnel to the right place and playing
the right roles alongside our partners — are all aimed
at delivering on our mandates, building national
institutions, and ensuring that we do not have to return
again once our missions have left.
The Security Council plays an enormous role in
that, setting the direction for our efforts not only
through mandates, but also through building and
maintaining the political support required for delivery.

7

S/PV.6740

In addition, we count on the Council and its members
to work with us as partners in ensuring a coherent,
coordinated and sustained response to the complex
challenges we face in building peace before, during
and after the departure of our missions.

The President: I thank Ms. Malcorra for her
briefing.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

8

12-27487
