Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

15 d

1392

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I contested the point with Mr. Wellington Koo
in London, and he won the argument. His view
was accepted as-being the correct one. The same
difficulty had arisen, and it was decided to count
the non-valid votes.
The result of, the vote is therefore as follows:
Number of Members voting. . . .. 49
N umber of valid votes. . . . . . . .. 44Required majority . . . . . . . . . . .. 25
The number of votes obtained is as follows:
Number of votes
Uruguay .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 24Norway
, .. , .. , 20
Had the Assembly adopted my view, the matter would have been settled.
Mr. NrSOT (Belgium) (translated' from
French) : To me it seems obvious that, since the
voting is shown by the ballot papers, no paper
that is not valid should be counted.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
There is no indication in the rules of procedure
as to how we should now proceed. We can take
a fresh vote, or else we might try to find some
other solution. Is there any objection to our
drawing lots?
Objections were made from the floor of the
Assembly and it was theref(Jre decided to continue with the vote on the following day.
The meeting rose at 12.05 a.m.

15 December 1946

'
Le P RESIDENT:

Londres sur ce point avec M. Wellington Koo
et il a triomphe. Sa these a ete reconnue exacte.
La meme question s'etait posee et on avait
decide de cQmpter les bulletins non valables.

TJ
Par consequent, le resultat du vote est le
suivant:
N ombre de votants. . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Bulletins valables . . . . . . . . . . . .. 44Majorite requise .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
ant ohtenu:
N ombre de voix
Uruguay .. '"
, . '"
24
Norvege
20
Si vous aviez adopte ma maniere de voir, la
question aurait ete reglee.
M. NISOT (Belgique): 11 me parait evident
que les bulletins sont !'expression des votes. Par
consequent, seuls doivent etre pm en consideration comme votes les bulletins valables.
Le PRESIDENT: Il n'y a rien dans les regles
de procedure qui nous indique comment nollS
devons continuer. Nous pouvons renouveler les
tours de scrutin mais peut-etre pourrions-nous
imaginer autre chose. Est-ce que vous verriez
un inconvenient a cc' que nous tirions au sort?
Protestations dans l'Assemblee. Il est decide
de remettre le vote au lendemain.

La seance est levee

a 0 h. 05.

SOIXANTE-SIXIEME SEANCE PLENIERE

Held on Sunday, 15 December 1946,
at 2:30 p. m.

Tenue le dimanche 15 decembre 1946,

CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

14 h. 30.

a

Page

Pages

198, Report of the Economic and Social
Council: report of the Joint Second and
Third Committee: resolution
1393

198. Rapport du Conseil economique et social. Rapport de la Commission mixte
des Deuxieme et Troisieme Commissions. Resolution
1393
199. Rapport final de la Commission de verification des pouv6irs
1415
200. Projet provisoire relatu aux Caisses de
l'etraite et de prevoyance du personnel
et au."{ prestations connexes. Rapport
de la Cinguieme Commission. Resolutions
1416
201. Organisation et administration du
Secret~ri~t. Rapport de la Cinquieme
1417
CommIssIOn
202. Indemnites de logeroent et indcmnites
de vie chere pour le personnel de 1'01'ganisation des Nations Unies. Rapport
de la Cinquieme Commission
1417
203. Election du huitieme membre du Comite
charge d'examiner les renseignements
fournis par les Etats administrant des
territoires non autonomes
1418
204. Re£ugies et pcrsonnes deplacees. Rap?ort de la Troisieme Commission. Ques-tions financieres et buclgetaires concernan!' l'Organisation internationale pour
les refugies. Rapport de la Cinquieme
Commission
,
1420

201. Organization and administration of the
Secretariat: report of the Fifth Committee
1417
202. Housing allowances and cost of living
allowances for the staff of the United
N atiolls: report of the Fifth Committee 1417
203. Election of the eighth member of the
Committee for studying information
submitted by States administering NonSelf-Governing Territories
1418
204. Refugees and displaced persons: report
of the Third Committee. Financial and
budgetary questions relating to the International Refugee Organization: report of the Fifth Committee
1420
President: Mr. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgium).

We'
tion
stud
mini
Hov.
dves
mislc

I:

of t1:

I
Chir

,Jj
I
'i

1

M
men
two
of t
gene
tativ

gow

M

re801
the
that

tiom

Cou

SIXTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING

199. Final Report of the Credentials Committee
1415
200. Provisional scheme for staff retirement,
insurance funds and related benefits: report of the Fifth Committee:
resolutions
1416

198,

J'at. eu une controverse a,

President: M. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgique).

Ir

repo
prec

in t:
ohI:

the:

SOClC

11

expr
volv
The
Cou
the
noll'
of "
the
COIl
COIl

cod
org,
bet,
non
age]
aspl
twe
non
witl

1

gen
Eec

i946
fe

.a

&00
:Ilil'"tt",

l'lt;U!t

, 5 decembre 1946

1393

198. Report of the· Economic and Social
Council: report of the Joint Second
and Third Committee: resolution
(document A/246)
'l~he PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We were supposed to proceed first with the election of the eighth member of the Committee for
studying information submitted by States administering Non-Self-Governing Territories.
However, I propose to wait until all representatives are present, to avoid any risk of obtaining
misleading results in the voting.
I suggest, therefore, that we pass to the report
of the Economic and Social Council (annex 92).

.r. b
den~

Pat
Je:ra-

~.c ~

DOU.'

::t"Iie2
!On?

i.

~

I call upon Mr. Chang, representative of
China, Rapporteur.
Mr. CHANG (China), Rapporteur: In document A/246, as you will note, there are really
two parts: the first part dealing with the report
of the Economic and Social Council and a
general resolution; the second part, the consultative arrangements of the Council with nongovernmental organizations.
May I have your permission to read the
resolutions separately: first, the resolution on
the report-a general resolution; then, after
that is voted upon by the Assembly, the resolutions on the consultative arrangements of the
Council with non-governmental organizations?

In the course of the general discussion on the
report of the Economic and Social Council appreciation was expressed of the progress made
in the organization of the Council, as well as
of the effort which the Council has made towards
the solution of various important economic and
social problems.
I t may not be very clear to all of us what the
expression "organization of the Council" involves. Briefly speaking, it involves three aspects.
There are, first, the Commissions under the
Council, of which nine are already in existence:
the Commission on Human Rights, the Econom le and Employment Commission, the Status
of Women Commission, the Social Commission,
the Statistics Commission, the Transport and
COlurnunications Commission, the Population
Corrnnission, the Fiscal Commission and the Narcotics Commission. That is one aspect of the
organization. Another aspect is the relationship
be'tween the United Nations, especially the Economic and Social Council, and the specialized
ag-encies. Yesterday we took action on that
aspect. Another aspect is the relationship be·
tween the Economic and Social Council and the
non-governmental organizations. We shall deal
with that presently.

T he Rapporteur then read the text of the
aeneral resolution concerning the re/Jort of the
Economic and Social Council.

Soixante-sixieme seance plenlere

198. Rapport du Conseil economique et
social. Rapport de la Commission
mixte des Deuxieme et Troisieme
Commissions. Resolution (document
A/246l
Le PRESIDENT: Nous devions proceder
d'abord a l'election du huitieme membre du
Comi~e charge d'examiner les renseignements
{ournls par les Etats administrant des terri~
toires non autonomes. Toutefois, je propose
d'attendre, pour ce faire, que· tous les representants soient presents afin de ne pas risquer de
fausser les resultats du vote.
Je suggere que nous examinions maintenant
le rapport du Conseil economique et social
(annexe 92) .
Je donne la parole a M. Chang, representant
de la chine, Rapporteur.
J M. <?HANG (Chine), Rapporteur (traduit de
1anglazs): Comme vous pouvez le voir, le document A/246 comporte deux parties: la premiere traite du rapport du Conseil economique
et social et d'une resolution generale; ·la
deuxieme partie traite des dispositions a prendre
en vue des consultations du Conseil avec les
organisations non gouvernementales.
Voulez-vous me permettre de donner lecture
des resolutions separement; tout d'abord, la resolution relative au rapport qui est une resolution d'ordre general; puis, quand l'Assemblee
aura vote sur ce point, je lirai les resolutions
relatives aux dispositions a prendre en vue des
consultations du Conseil avec les organisations
non gouvernementales.
Au cours de la discussion generale du rapport
du Conseil economique et social, des eloges ont
ete adresses au Conseil pour les progres qu'il
a accomplis dans son organisation et pour les
efforts qu'il a deployes en vue de resoudre un
certain nombre de problemes importants dans le
domaine economique et social.
Il se peut que vous n'ayez pas tous une
idee tres precise, de ce que signifie l'expression
"organisation du Conseil". En bref, cette organisation comporte trois aspects. Il y a d'abord
les Commissions placees sous la direction du
Conseil, il en existe deja neuf a l'heure actuelle:
Commission des droits de I'hornrne, Commission
economique et de l'emploi, Commi~sion de la
condition de la femme, Commission sociale,
Commission de statistique, Commission des
transports et des communications, Cornmissi~n
de la population, Commission fiscale, CommISsion des stupefiants. C'est le premier aspect de
l'organisation du Conseil. Le second aspect a
trait aux relations qui existent entre les Nations
Unies, notamment le Conseil economique et
social et les institutions specialisees. Une decision' a ete prise hier a cc sujet par l'~semblee.
Le troisieme aspect concerne .les relations e~tre
le Conseil economique et SOCIal et les orgamsations non gouvernementales. C'est ce point que
l'Assemblee va examiner.
Le Rapporteur donne lecture de la r~solution
genlrale relative au rapport du Conse'll econo'.mique et social.

-~--

·td

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

15 December 1946

1394

a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French)': I
call upon Mr. Wells, representative of the United
Kingdom.

Le PRESIDENT: J e donne la parole
M. Wells, representant du Royaurne-Uni.

Mr. WELLS (United Kingdom): Three resolutions have been recommended for adoption
by the General Assembly in the report of the
Joint Second and Third Committee.

M. WELLS (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de ['anglais): Dans son rapport, la Commission mixte
des Deuxieme et Troisieme Commissions a recommande a l' Assemblee generale d'adopter
trois resolutions.
La premiere, qui adresse au Conseil economique et social dans son ensemble des felicitations pour le travail qu'il a accompli, n'appelle
aucune critique de la part de ma delegation;
et je suis heureux de saisir cette occasion de
declarer que le Conseil economique et social a
bien merite ces remerciements pour le travail
qu'il a accompli jusqu'ici.
Par contre, ma delegation doit s'elever de la
maniere la plus energique contre l'adoption des
deux autres resoltuions. Quant au nouvel amendement qui a ete presente par la d~16gation de
rUnion sovietique (document A/253) \ il est
presque identique a une clause d'une motion
qui a deja ete repoussee par la Commission
apres une longue discussion. La partie essenticllc
de l'amendement propose est redigee commc
suit: "et aussi le droit de faire au Conseil economique et social des communications ecrites
et orales sur toutes les questions interessant la
Federation".
Je tiens a signaler que la Federation syndicale
mondiale possede deja le droit de soumettre des
communications ecrites au Secretaire du Conseil
economique et social) qui est dans l'obligation
de les transmettre aux membres du Conseil. La
Federation a deja aussi le droit de se presenter,
sur recommandation prea]able du Comite permanent, devant le Conseil economique et social.
Ce qui me reste a dire maintenant au sujet des
propositions qui figurent dans le rapport soumis
a l'AssembIee s'applique avec plus de force
encore aux droits plus· etendus que l'on vous
demande maintenant d'accorder.
Vous vous souvenez que la premiere de ces
deux resolutions recommande d'accorder a la
Federation syndicale mondiale le droit de sou·
mettre au Conseil economique et social des
questions destinees a etre inscrites a l'ordre du
jour provisoire, conforrncment a la procedure
instituee pour les institutions specialisees. Remarquez l'emploi, a ce sujet, du terme "institutions specialisees" car il induit en erreur et
c'est lui qui rend la resolution .inacceptable.
La derniere de ces trois resolutions est un texte
inoffensif qui decoule logiquement de la resolution precedente. En fait, ma delegation l'a
a.ppuyee a la Commission par souci d'equite et
parce qu'elle a estime qu'il s'agissait la d'une
question de bon sens. Cette resolution se borne
a demander l'octroi aux autres organisations
c1assees dans la meme categorie que la Federation syndicale mondiale, de droits identiques a
ceux qui auront ete accordes a la Federation par
la premiere resolution.
De quoi s'agit-il done? Pour comprendre
clairement les propositions, il faut tout d'abord

Of these, the first-namely the laudatory
resolution on the work of the Economic and
Social Council as a whole-is unexceptionable to my delegation, and I should like to
take this opportunity of saying that it is a fitting
word of thanks to the Economic and Social
Council for its labours so far.
My delegation must, however, oppose in the
strongest terms the adoption of the other two
resolutions. .As for the new amendment which
has been presented by the delegation of the
Soviet Union (document A/253)/ it is almost
identical with a clause of a motion that has already been turned down by the Committee after
a lengthy debate. The operative clause of the
proposed amendment reads as follows: "and also
the right to make written and verbal communications to the Economic and Social Council on all
questions in which the Federation is interested".
I should like to point out that the World
Federation of Trade Unions already has the
right to submit written communications to the
Secretary of the Economic and Social Council,
Who is under obligation to transmit such communications to members of the Council. It already had the right to appear before the Economic and Social Council, subject to having
been first of all recommended by the standing
committee. What I now have to say on the
proposals in the report before you applies with
even greater force to the extension that is now
proposed.
You will recall that the first of these two
recommends the granting to the World Federation of Trade Unions of the right to submit to
the Economic and Social Council questions for
insertion in the provisional agenda in accordance
with the procedure now applicable to the specialized agencies. Please note "specialized agencies"
in this connexion, because therein lies a fallacy,
indeed the obnoxious character of this resolution.
The last of these resolutions is an innocuous
document which follows logically from the other.
Indeed, my delegation supported it in the Committee from a sense of equity and as a matter of
what we considered to be common sense. This
resolution merely asks for the grant to other
organizations in the same category as the World
Federation of Trade Unions of the same rights
as have been granted to the Federation in the
earlier resolution.
.
Now what is this all about? To understand
the proposals clearly we must first refer to the
1

See annex 92a.

1

Voir l'annexe 92a.

15 decem bre 1946

1395

Chart er, Articles 70 and 71. A careful stud f
these will show that, in effect the Join t Sec~ od
-:nd Thi,rd Committee has p~t forward reso~l­
tions wluch arc contrary to the express ProVl'S'(I ms
. ee has, however, no vestige
f Th e C ommltt
ther
, ~o.
:l[lg ht, as. you will surely agree, to do this. It
be. ~otl~ed ~hat the Charte r makes a vcry
clear dlStmc tlon m these two articles, 70 and 71,
bet~een th~ two ~lasses of organization with
whIch the Economic and Social Council has to
enter into relationship.

Soixante-sixieme seance plenil~re

s~ repor~er ~ux ~rticles 70 et 71 de la Charte.
~1 on ;tudle SOlgneusement ces Articles, on
s ape~C;Olt en effet que la Commission mixte des
~
D euxleme ,etT"
e Commissions a prcsente
rOl.slcm
,
,
vont a l'encont re d es d'ISPOS1qUI
Ons
resolutI
des
f
.
lssion
Commi
Cctte
tl,ons ormelles de la Charte.
n a p~urtant, vous me l'accorclerez ' nullement
V ous remarquerez que la
"
. amsl.
le dro 1t d' aglr
Chart: , ?an~ ces deux Articles 70 et 71, etablit
un~ dlst,mctlOn trcs nette entre les deux catcgones ~ organisations avec lesquelles le Conseil
economlque et social doit entrer en relation.
In the first it is laid ,d~wn beyon da possibility
L'Article 7~ st~pul;, sans aucun cloute possiof doub t that the speclahzed agencies are and I
b!e, que les mstitutlOns specialisees, et id je
at;:' here qU?ti~g textually, "to participate, cite. textuellement la Charte, "participent, sans
WItho ut vote, m Its [se. the Economic and Social drOIt .de vote, a ses deliberations [celIes du
oun c;il's] deliberations and in the CommisConse~l .econ.om~que et spdal] et a celles des
Slons establi shed by it," whereas in Article 71
commISSIOns mstltuees par lui". Par contre, nux
and I should like here to draw your attentio n t~ termes de l'Article 71 - et je tiens ici a attirer
th,e fact that this is a separate Article dealing v?t~e attent,ion sur le fait qu'il s'agit d'un Article
WIth a separa te class of organization in a separate . dlStmct traltan t d'une cate~orie distincte d'orm~ner and in the most pointed fashio n-in ~anisation, d'une maniere differente de la fac;on
ArtIcl e 71, I repeat, "the Economic and Social la plus formelIe -.aux termes de l'Article 71, je
Coun cil may make suitable arrangements for le rephe, le ConsCl1 6conomique et social "peut
c~:msu!;ation wi.th non-governmental organiza- prendr e toutes dispositions utiles pour consulter
That IS to say, the Council is not les organisations non gouvernementales". En
tions.
oblige d to make any particular type of arrange - d'autre s termes, il ne s'agit pas d'une obligation
ment; it is given the right to make such ar- pour le Conseil de prendre des dispositions d'un
range ment as may, in its unfettered judgm ent caractere donne, il s'agit d'un droit qui lui est
appea r suitabl e for consultation with non-gov~ accordc de prendre telIes dispositions qu'il
ernme ntalor ganiza tions.
pourra , en toute independance, juger utiles en
vue de la consultation d'organisations non gouvernementales.
This word "consultation" in Article 7 when
Ce terme "consulter"-em ploye a l'Article 71,
place d side by side with the word "partic ipate" alors que, dans la partie correspondante de
in Articl e 70, serves to emphasize not only the I'Artic1e 70, on trouve le terme "partic ipent" intent ion of the Economic and Social Council, sert a faire ressortir qu'il s'agit, non pas seulebut its explicit obligation to make a distinc- ment de laisser au Conseil economique et social
tion in its treatm ent on t1;le one hand, of the la facultc, mais de lui imposer I'obligation exspecia lized agencies, which are inter-govern- presse d'6tablir une distinction dans la maniere
ment al organizations of the United Nations, and dont i1 doit traiter, d'une part, les institutions
on the other hand, its treatm ent of the non- sp6cialis6es qui sont des organisations intergougover nment al organizations which are not inter- vernementales des Nations Unies, et la maniere
gover nment al but are voluntary, unofficial dont il doit traiter, d'autre part, les organisations
non gouvernementales qui sont, non des organibodie s.
sations intergouvernementales, mais des organismes benevoles sans caractere officiel.
Je ne cherche pas le moins du monde a dimiI would not for one moment belittle either the
believe
We
bodies.
la puissance ni la valeur de ces organismes.
these
of
nuer
value
the
powe r or
la
sincer ely and ardently in democracy and in the Nous avons une foi sincere et ardente dans
demola
de
es
mcthod
les
most
dans
the
et
democratie
proces ses of democracy, amongst which
ntes est repreimpor tant are the functions exercised 1:>Y just cratie, dont une des plus importa
ment par
prccise
s
exercce
s
fonction
such
les
of
par
and
sentee
women
and
men
such group s of
et par
fcmmes
de
et
es
organ izatio ns and associations as are represented des groupements d'homm
iations
d'assoc
et
isatiolls
d'organ
ments
des groupe
in this category. It includes the World Federa
classes dans cette categorie.
tion of Trade Unions, the InternatioIl;al Cham- comme ceux qui sont
Federation synclicale mondiale,
ber of Comm erce, the International Co-operative Elle comprend la
rce internationale, l'Alcomme
de
A1lian ce and finally, the American Federa tion of la Chamb re
tionale et, en dernier
interna
tive
coopera
Labo r. But our support of apd belief in these liance
ine du travail. Mails,
america
tion
Federa
la
lieu,
organ izatio ns cannot raise them by any conde soutenir ces organisations et d'avoir
ceivab le means to the status of inter-govern- le fait
dIes ne suffit certainement pas ales elever
menta l organizations, The force of the resolu- fai en
d'organisations intergollvernementales.
rang
au
tion before you is clear and is stated by its
le but de la resolution soumise a
ant,
Cepend
advoc ates to be the elimination, as far as possible,
l' Assemblee est clair et ses partisans ont declare
of this import ant and valuable distinction, and
qu'elle visait a faire disparaitre, dans toute la
I must beg the Assembly to give the most mesure du possible, cette distinction importante
carefu l though t to the results which will flow

9

i,

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

1396

15 December 1946

et si utile; c'est pourquoi je demanderai a 1'Assemblee d'examiner tres attentivement les consequences que risquerait d'entrainer toute action
irreflechie dans cc sens. Ces consequences doivent etre evidentes pour toute personne qui a
assiste aux discussions qui ont eu lieu, soit a
San-Francisco, soit a Londres, soit ici a NewYork, au cours des dix-huit derniers mois et je
ne m'etendrai pas sur ce sujet.
I have one other point to make which
Toutefois, il y a un autre point que je veux
warrants the attention of every representative faire ressortir et qui merite l'attention de taus
in this Assembly, both in this context and with les representants a cette Assemblee par l'imporregard to making the United Nations function tance qu'il presente, tant dans le texte qui nous
effectively. If the organs of the United Nations est soumis aujourd'hui que dans l'interet du
are to serve any useful purpose, if they are to fonctionnement efficace de l'Organisation des
produce results, these organs must receive the Nations Unies. Si l'on veut que les organes des
confidence and the support of the Assembly. Nations Unies aient de l'utilite, si l'on veut qu'ils
If I Ihay use a homely simile, we must, as adults, produisent des resultats, il faut qu'ils beneficient
resist the childish temptation of pulling these de la confiance et de l'appui de l'Assemblee.
tender plants up by the roots every so often Qu'il me soit permis de me servir d'une comto see how they are growing.
paraison familiere: il faut que nous autres,
adultes, resistions a la tentation puerile d'arracher souvent ces tendres petites plantes pour voir
comment elles poussent.
The Economic and Social Council. is one of
Le Conseil economique et social est l'un des
the principal organs of the United Nations. It principaux organes des Nations Unies. C'est un
is an important body whose functions have been organe important dont les fonctions ont ete tres
very ably defined and extend over a very wide bien definies et couvrent un tres vaste domaine.
field. On the solution of the problems with De la solution apportce aux problcrl1es que le
which the Council deals, depend, we may safe- Conseil traite, on peut dire, sans risquer de se
ly say, the life and happiness of millions. The tromper, que dependent la vie et le bonheur de
Economic and Social Council in its wisdom millions d'etres humains. Le Gonseil econornique
has decided that the proper, and indeed I believe et social a decide, dans sa sagesse, que le bon
the only way, of carrying out the provisions of moyen, voire le seul, d'assurer l'execution des
the Charter in respect to its relations with the dispositions de la Charte concernant les relaspecialized agencies and the non,governmental tions entre les Nations Unies et les institutions
organizations, is to create a standing committee specialisees, d'une part, et les organisations non
to consider any problems they may want to lay gouvernementales, d'autre part, est de creer un
before the Council.
'
Comite permanent charge d' examiner tous les
problemes que ces institutions et ces organumtions pourront desirer soumettre au Conseil.
We must not lightly go against the decisions
I1 ne faut pas nous opposer a la legere aux
(,If our own Council in a matter so clearly within decisions de notre propre Conseil sur une quesits jurisdiction. The Committee is there so that tion qui entre d'une fat;;on si evidente clans sa
the proposals of these organizations and their competence. Le Comite permanent a pour objet
wishes may receive proper and close attention, de faire en sorte que les propositions emanant
and so that the Council may in its turn receive de ces organisations ainsi que les vreux qu'elles
,the very best help and advice available. This expriment soicnt examines avec toute l'attention
Committee is no casual group of people meeting qui convient et que le Conseil puisse a son tour
occasionally and at leisure, but a working Com- benefic.ier de la meilleure assistance et des avis
mittee specially designed to serve these very les plus eclaires possibles. Ce Comite n'est pas
organizations, and for that purpose alone. The compose de personnes groupees au hasard et qui
Committee will have before it constantly the re- se rcunissent de temps en temps, a loisir; c'est
quests which these organizations may agree to un groupe de travail qui est tout specialement
send i~ and will consider them, will arrange clestine a aider precisement les organisations en
them III an orderly and logical manner for question et qui n'a pas d'autre but. Ce Comite
presentation to the Council, and finally will so recevra constamment les requetes que ces orgapresent them for insertion in the Council's pro- nisations peuvent decider de presenter, it les
visional agenda.
examinera, les classera de fa~on mcthodique et
logique pour les soumettre au Conseil et, en dernier lieu, il les presentera en suivant le classement etabli pour qu'elles soient inscrites a l'ordre
du jour provisoire du Gonseil.
It is the duty of that Committee and also
I1 incombe a ce Comite, comme au Conseil
of the Council, as it is indeed the duty of this et a l'Assemblee elle-meme, de veiller a ce que
Assem~ly, t? see that the channels by which les voies qui donnent acces aux assembIees suaccess IS gamed to the highest councils of the premes des nations soient degagees et aplanies,
nations are kept clear and smooth, that there de veiller Et ce qu'il n'y ait ni encombrement, ni
from any such ill-considered action. These consequences must be obvious to any who assisted
at the'debates either in San Francisco or London
or here in New York in the course of the last
eighteen months, and I shall not elaborate on
them here.

I

15 decembre 1946

1397

is no. clogging and confusion and that no me;hamcal obstacles are created by negligen
In
t
.
.
ce or
compe ence m thIS all·important matter of
access.
An~ y~t it is suggested that these immense
orgamzatioz;s,. with their seventy million, one
hundred
million
or two hundred .....
b
..
"""";11·Ion memel's, . as It 18 variously claimed, should have
the nght to. put on the provisional agenda of
the EconomIc
. dand Social Council at any ti'me,
one or two,.m eed any number of items which
they collectively or individually wish to put
there: Wh.at does this mean? That every
questlO.n. will have. to be considered by the
Council m the openmg meetings of each session
for hours or perhaps days.

Soixante-sixieme seance plenler.

d~sordr~Aet a ce qu'aucun obstacle d'ordre techn~que u a la negligence ou a l'incompetence
~ entrave cet acces qui est de la plus grande
Importance.
Or, on p~opose neanmoins de donner a CCs
vastes
.
.
. . orgamsations
. ' qUl" comptent sOlxantc-dlx
n;llho~s, cent ml1lions ou deux cent millions
~ a~herents, selon les diverses estimations le
r01t de f~ire, inscrirc: a l'ordre du jour provis'oire
duConseil economlque et social,
n'importe
q~elle ?ate, une ou deux" voire un nombre in(~etermme de questions qu'elles desirent soit a
titre collectif, soit a titre individuel y v~ir figur~r. Qu'en resultcra-t-il? Que tOl~tes les questlOns devront etre examinees par le Conseil au
cours des seances d'ouverture de chaque session
pendant des heures ou peut-ctre des jours.
The prospect is appalling. It is so serious that
. C'est l~ une perspective desastreuse. La qllC~­
we must question the good sense of those who tlOn est SI grave que l'on peut doutcr du jugch~ve pressed us and who have persuaded Com- ment de ceux qui ont insiste aupres de nous pour
mIttees of this Assembly to agree to waste our que t;l0us consentions. ~ perdre notre temps a
time with ~his. proposal. I. ~o not say that exall~mer cette I?r?pOsltlOn et qui ont persuade
th~~ orgarnzatlons would Wlttlngly abuse their certames Con:mlsslons de l'Assemblee qu'il ctait
pnVIleges; but wh? can say, that under pressure bon ~e l~ falre. Je t;le veux pas dire que ces
of some urgent WISh, none of these organs will orgamsatlOns abuseralent sciemment de leurs
be led to use these means of asserting their privileges; mais qui pourra dire qu'auCllne
d'elles ne se laissera entrainer, par l'ardent desir
po~er or frustrating the aims of the other organlzatlOns? Who can guarantee, and I cite this d'obten~ que1que c~lOse, a user de ces privileges
only as an example, that the World Federation pour afflrmer sa pUlssance au pour empecher les
of Trade Unions will not put forward some autres organisations d'atteindre leurs buts. Qui
proposal that will immediately incite the Inter- peut se porter garant - et je cite ceci seulement
national Chamber of Commerce to put forward a titre d'exemple - que la Federation syndicale
mondiale ne soumettra pas une proposition qui
another and opposing proposition?
incitera immediatement la Chambre de commerce internationale a en presenter un autre,
d'eff'et contraire?
Qui pourra m'assurer que ces procedes ne
Who will tell me that these processes might
110t be extended indefinitely, so that the Eco- s'etendront pas a l'infini de telle sorte que le
nomic and Social Council becomes an arena Conseil economique et social deviendra une
for the airing of disputes between organizations arene ou se debattront les questions litigieuses
whose primary interest lies elsewhere, and whose qui existent entre des organisations dont la
concern for the Economic and Social Council preoccupation essentielle reside aillcurs et qui ne
must at best be secondary? It will be said that portent, tout au plus, au Conseil economique et
social qu'un interct relatif? On rcpondra que
the Council can itself turn down or veto the
le Conseil peut lui-mcme ecarter ces propositions
~doption of these proposals, but why, I ask you,
ou opposer un veto a leur adoption. Mais pourill the name of common sense, should we impose
quoi, je vous le demande, au nom du bon sens,
the burden of considering and then turning imposerions-nous la charge d'examiner, puis
down the multifarious proposals of these organs d'ecarter les multiples propositions soumises par
upon the unfortunate eighteen members of the ces organisations, aux dix-huit malheureux memCouncil, who will have travelled from the far bres du Conseil, qui seront venus des regions du
ends of the earth to attend what they imagined monde les plus. eloignees pour assister a ce qu'ils
to be a conference dealing with more con- se seront imagine ctre une conference s'occupant
structive matters, and not to review a lot of de problemes de caractere plus specifiqucment
conflicting propositions?
constructif et non une conference convoquee
pour passer en revue une masse de propositions
qui s'opposent.
En supposant mcme que nos craintes les plus
Even supposing that our worst fears are not
graves,
ne se realisent pas, voyons quelle valeur
realized, let us examine what positive value these
peuve11t
avoir ces propositions. Que
reelle
resolutions may have. What would the organles
organisations
en question en ougagneraient
izations concerned gain by opening these doors
vrant
si
largement
l'acces
du
Conseil que toutes
so widely that all other organizations great and
les
autres
organisations,
grandes
et petites, essaiesmall try to crowd in? I put it to you that they
raient
de
se
glisser,
eUes
aussi?
Je pretends
will have gained nothing at all. Any. suggestion
qu'elles n'y gagneraient rien. En effet, toute
which is serious and important will be considered
suggestion serieuse et importante sera examinee
by the standing Committee set up for this
par le Comite permanent instituc a cette fin.
purpose.

a

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

1398

I put it, therefore, to the Assembly, that these
resolutions are contrary to the explicit terms of
the Charter, are contrary to the interests of the
Economic and Social Council and all the people
who depend for their welfare on its efficient
working, and finally are most certainly contrary
to the most elementary interests of the organiza~
, tions themselves; and I ask you to reject the
clauses of this report accordingly.
This is no anti-trade-union move on our part.
In Britain, the home of free trade unions, we
secure representation in Parliament and on
political bodies indirectly. That system has
worked well and certainly has not been disadvantageous to the trade union movement. The
World Federation of Trade Unions would do
well not to seek to force itself on the Economic
and Social Council, but to accept gracefully and
endeavour to operate the arrangements already
agreed.
We feel that it is not in the interest of the
United Nations or of the trade union movement
itself that the further concessions sought should
be granted. As a keen and life-long trade unionist, I am convinced of this. I have suffered
victimization, unemployment and imprisonment
in the cause of trade unionism and international
working-class solidarity. I am not likely to blackle~ or, as it is expressed in this country, "scab"
now.

I appeal to this Assembly to approach this vote
with open eyes and clear minds, and I repeat,
reject these proposals. Let us who are trade
unionists in this Assembly not seek facilities for
ourselves which we would deny to others. Let
us rather remember and act in the spirit of the
old trade union slogan, which we have used
so often in the past to build up our great movement: "That which we can win by right shall
be ours; more than this we do not ask; less we
will not accept".

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
should like to consult the Assembly as to its
intentions. If we want to finish today we must
take steps to do so. There are still ten items
o.n the agenda" two. of which will certainly give
rIse to some dIScussIon. I refer to the item now
under debate and to the refugee question. I have
five speakers on the list in connexion with the
matter we are now discussing. If each of them
speaks for twenty minutes, allowing for interpretations, the discussion will take over three
hours. Other speakers may also wish to be heard.
If we give three hours to this item and a further
three hours to the refugees question we shall
not get through Our work.
O~ the pres~nt issue,. therefore, I propose that
we dIspense With the mterpretations unless the
speeches are delivered in Russian or Spanish,

,

15 December 1946

Je signale done a I'Assemblee que ces resolutions sont en contradiction avec les termes formels de la Charte, qu'eIles vont a l'encontre des
interets du Conseil economique et social et de
toutes les personnes dont la prosperite depend du
bon fonctionnement de cet organe. J e pretends
qu'elles sont en opposition flagrante avec les
interets les plus elementaires de ces organisations
eIles-memes. C'est pourquoi je demandea 1'Assemblee de rejeter les propositions presentees
dans ce rapport.
Ma delegation n'agit pas ainsi par hostilite
pour le mouvement syndicaliste. Dans mon
pays, qui est la patrie des syndicats, nous avons
un systeme qui assure indirectement leur representation au Parlement et dans les institutions
politiques. Ce systeme a fonctionne de fa~on satisfaisante et n,a certainement pas ete prejudiciable au mouvement syndicaliste.
La
Federation syndicale mondiale ferait bien de ne
pas chercher a forcer la porte du Conseil
economique et sociaIecelle devrait se horner a
accepter de bonne grace les dispositions deja
prises, et s'employer a favoriser leur execution.
Ma delegation estime qu'il n'est de l'interet
ni de l'Organisation des Nations Unies ni du
mouvement syndicaliste lui-meme que les concessions plus importantes qui sont sollicitees
soient accordees. J'ai ete toute ma vie un
syndicaliste ardent et je suis convaincu que mon
point de vue est juste. J'ai ete brime, j'ai etc
reduit au ch8mage et j'ai ete emprisonne pour
la cause du syndicalisme et de la solidarite internationale de la classe ouvriere. 11 y a peu de
chance qu'aujourd'hui je change de camp, que
je devienne un "jaune", comme on dit.
Je demande a l'Assemblee de proceder a ce
vote les yeux bien ouverts et l'esprit clair et, je
le repete, je lui demande d'ecarter ces propositions. Que ceux d'entre 1es Membres de l'AssembIee qui sont syndicalistes s'abstiennent de
chercher a obtenir pour nous, syndicalistes. des
avantages que nous refuserions aux autres. Rappelons-nous plut6t le vieux mot d'ordre syndicaliste, que nous avons rcpete si souvent dans le
passe pour organiser notre grand mouvement:
"Ce que nous pouvons gagner par le droit doir
etre a nous; nous ne demandons pas plus, mais
nous n'accepterons pas moins."
Le .PRESlDENT: Je voudrais interroger I'Assemblce sur ses intentions. Si elle cJesire en finir
aujourd'hui, nous devons prendre des dispositions. Nous avons encore dix points a notre
ordre du jour, dont deux certainement provoqueront des discussions: je veux par/er du point
actuellement debattu et de la question relative
aux refugies. J'ai cinq orateurs inscrits pour le,
point que nous discutons actueIlement. Si chacun
d'eux parle vingt minutes, nous cn aurons pour
plus de trois heures de debat avec les traductions.
Peut-ctre d'autres orateurs voudront-ils encore
s'inscrire. Si nous comptons trois heures de debat
pOUF cette question, trois heures pour ceIle des .
r6fugies, nous n' en finirons pas.
Je vous propose, pour le point que nous discutons actuellement, de ne pas trauuire les discours qui seront prononces, a moins que ceux-ci

,

15 decembre 1946

1399

in which case they would be translated into one
of the t'"':o working languages. With regard to
the question of refugees, I suggest we limit the
nu~ber of speakers to three in favour and three
agaInst.
Mr. CHANG (China), Rapporteur: r under-

~ood that we should vote on the general resolu-

tion first. If that is not the case, shall I now
read the other two resolutions?

The President gave a sign of consent.
There are, as you know, two parts in document ~/246.1 The first part contains a general
resolutIOn on the report of the Economic and
Social ~oun.ci1, and the second part contains two
resolutIOns ID connexion with consultative arr:mgements with non-governmental organizations.
. The Rapporteur then read the two resolutions
m the second part of the report.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mrs. Douglas, representative of the
United States of America.

Solxante-sixieme seance plenh\re

ne le soient .en russe ou en espagnol, au uel Ca:J
lune traduction serait donnee dans l'une
deux
angu:es de travail. Je vous suggcre que pour la
questIOn .des refugies, nous entendions ~u maximum trOIS orateurs pour et trois orateurs contre.
J M'l 9HANG (Chine), Rapporteur (traduit de
l ang azs)'.' Je pen'
~
salS qu 'ij etait
entendu que
nous devI~ns voter d'abord Sur la resolution enerale, S 11 en est autrement' dolo'
f?
..,-Je lire mamtenant Ies autres resolutions?
Le President fait un signe dJassentiment.
Comme vous le savez, le document Aj246 1
s~ compose de deux parties. La premiere contIent une :es?lution .generale relative au rapport
clu 90nseil economIque et social et la seconde
con.tI.ent deux resolutions conc~rnant les disposItIOns a prendre en vue des consultations
avec les organisations non gouvernementales.
. Le Rapporteur donne lecture des deux resolutzons contenues dans la deuxieme !Jartie du
rapport.

ls

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a. Mme
!?ouglas, representant des Etats-Unis d'Ame~lque.

Mrs. DOUGLAS (United States of America) : I
Mm~ DOUGLAS, (Etats-Unis d'Amerique)
hope I shall be able to clarify the United States (trad~zt de l'anglazs): J'espere pouvoir preciser
position in relation to the World Federation of la pOSItion des Etats-Unis a l'egard de la Fede-:J;rade Unions. I a?1 going to speak. in opposi- ration sy~dicale mondiale. Je vais parler contre
tion to the resolution now before us-not in la resolution dont nous sommes saisis - et non
opposition to the World Federation of Trade contre la Federation syndicale mondiale. J'esUnions. There is no evidence that the addi- time que rien ne justifie l'octroi des privileges
tional privileges sought for the WFTU in this supplementaires dont la resolution cherche a
faire beneficier cette organisation.
resolution are needed.
D'autre part, la proposition dont il s'agit pose
This proposal also raises difficult organizational and constitutional questions. The resolu- des problemes d'organisation et des problemes
tion now before us is the first part of a resolution d'ordre constitutionnel difficiles a resoudre. La
introduced by the delegation of the Soviet Union resolution que nous avons sous les yeux constitue
in the Second and Third Joint Committee. The la premiere partie de la resolution presentee a.
original resolution had two parts, recommend- la Commission mixte.des Deuxieme et Troisieme
ing that the Economic and Social Council grant Cominissions par la delegation de rUnion sothe WFTU: first, the right to submit to the vietique. La resolution primitive etait composee
Council questions for insertion in the provisional de deux parties, recommandant au Conseil
agenda, in accordance with the procedure now economique et social d'accordcr a. la Federaapplicable to specialized agencies; and secondly, tion: le droit de soumettre au Conseil des questhe right to present written and verbal statements tions destinees a etre inscrites a. l'ordre du jour
to the Council on all matters of concern to the provisoire, conformement a. la procedure qui
s'applique actuellement aux institutions speciaFederation.
lisees; le droit de presenter au Conseil des communications ecrites et orales sur toutes les
questions'interessant la Federation.
La seconde partie de cette resolution a ete
The second part of that resolution was reecartee.
Elle prevoyait, pour la Federation, le
jected. It provided that the Federation be given
droit
de
prendre
part a toutes les deliberations
the right to participate in all the deliberations of
du
Conseil.
Ce
droit
aurait place la Federation
the Council. Such a right would have elevated
syndicale
mondiale
sur
un plan plus eleve qu'un
the World Federation of Trade Unions to a
Etat
Membre
des
Nations
Unies non represente
status superior to that of a Member of the
au
Conseil.
11
aurait
egalement
donne a la
United Nations not represented on the Council.
un
statut supeFederation
syndicale
mondiale
It would also give to the World Federation of
a
celui
qui
a
etC
accorde
aux
institutions
ricur
Trade Unions a status higher th~n that accorded
specialisees intergouvernementales, institutions
to the specialized inter-governmental agenciesagencies composed in each case of most of the dont chacune compte parmi ses membres la
plupart des Etats Membres des Nations Unies.
Members of the United Nations.
La seconde partie de la resolution presentee
The second part of the Soviet Union resolution
par
la delegation de rUnion sovietique etait en
was so clearly a violation of the letter and spirit
1 See annex 92.

1

Voir l'annexe 92.

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

1400

15 December 1946

contradiction si flagrante avec la lettre et l'esprit
de la Charte que la Commission nUxte 1'a
repoussee a une forte majorite. ElIe revient
maintenant sous forme d'un amendement a la
resolution dont nous sommes saisis. J e suis
convaincu que l'Assemblee l'ecartera pour les
mcmes motifs que ceux qui ont inspire la Commission.
J'en viens maintenant a la premiere partie de
I come now to the first part of the resolution
which was passed by the Joint Committee and la resolution adoptee par la Commission mixte,
which is now before the Assembly. I should like qui est maintenant soumise a l'Assemblee. Je
to explain why the United States delegation op- voudrais exposer les raisons pour lesquelles la
posed it in the Joint Committee and is opposing delegation des Etats-Unis s'est prononcee contre
cette resolution a la Commission mixte et s'y
it now before the Assembly.
oppose aujourd'hui devant l'Assemblee.
La discussion relative aux dispositions a prenThe debate on the subject of consultative arrangements between the Economic and Social dre par le Conseil economique et social en vue
Council and non-governmental organizations be- des consultations avec les organisations non
gan at San Francisco. As a result of this debate, gouvernementales a commence a San-Francisco.
, the Charter distinguishes clearly, in Articles 69, A la suite de cette discussion, la Charte a etabli
70 and 71, between: (1) Members of the une distinction nette, dans les Articles 69, 70 et
United Nations not represented on the Eco- 71, entre: 1) les Etats Membres des Nations
nomic and Social Council; (2) specialized inter- Unies qui ne sont pas repn~sentes au ConsdI
governmental agencies; and (3) non-govern- economique et social; 2) les institutions speciamental organizations.
lisees intergouvernementales, et 3) les organisations non gouvernementales.
Article 69 provides that the Economic and SoL'Article 69 stipule que le Conseil economiqm:
cial Council shall invite any Member of the et social, lorsqu'il examine une question qui
United Nations to participate, without vote, in interesse particulierement un Membre de 1'Orits deliberations on any matter of particular con- ganisation, convie celui-ci a participer, sans droit
cern to that Member. Article 70 provides that de vote, a ses deliberations. L'Article 70 stipule
the Economic and Social Council may make que le Conseil economique et social peut prendre
arrangements ~or representatives of the special- toutes dispositions pour que les representants
ized agencies to participate, without vote, in its des institutions specialisees participent, sans droit
deliberations and in those of the commissions de vote, a ses deliberations et a celles des Comestablished by it. The agreements with special- missions instituees par lui. Les accords avec les
,ized agencies contain provisions which limit institutions specialisees contiennent des dispositheir participation to matters within their re- tions limitant la participation de ces institutions
spective fields of responsibility.
aux questions relevant de leur competence
respective.
'Article 71 provides that the Economic and
L'Article 7'1 stipule que le Conseil economique
Social Council may make suitable arrangements et social peut prendre toutes dispositions utiles
fo~ consul~ation with non-governmental organiz- pour consulter les organisations non gouvcrneatlOns which are concerned with matters within mentales qui s'occupent de questions relevant
its competence. In a comprehensive resolution de sa competence. Dans une resolution d'une
adopted on 21 June of this year, the Council portee ,etendue, adoptee le 21 juin de cette
laid the foundation for such arrangements and annee, le Conseil· a jete les bases de telles dispoesta?lis?ed categories of non-governmental or- sitions et letabli des categories d'organisations
garuzations. '
non gouvernementales.
One might have thought that the Charter
On aurait pu penser que la Charte elle-meme
itself .would have settled, once and for all, any aurait servi a trancher, une fois pour to\.1tes, la
questlOnof the Council's giving, to any non- question de la possibilite pour le Conseil d'acgovernmental organization, a status before the corder a une organisation non gouvernementalc
Council' equal or superior to that of a Govern- que1conque, un statut egal ou superieur a celui
ment not represented on the Council or of a d'un Gouvernement qui n'est pas represente a
specialized inter-governmental agency. But th;t ce Conseil ou d'une institution specialisee interwas not .the case. ~t Londo~, at meetings of the gouvernementale. Mais, il n'en est pas ainsi. A
Econonuc and SocIal CounClI, and again during Londres, au cours des seances du Conseil ecothe present session of the General Assembly, nomique et social, et de nouveau durant la
stre~uous efforts have been made to give one presente session de l'Assemblee generale, on a
partIcular non,-governmcntal organization, the deploye de tres grands efforts pour donner a
orld ~7deratlOn of Trade Unions, a preferen- une certaine organisation non gouvernementale,
tIal pOSItIon, superior not only to that of any la Federation syndicale mondiale, une situation
other non-gover~mental organization in category privilegiee, superieure non seulement a celle qui
.( a), but supenor even to that of specialized est faite aux autres organisations non gouvernemter-governmental agencies and superior to that mentales de la categorie a), mais meme a celle
of Governments not represented on the Council. des institutions specialisees intergouvernemenof the Charter that the Joint Committee rejected it by a substantial majority. It has been
reintroduced now as an amendment to, the resolution 'before us. I am confident that this Assem, bly will reject it for the same reasons as the Committee.

':V

1 5 dec.embre 1946

1401

On all these occasions, representatives of my
Government and of a considerable number of
?ther. Governmen~, ha;e sought to prevent the
l~:pa.mnent and dIStortIOn of the pertinent proViSIons of the Charter.

We have sought to protect the Economic and
~ocial .Cou?cil against repeated efforts to force

It, agamst Its best judgment, to elevate a single
above all other
non-governmental organizations in the same
categ<;U1" We have upheld the principle of
equality of treatment of all organizations within
a particular c~tegory. Under this principle,
clearly stated m the Council's resolution of
21 June, any arrangements worked out for one
organization must be extended to all other organiza~ons within the same category. The Joint
Comnuttce met the attack on this principle by
adopting the resolution put forward by my
delegation, which appears in the report now
before the Assembly.

non~governmenta1 organization

We should all bea~ in mind that if the As-

se~bly shoul? support the action taken by the

Jomt Comnuttee on the first half of the Soviet

Union resolution, and if the Council should take
action accordingly, then all other organizations
now in category (a), namely, the International
Cooperative Alliance, the American Federation
of Labor, and the International Chamber of
Commerce, would also have to be given the unrestricted privilege of placing items on the Council's provisional agenda. In that unfortunate
event the Council's control over its own agenda
over its own important work - would be
seriously jeopardized. The Council's agenda is
already heavy laden.

r beg you not to overburden the Council
with additional questions put forward by at
least four non-governmental organizations without prior discussion and appropriate co-ordination through the Council's Standing Committee
on Non-Governmental Organizations. Let uS
help the Council, not hinder it, in its work toward the goals we all seek.
We believe that the Economic and Social
Council should be given a reasonable opportunity to discharge its important responsibility,
under the Charter, to work out suitable arrangements for consultation with non-governmental
organizations. We believe, and a majority of
the Economic and Social Council share our
belief, that the Council has begun to discharge
this responsibility in a very satisfactory manner.
The President of the World Federation of Trade
Unions, Mr. Arthur Deakiu, apparently shared
this belief as recently as 2 October of this year.

Soixante-sixieme seance plenlllre

tales et a celle des Gouvernements qui ne sont
,pas r.epresentes au Conseil. A chacune de ces
OCCasIOns, ,des representants de mon Gouvernement et dun assez grand nombre d'autres Gouverne~ent~ se sont efforces d'empecher qu'on
e~ ar~l~e a denaturer et a fausser le sens des
dlsp01ntIOns correspondantes de la Charte.
Nous avons cherche a proteger le Conseil
ec~nomiq~e et, socia1 contre des efforts repetes
qUI tend~lent a le pousser, en faisant violence a
son s~ntl~ent sur ce point, a placer une des
org~msatwns non gouvernementales cl'une categone donnee sur un plan superieur a cclui de
tou~es les autres organisations de la meme cate~~ne .. ,Nous .avons soutenu le principe de
l.egahte de traltem~nt pour toutes les organisatwns appartenant a une categorie determinee.
En vertu de ce principe, clairement enonct dans
l~ res~l~tion d~ ~o~se~l, en da~e du 21 juin, les
dISPOSltlO?S ar:etees ~ 1egard dune organisation
~Olvent s apphq,uer a toutes, les autrcs orRanisatl~ns de l~ meme categone. La Commission
ffilxte. a. repondu, aux .critiques dirigees contre
ce prmclpe par I adoptIOn de la resolution presentee par ma delegation, qui figure au rapport
dont l'AssembIee est actuellement saisie.
. Nous de.vr~bns tous nous p~nc:rer de ,cette
Idee que SI I AssembIee se ralhe a la solution
adoptee par la Commission mixte relativement
a la premiere moitie de la resolution presentee
par la. del~gation de l'Union sovietique et si le
Conseil aglt dans le meme sens, il y aurait lieu
de donner a toutes les autres organisations figur~nt actuellement dans la categorie a), c'est-adIre a l'Alliance cooperative internationale, il la
Federation americaine du travail et a la Chambre de commerce internationale, le privilege
d'inscrire sans restrictions des questions a l'ordre
du jour provisoire du Conseil. Si cette Hicheuse
hypothese se realise, le drQit pour le Conseil de
fixer lui-meme son propre ordre du jour, c'est-adire de garder la direction de ses importants
travaux, serait serieusement compromill. L'ordre
du jour du Conseil est deja tres charge.

Je vous demande instamment de ne pas surcharger le Conseil de questions nouvelles soumises par au moins quatre organisations non
gouvernementales, sans qu'il y ait ni discussion
prealable ni coordination appropriee par l'intermediaire du Comite permanent du Conseil pour
les organisations non gouvernementales. Aidons
le Conseil, et n'entravons pas ses travaux qui
tendent vers le but que nous desirons tous
atteindre.
Nous estimons que, dans la mes111'C du possible, le Conseil economique et social doit etre
a meme de s'acquitter de la mission importante
qui lui est confiee par la Charte et qui consiste
a prendre toutes dispositions utiles pour consulter les organisations non gouvernementales. Nous
cstimons, et telIe est aussi la pensee de la majorite du Conseil economique et social, que le
Conseil a commence a s'acquitter de cette mission d'une fa~on tres satisfaisante. Il semble que
le President de la Federation syndicale mondiale,
M. Arthur Deakin, partageait encore cette opi-

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

1402

15 lDecember1946

The report of the Council's Committee on NonGovernmental Organizations, dated 2 October,
has some illuminating information on this point.
It records the fact that the representative of the
Soviet Union urged the Committee to recommend
an amendment to the basic resolution adopted
by the Council on 21 June 1946. The amendment he proposed was to the effect that the
World Federation of Trade Unions be given
"the right of full participation, without vote,
in all the meetings of the Council." This
amendment, it will be noted, is very similar to
the Soviet Union amendment to the resolution
now before this Assembly (document A/253) 1.
The Council's Committee, at that time, properly
considered that it was not within its terms of
reference to make such ,a recommendation.

nion le 2 octobre de cette annee. Le rapport du
Comit6 pennanent du ConseiI pour les organisations non gouvernementales en date du 2 octobre
contient des indications interessantes a cet egard.
Ce rapport enregistre le fait que le representant
de l'Union sovietique a demande instamment au
Comite de recommander un amendement a la
resolution fondamentale adoptee le 21 juin 1946
par le Consei!. Cet amendement sovietique tendait al'octroi a la Federation syndicale mondiale
du "droit a une participation complete, sans
droit de vote, a toutes les reunions du Conseil".
Cet amendement, comme on le remarquera, est
tres proche de l'amendement de l'Union sovietique a la resolution actuellement soumise a
l'AssemblCe (document A/253) 1. Le Comite des
organisations non gouvernementales a estime, a
cette meme date, a juste titre, qu'il ne pouvait,
sans depasser son mandat, emettre une recom·
mandation de ce genre.

What I want to call to your attention now
is that the President of the World Federation
of Trade Unions himself expressed his appreciation of the difficulties involved for the Council's
Committee in making any such recommendation.
He stated that he would recommend to his Exec~
utive Bureau that the working arrangements as
agreed upon should be put into operation in the
hope that they· would prove fully satisfactory.
This same report says in conclusion: "It was
mutually agreed that if the co-operative spirit
which had prevailed throughout the first meeting between the World Federation of Trade
Unions and the Committee continued throughout the future it should be possible to arrive at
a close and fruitful co-operation between the
Council and the World Federation of Trade
Unions, assuring the World Federation of Trade
Unions that it would be able to contribute constructively to the work of the Council."

Il y a un point sur lequel je voudrais maintenant attirer votre attention: le President de la
Federation syndicale mondiale lui-meme a declare qu'il se rendait compte des difficultes qu'il
y avait pour le Comite du Comeil a emettre une
recommandation de ce genre. 11 a ajoute qu'il
recommandera a son Bureau executif que les
arrangements pratiques soient mis en application
te1s qu'ils ont ete conclus, dans l'espoir qu'ils se
reveleront pleinement satisfaisants. Et ce meme
rapport se termine par la conclusion suivante:
"Il a ete constate d'un commun accord que si
I'esprit de cooperation qui a prevalu tout au
long de la premiere reunion conjointe de la
Federation syndicale mondiale et du Comite se
maintient a I'avenir, il devra etre possible de
realiser une cooperation etroite et fructueuse
entre le Conseil et la Federation, donnant ainsi
ala Federation l'assurance qu'elIe sera en mesure
de contribuer a l'activite du Conseil d'une
rnaniere constructive."

For some reason not yet dear to us, Mr.
Jouhaux, one of the Vice-Presidents of the
, World Federation of Trade Unions and a distinguished member of the French delegation to
this Assembly, addressed a letter to the President
of the Assembly dated 12 November. Attached
to this letter was a longer one, signed by himself
and a number of others-not, however, including Mr. Deakin, President, or Mr. Saillant, Secretary-General, of the Federation-in which an
appeal was made to this Assembly to recommend
to the Economic and Social Council that these
additional rights be given to the World Federation ,of Trade Unions.

Pour une raison qui ne nous apparalt pas
encore clairement, M. ]ouhaux, qui est l'un des
Vice-Presidents de la Federation syndicale mondiale et un membre distingue de la delegation
fran!;aise a cette AssemblCe, a adresse le 12 novembre une lettre au President de I'AssembIee.
A cette lettre en etait jointe une autre, plus
longue, signee de lui-meme et de plusieurs autres
personnalites - mais ne portant, toutefois, ni la
signature de M. Deakin, President, ni celle de
M. Saillant, Secretaire general de la Federation
- faisant appel a l'AssembICe pour qu'elle recommande au Conseil economique et social
d'octroyer a la Federation syndicale mondiale
ces droits nouveaux.

Let us all bear in mind that this appeal for
additional privileges came less than two months
after the apparently happy conclusion of the
October discussions between the Council's Committee on non-governmental organizations and
the President and Secretary-General of the Federation. It is obvious that there could have been
no operating experience whatsoever, in this short

Il ne faut pas oublier que cette demande
d'octroi de privileges suppIementaires a ete presentee moins de deux mois apres les discussions
d'octobre, qui semblaient s'etre terminees d'une
fa<;;on satisfaisante, entre le Comite des organisations non gouvernementales du ConseiI, d'une
part, et le President et le Secretaire general de
la Federation, d'autre part. II va sans clire qu'il

1 See

,
annex 92a,

1

Voir l'annexe 92a.

,
I

15 decembre 1946

1403

interval, under the mutually satisfactory arrangements worked out in early October.

Soixante-sixieme Seance pleniero

etait'impossible, en un laps de temps aussi court,
de savoir si les arrangements qui avaient ete
conclus au debut d'octobre, a la satisfaction des
deux organismes interesses, pourraient fonctionner clans la pratique.
Representatives of my Government and of
Certains reprcsentants du Gouvernement des
other Governments made a strong plea, in the Etats~Unis et d'autres Gouvernements ontdeJoint Committee, for allowing sufficient time for mande avec insistance a la Commission mixte
both the Economic and Social Council and the de prevoir un d61ai assez long pour que le
World Federation of Trade Unions to see Conseil economique et social et la Federation
whether, in actual practice, the arrangements syndicale mondiale puissent l'un et l'autre s'asalready worked out so carefully, and in such a surer que, dans la pratique, les arrangements
co-operative spirit, were completely satisfactory. deja elabores avec tant de soin et dans un si
grand esprit de cooperation sont entiereme~t
satisfaisants.
'
This plea was unjustifiably misconstrued by
Les mcmbres de certaines delegations ont vu,
representatives of certain delegations as an attack a tort, dans ce plaidoyer une attaque dirigee
on the whole trade union movement and on the contre le mouvement syndicaliste dans son enWorld Federation of Trade Unions in particular. semble et contre la Federation syndicale monThere is no ground whatsoever for such a mis- diale ,en particulier. Cctte interpretation erunderstanding of our motives in opposing the ronee des motifs pour lesque1s nous nous somresolution introduced by the delegation of the mes opposes a la resolution presentee par la
Soviet Union. The United States delegation delegation de l'Union sovietique ne repose sur
wants the most fruitful co-operation possible rien. La delegation des Etats-Unis a la volonte
between representative labour organizations and de voir s'etablir la cooperation la plus fructueuse
the Economic and Social Council. It certainly possible entre les organisations ouvrieres repredoes not want to place any unnecessary obstacles sentatives et le Conseil economique et social;
in the way of such fruitful co-operation.
iI est bien certain que notre delegation n'est
nullement desireuse d'elever des obstacles inutiles dans la voie d'une teIle cooperatin.
We know that we would not be meeting here
Nons savons que nollS ne serions pas n~unis
today, the free representatives of fifty-four na- dans cette salle aujourd'hui, nous, les repretions, were it not fqr the contribution that or- sentants libres de cinquante-quatre nations, si
ganized labour made the world over towards les organisations ouvrieres n'avaient apporte,
winning the war. We know that we would not dans le monde entier, leus contribution a l'effort
today be agreeing upon disarmament, andmak- fait pour gagner la guerre. Nous savons que
ing plans together for the future, if it haq not nous ne serions pas a l'heure actueUe en mesure
been for the devotion and the untiring effort of de conclure des accords sur le desarmement,
organized labour in the fight for freedom. We cJ'elaborer en commun des projets d'avenir, si
do not forget the long hours, the uncomplaining les organisations ouvrieres n'ovaient consacres a
self-sacrifice of millions of men and women dur- la defense de la liberte dans le monde entier
ing those dark days when the contribution they leurs efforts devones et inbassables. Nous
made was so vital and so effective. We do not , n'oublions pas que des millions d'hommes et de
forget now that, without the support and devo- femmes ont travaiIIe pendant de longues heures
tion of organized labour, we would not fulfil the et ont montre, sans se plaindre, tant d'abnegation en ces jours sombres ou leur concours
plans we make here today.
etait si precieux et si efficace. Nous n'oublions
pas non plus a cette heure que, sans le soutien
et le devouement des organisations ouvrieres, iI
nous sera impossible de mettre a execution les
plans que nous elaborons aujollrd'hui a l'As~
semblee.
Les motifs qui nous inspirent sont tres clairs.
Our motives are clear. It seemed to us necessary, however, to state them again, in view of the Toutefois, il nous a pam necessaire de les exadoption of the first part of the Soviet Union poser de nouveau, maintenant que la Commisresolution by the Joint Committee after a rather sion mixte a adopte la premiere partie de la
confused and confusing debate. It seemed neces~ resolution presentee par la delegation de l'Union
sary also in view of the fact that the delegation sovietique, a ]a suite de debats assez confus et
of the Soviet Union had introduced in this assez deroutants. Nous avons juge utile de le
Assembly that portion of its original resolution faire egalement parce que la delegation de
which was rejected by the Joint Committee.
l'Union sovietique a soumis a I'Assemblee la partie de sa resolution primitive que la Commission mixte avait repoussee.
Our motiv.es are first to allow sufficient time
Nous desirons: primo, disposcr d'assez de
for the very reasonable consultative arrange~ temps pour pouvoir mettre en pratique les
ments already worked out with the World Fed~ dispositions tres raisonnables prevues par les areration of Trade Unions to be applied in prac~ rangements pris avec la Federation syndicale

1404

Sixty-sixth ,Plenary Meeting

15 Decem "er 1'946

mondiale concernant la procedure des consultations; secundo, perrnettre au Conseil economique et social de poursuivre sans entraves injustifiees la tache complexe qui lui est confiee
et qui consiste a prendre toutes dispositions
utiles pour consulter les organisations non gouvernementales; tertio, empecher que soit entreprise une action quelconque qui puisse constituer une infraction ou violation de la Charte,
de ses dispositions ou de ses principes.
En conclusion, permettez-moi de repeter que
In conclusion, let me say again that the
United States opposes this resolution ,and the les Etats-Unis sont opposes a cette resoItition
amendment proposed by the Soviet delegation in et a l'amendemellt propose par la delegation de
principle, in practice and in the interests of the l'Union sovietique; cela, pour des raisons de
Economic and Social Council itself. Indeed, we principe et de pratique, et a,fin de sauvegarder
les interets du Conseil economique et socialluifeel that:
meme. Nous estimons en effet que:
1. The arrangements already worked out
1. Les arrangements deja etablis devraient
should afford this organization and the other pleinement permettre a la Federation syndicale
non-governmental organizations included in mondiale et aux autres organisations non goucategory (a) ample access to the agenda.
vernementales comprises dans la categorie a)
de faire porter des questions a l'ordre du jour
du Conseil.
2. These arrangements have not even been
2. Ces arrangements n'ont pas pu encore
tested by usage and it is therefore unreasonable etre experimentes en pratique; il ne convient
done pas de les declarer inadequats.
to assume their inadequacy.
3. These arrangements should be given a
3. Ces arrangements devraient etre mis a,l'esreasonable trial before the Assembly intervenes sai durant un temps convenable et avant que
and, in effect, overrules the Council by recom- l'AssembIee n'intervienne en cette question--ee
qui consisterait en fait a changer l'ordre etabli
mending a change.
sans tenir compte de l'avis du Conseil.
4. L'Assemblce doit se garder de modifier le4. The Assembly shoul? forbear from intermecanisme
des travaux du Conseil.
'
ference in the mechanics of the Council's work.,
Pour ces motifs, nous jugeons utile de nous
For these reasons we have considered it necessary to oppose this resolution and the amend- opposer a la resolution et a l'amendement proment proposed here in the Assembly, and we pose devant cette Assemblee. Et c'est notreespoir
hope that the ;Assembly will now reject both the que, pour les memes motifs, l'Assemblee rejettera et l'amendement et la resolution.
amendment and the resolution.

tice; secondly, to allow the Economic and
Social Council to go forward, without unwarranted interference, with' its complicated task of
making suitable arrangements for consultation
with non-governmental organizations; and
thirdly, to safeguard the Charter itself from any
action that would dangerously distort or violate
its intent and wordiJ1.g.

\

\
i

}

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Gusev, representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
M. Goussev, representant de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Mr. GUSEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The question of the participation of the World Federation
of Trade Unions in the work of the United
Nations is of the utmost importance. The head
of the Soviet delegation, Mr. Molotov, in his
speech to the General Assembly on 29 October
1946, pointed out the necessity of establishing
friendly relations with this international organization of trade unions, which includes tens of
millions of workers in many lands. This is
particularly necessary for the Economic and
Social Council, which cannot ensure the success
of its work unless it can count on the support of
such a vast democratic organization as the
World Federation of Trade Unions.

M. GOUSSEV (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): La question de la participation de la Federation syndicale mondiale aux travaux de 1'0rganisation est
une question tres importante. Dans le discotirs
qu'il a prononce a l'Assemblee le 29 octobre
(946, le chef de la delegation sovietique, M. Molotov, a dej~ souligne la necessite d'etablir des
liens amicaux avec cette organisation intemationale des syndicats qui groupe des dizaines de
millions de travailleurs appartenant a de nombreux pays. Ces liens sont particulieremellt
necessaires au Conseil economique et social, qui
ne pourra mener a bonne fin sa tiche que s'il
s'appuie sur une organisation democratique dc'
masses cotnme, l'est la Federation syndicale
mondiale.
On sait que cette question a ,ete eXaminee a
la Conference de San-Francisco ainsiqu'a la
premiere· partie de la premiere session de l' Assemblee generale, a Londres. L' Assem blt~e generale a recommande au Conseil economique et
social de prendre des mesures pour permettre it
la Federation syndicale mondiale d'apportcr: au

As we know, this question was discussed at the
San Francisco Conference and at the first part
of the first session of the General Assembly held in
London. The General Assembly recommended
the Economic and Social Council to adopt suit~
able arrangements enabling the World Federation of Trade Unions to collaborate for purposes
I

j

15 decembre 1946

1405

of consultation with the Economic and Social
Council.
During its second st"-ssion, 'the Economic and
Social Council considered the question of conimItation with non-governmental organizations.
The Council's decision of 21 June 1946 states:
"''Ibe Council deems that the most close conImItative connexion should be established with
the World Federation of Trade Unions".
The Economic and Social Council did not,
however, bring this just decision to its conclusion. The Council decided that the representative~ of the World Federation of Trade Unions
could be present at meetings of the Economic
and Social Council, in the same manner as other
mm-governmental organizations, only as obser,"ers, and that they might submit their proposals
neither at meetings of the Council nor at meetings of its Commissions, but through a special
Committee for discussions with non-governmental organizations. It is quite obvious that
this decision could not satisfy a vast organization
of workers such as the World Federation of
Trade Unions. The latter addressed a request
to the General Assembly that it examine this
question and give the World Federation of
Trade Unions:
1. The right to submit to the Economic and
Social Council questions for insertion in the
provisional agenda, in accordance with the procrdllre now applicable to specialized agencies.

2. The right to present both written and verbal statements to the Economic and Social
Council on all matters of concern to the Federation.
During the discussion of this ques!ion at a
joint meeting of the Second and ThIrd Committees, the Soviet delegation supported the
request of the World Federation. of . Trade
Unions and submitted a draft resolunon m conformity with this request. The proposal, contained in the draft resolution, to give the Federation the right to insert in the provision~l
agenda of the Economic and Social. Counol
questions of interest to the FederatIO~, was
adopted. However, thy proposal, to gtve the
Federation the right to present wntten and v:rbal statements to the Economic and Socral
Council on matters of concern to it was not,
unfortunately, adopted..
"
The Soviet delegation conSIders that,thIS d~Clsion on the second point was wron,g, ~s It !estncts
the just rights of such an authontanve mternational organization of workers as, the Wor~d
Federation of Trade Unions. The tens ?f m~l­
lions of workers, organized in trade. umons 111
States, Members ~f the Un.ited NatIons, have
made an immense contributIOn to the, cause. of
victory over Hitlerite Germany. a;nd Impenalistic Japan; and now, unde~ ~o,ndltIOns of pe~ce,
the co-operation in the actlVltles of ~he U mted
Nations of the millions of worke:s un:ted by the
World Federation of Trade Umons IS a yrtally
essential condition for the successful solutIOn of

Soixante-sixieOle seance plenlere

Conseil economique et social sa collaboration
a des fins consultatives.
Au cours
sa deuxieme session , le Conseil
,
. de
.
economlque, et SOCIal a e~amine la question de
la consultation des orgamsations non gouvernementales. La decision du Conseil en date du
21 juin 1946 declare: "Le Conseil estime qu'il
conviendrait d'etablir aux fins de consultations
les relations les plus etroites possibles avec la
Federation syndicale mondiale."
Mais le Conseil economique et social n'a pas
ete jusqu'au bout de cette decision justifiee, Il
a decide que les representants de la Federation
syndicale mondiale, au meme titre que les representants d'autres organisations non gouvernementales, ne pourraient assister au Conseil
economique et social qu'en qualitc d'observateurs, qu'ils ne pourraient introduire leurs propositions ni aux seances memes du Conseil ni
a ce11es des Commissions, qu'ils ne pourraient
le faire que par l'intermediaire d'un Comitc
special charge des negoeiations avec les organisations non gouvernementales. Il est tout nature1
qu'une te11e decision n'ait pu satisfaire en aucune
fa<;on une organisation ouvriere de masses
comme l'est la Federation syndicale mondiale,
Celle-ci a done prie l' Assemblee generale d'etudier cette question et d'accorder a la Federation
syndicale mondiale:
1. Le droit de soumettre a I'examen du
Conseil economique et social des questions a
inscrire a I'ordre du jour provisoire, confonncment a la procedure actuellement en vigueur
pour les institutions specialisees.
2. Le droit de soumettre au Conseil economique et social des communications, tant
verbales qu'ecrites, sur toutes les questions qui
interessent la Federation,
Lorsque cette question a ete examinee par la
Commission mixte des Deuxieme et Troisieme
Commissions, la delegation sovietique a appuye
la requete de la Federation syndicale mondiale
et a presente un projet de resolution dans ce
sens. Notre proposition d'accorder a la Federation le droit de porter a l'ordre du jour provisoire du Consei1 economique et social des questions interessant la Federation a ete adoptee.
Malheureusement la proposition d'autoriser la
Federation a pre~enter au Conseil economique
et social des communications ecrites et verbales
sur les questions qui l'interessent a ete rejetee.
La delegation sovietiquc; estim~ 9-ue la decision sur ce deuxieme pomt est m)uste;. ~ette
decision meconnait, en effet, les drOlts .legttime;
d'une organisation internati?nale ou~nere aUSSI
importante que la FederatlO~ ~yndlca~e m?ndiale. Les dizaines de mIllIons d ouvners
groupeS dans les syndicats des pays M,em~res
d Nations Unies ont apporte une contnbution
~ es rme a la victoire sur l'hitlerisme allemand
cilO
,
A' d'h'
et sur l'imperialisme japon~I~, .UJour ~l ~ue
la paix est revenue, la partlclpa~lOIl; des miJ!ions
d'ouvriers groupes dans l~ Fede~atI?n syndicale
mondiale a. l'ceuvre de I <?~gaTIlsatron des Nations Unies est une condItion absolument cs·

. :!

',:\
(

-

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

1406

15 December 1946

sentielle pour la reussite de la collaboration
economique et sociale que les Nations Unies se
proposent d'etablir.
La participation d'une organisation internaThe participation of such an authoritative intionale
ouvriere aussi importante a l'activite du
ternational organization of workers in the activities of the Economic and Social Council will Conseil economique et social ne pourra que
merely serve to lighten the work of that body faciliter les travaux de cet organisme, et contriand will thus promote the improvement of the buera par la meme a perfectionner I'action de
activities of our Organization as a whole and notre Organisation dans son ensemble, en l'aifulfilment of the lofty tasks entrusted to it dant a accomplir les nobles taches que lui cOilfic
la Charte.
by the Charter.
La Federation syndicale mondiale groupe,
As we know, the World Federation of Trade
Unions unites approximately seventy million nous le savons, environ soixantc-dix millions
people of various trades. It is also concerned d'hommes de differentes professions. Elle s'ocwith those same economic and social questions cupe des memes questions economiques et sodawith which the Economic and Social Council is les que le Comite ecoilomique et social: droits
dealing-human rights, problems of health, edu- de ~'homme~ questions de sante publique, d'education and culture-and it is an international catIOn et de culture. En tant qu'organisation
organization co-ordinating the activities of the internationale, clle coordonne I'activite des syntrade unions of fifty-five countries in these dicats de cinquante-cinq pays dans ces domaines.
spheres. This has enabled the World Federation Cela permet a la Federation syndicale mondiale
of Trade Unions to draw on the accumulated de disposer de l'experience accumulee par des
experience of tens of millions of workers in many dizaines de millions d'ouvriers dans de nombreux pays.
of the countrie~ of the world.
Ne serait-il pas utile de mettre l'experience
Let us therefore ask ourselves whether it
de
cette tres grande organisation internationale
. would not be advisable to make use of the ex.
des
travailleurs au service de toutes les Nations
perience of this immense international organizaUnies?
N'est-il pas clair que le Conseil econotion of workers in the interests of all the United
et
social, en tant qu'organisme traitant
mique
Nations. Is it not obvious that the establishment
of a close connexion with the World Federation de problemes economiques et sociaux, est inof Trade Unions is primarily of interest to the teresse au premier chef a etablir'des relations
Economic and Social Council, as the body con- etroites avec la Federation syndicale mondiale?
cerned with economic and social problems?
Certains des representants qui ont refuse a la
In expressing their objections to giving the
Federation
syndicale mondiale le droit de prenWorld Federation of Trade Unions the right to
dre
part
aux
reunions du Conseil economique et
participate in the meetings of the Economic and
Social Council, members of certain delegations social, ont pretendu que cette demaJ;lde 'des
alleged that this request from the Trade Unions syndicats n'etait pas conforme a la Charte de.,
was not in conformity with the United Nations Nations Unies. Mais, en realite, la proposition
Charter. However, in actual fact the proposal concernant la Federation syndicale mondiale est
concerning the World Federation of Trade entierement conforme al'Article 71 de la Charte
Unions is in full conformity with Article 71 of des Nations Unies, lequel recommande au Conthe United Nations Charter, which recommends seil economique et social de consulter les organito the Economic and Social Council that it sations non gouvernementales. Non seulement
make arrangements for consultation with non- le mot "consulter" n'exclut pas la consultation
governmental organizations. The meaning of sous forme de participation aux seances, mais il
the word "consultation" not only does not ex- presuppose cette participation si on ne veut pas
clude consultation by means of participation in reduire cette consultation a une procedure vide,
d'un formalisme purement bllreaucratique:
mee!i~gs, .but, on the cont!'ary, presupposes such
echange
de lettres et cretera: Si nous adoptions
partIcIpatlOn, unless we WIsh to reduce consultation to an empty, formal, bureaucratic proced. cette procedure, nous dresserions entre la Fedeure, such as correspondence and so forth. Such ration et le Conseil economique et social une
procedure would result in the creation of a barriere qui rendrait difficile une collaboration
barrier between the Federation and the Eco- feconde entre ces deux organisations. La Fedenomic and Social Council, which would hinder ration syndicale mondiale peut apporter une
their fruitful co-operation. The World Federa- aide efficace au Conseil economique et social
tion of Trade Unions can give effective help to pour la solution de nombreux problemes econothe Economic and Social Council in the solution miques et sociaux; dIe peut l'aider a renforc~r
of many economic and social problems, .in la collaboration economique entre les peuples et
strengthening economic collaboration between a accomplir les taches confiees aux Nations
nations and in the implementation of the tasks Unies, si nous savons profiter de son experience
entrusted to the United Nations, if we make use et si nous facilitions, au lieu de l'entraver, sa
of the experience of this organization and if we collaboration avec l'Organisation des Nations
help and do not hinder co-operation between Unies. Pour toutes ces raisons, la delegation
the World Federation of Trade Unions and the sovietique appuie la requete de la Federation
United Nations. Guided by these considerations, syndicale mondiale et propose que l' Assemblee
the Soviet delegation supports the request of the generale accorde a cette Federation le droit de
the problems of economic and social co-operation confronting the United Nations.

.1

I

'" .'.

15 decembre 1946

•

1407

World Federation of Trade Unions and p
th t th G
roposes
a. e eneral Ass~mbly give the Federation
the nght to present wntten and verbal statements
to the Economic and Social Council on all matters of concern to the Federation.
It has been said here today that the Asse .bl
should. not waste ~ime on the discussion o~th~
resolutIOn rega:dmg consultation with the
World FederatIOn of Trade Unions. We
understand " such statements to mean th at as
f ar as certam delegat1o~s are concerned the just
demands of the FederatIOn of Trade Unions can
be left out of account and ignored. The Soviet
delega~io.n has different views. We consider that
the. opmIOn. of the World Federation of Trade
UnIOns, whIch has about seventy million members, cannot be ignored. The Federation can
help the Economic and Social Council and the
~c~nomic and Social. Council can tak~ account
m Its work of the WIshes of that organization.
Our addition to the resolution adopted by the
Second and Third Committees has been distributed and is now before the representatives. The
Soviet delegation hopes that the Assembly will
adopt ~he resolution submitted by the Committee
and wIll support the addition proposed by the
Soviet delegation. We hope that other delegations will support this addition.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Sapru, representative of India.

Soixante-slxleme seance ph1nline

presente~ a~ Conseil economique et social des
commum.catIOns ccrites et verbales sur toutes
les questIOns qui intcressent la Federation.

On n?us a dit aujourd'hui que I'Assemblee
ne devaIt
.
la
. pas perd re son t emps a exammer
r~solutIOn. sur les consultations avec la Federa~
bon syndIcale mondiale. 11 resulte de ces de~
claratIOns
que certaines dl.lLgati'
t'
t
'"
C cons cs Imen
qu ~n peut lalsser de cote, qu'on peut ignorer
les Justes demandes de la Federation des syndicats. L~ delegation sovietique est d'un tout
a~tre aVIs., ~o~s estimons qu'il est impossible
d Ign~rer I opmIOn de la Federation syndicale
m,ondIale, avec ses soixante-dix millions d'adherents. La Federation peut aider le Consol
ec~nomiq~e et social, et ce dernier peut luimeme temr compte dans ses travaux des desiderata de cette organisation.
'
L'additif sovietique a la resolution qui a cte
approuvee par la Deuxieme et la Troisieme
Commission, a ete distribue et se trouve entre
l~s ~ains de.') representants. La delegation sovle~Ique e~pe:e que l'As;semblee adoptera la resolutIOn qll1 IU! est soumlSe par la Commission et
qu'elle app.uiera l'additif propose par la delegatI~n sO~Iebque. ~ous esperons que les autres
deh~gatIOns appUIeront notre additif.
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole
M. Sapru, representant de l'Inde,

a

M. SAPRU (Inde) (traduit de l'anglais): Ce
debat a ete ·assez viI, et la delegation de I'Inde
desirerait que le probleme pose par la recommandation de la Commission mixte re1ativement
a la requete de la Federation syndicale mondiale
qui desire voir s'etablir entre elle et le Conseil
economique et social des relations plus etroites
sous la forme de consultations, fClt examine sous
son vrai jour. Quelques simples faits pennettront a l'Assemblt~e de saisir la portee exacte de
notre decision.
Par sa recommandation, la Commission mixte
The recommendation of the Joint Committee .
exprime
son opinion reflechie sur une communi~
represents its considered views on a communication which waR addressed to you, Mr. President, cation adressee au President de l'AssembIee le
by the distinguiRhed Vice-President of the 12 novembre 1946, par le Vice-President de la
WFTU on 12 November 1946. In that letter, Federation syndicale mondiale. En cette comthe demand was put forward by the WFTU munication, la Federation demandait que le
for closer conRultation with .the Economic and Conseil economique et social ctablit avec dIe
Social Council. The actual proposals which des relations plus etroites aux fins de consulta~
were made hy that organization were that it tion. Cette organisation demandait en fait:
should be conceded (a) the right to submit to a) le droit de soumettre au Conseil des questions
the Council questions for insertion in the pro- qu'elles desirait voir inscrites a 1'0rdre du jour
visional agenda, in accordance with the pro- provisoire, conformement a la procedure qui
cedure now applicable to specialized agencies; s'applique actuellement aux institutions speciali(b) the right to present ,written and verbal sees; b) le droit de presenter au Conseil des
communications ecrites et orales sur tOlltes les
statements to the Council on all matters of conquestions interessant la Federation.
cern to the Federation.
La Commission mixte a accede a la premiere
What the Joint Committee has done is to demande de la FSM; elle a ecartc la seconde.
concede the first demand of the WFTU. It En somme, eile a simplifie les modalitcs de
has rejected the other. All that it has done consultation et de collaboration. S'it etait donne
is to simplify the procedure for consultation and suite a la recommandation de la Commission
collaboration. The recommendation of the mixte, les propositions que le Conseil econoJoint Committee, if implemented, will no doubt mique et social a faites, le 21 juin 1946, je crois
modify to some extent the proposals of ,the se trouveraient indubitablement modifiees dans
Economic and Social Council made, I think,
Mr. SAPRU (India): Much heat has been
exhibited in this debate, and the Indian delegation would like the problem raised by the recommendation of the Joint Committee in regard to
the demand of the World Federation of Trade
Unions for closer consultation with the Economic and Social Council to be viewed in its
proper perspective. A few simple facts will help
to explain the exact import of our decision.

Sixfy~sixfh Plenary Meeting

1408

on 21 June 1946. It will help to give the
WFTU contact and opportunity for consultation
in a concrete and effective form, and it will
ensure that the Council will be bound to apply
its mind to proposals submitted by it for insertion in the provisional agenda.
For our purposes, it is necessary to accept
the position that the WFTU is a reasonable
organization and that the Council is a body
capable of transacting its l;msiness in a busin~ss­
like manner. It is on this assumption that we
justify the vote we cast for the first part. of the
resolution. We assume that the WFTU is a
body of reasonable men who will submit reasonable proposals, and we also assume that the Economic and Social Council is a body which is
capable of going ahead with its business in an
expeditious manner. The recommendation that
the Joint Committee has made will simplify the
position and will not interpose any avoidable
delay in consideration of the questions in which
the WFTU, as a great organization, as an organization which represents the world of labour
in many countries of the world and has a membership of seventy million workers, is interested.
When a question is submitted by the WFTU,
the Council will be bound to apply its mind
to this question, for this is in effect what the
right of submitting items for the agenda will
amount to. The procedure will. have the merit
of increasing the efficiency of the procedure for
ensuring co-operation between the Council and
the WFTU. It will also save it from the dangers
to which attention has been invited in the letter
of the distinguished Vice-President of the
WFTU, Mr. Jouhaux.
The concessions which have been made to
theWFTU in no way put it on a par with a.
specialized agency like the lntemational Labour
Organisation. I have not been able to understand the legal arguments which have been
advanced against the first part of· the proposal
of the Joint Committee. I have read the relevant sections of the Charter, and our attention
has not been drawn to any particular section
of the Charter which debars the General Assem,
bly from making a recommendation of this character to the Economic and Social Council. There
is no express provision, as far as I have been
able to read, against our making recommendations to the Economic and Social Council of the
character we i.ntend to make.

Apart from this question, I may point out
that there is a difference between the status
which has been accorded to the specialized agencies and that accorded to the WFTU. The
International Labour Organisation is a special
inter-governmental specialized agency which
has the reciprocal right of participation
without vote in the deliberations of the Economic and Social Council. A perusal of the
agreement between the United Nations and the
~LO will make this position perfectly clear. The

15 O!,!cembell" 1946

une certaine mesure, La FSM aurait ainsi l'oc'casion d'entrer en contact avec le Conseil economique et social et d'ttre consultee par celui-ci,
d'une maniere concrete et effective; et le Conseil
serait tenu d'accorder son attention aux propositions que la Federation lui soumettrait pour
inscription a l'ordre du jour provisoire.·
Pour la c1arte de notre expose, il est necessaire de partir de ces premisses que la FSM est.
une organisation animee par des hommes senses
et que le Conseil est un organe capable de s'ac~
quitter de ses fonctions avec un esprit pratique.
Lorsque nous avons vote pour la premiere partie
de la resolution, nous avons tenu ces deux propositions pour acquiscs. Nous supposonf'l que la
FSM est une organisation dirigee par des
hommes de bon sens, qui presenteront des propositions raisonnables, et nous supposons egalement que le Conseil economique et social est
une organe capable de mener ses affaires av~c
celerite. La recommandation de la Commission
mixte simplifiera la situation et n'entrainera aucun retard evitable dans I'examen des questions
qui interessent la FSM en sa qualite de grande
organisatioll, d'organisation qui represente le
monde du travail dans de nombreux pays du
globe et qui compte soixante-dix millions d'adherents. Lorsque la FSM soumettra une question
au Conseil economique et social, celui-ci se verra
tenu de donner son attention a cette question,
car, en fait, c'est a cela que revient le droit de
demander l'inscription dOe questions a I'ordre du
jour. Cette procedure aura l'avantage d'accroitre l'efficacite des modalites de la collaboration
du Conseil avec la FSM. Elle garantira egalement cette collaboration contre les dangers que
M. Jouhaux, Vice-President de la Federation,
a sigl1ales dans sa lettre.
Les concessions qui ont cte accordees a la
FSM ne mettent llullement celle-ci au meme
rang qu'une institution specialisee comme 1'0rganisation intemationale du Travail. Je ne suis
pas parvenu a comprendre les raisons d'ordre
juridique qui ont cte invoquees contre la premiere partie de la proposition de la Commission
mixte. J'ai lu les passages de la Charte qui ont
trait a la question, et mon attention n'a ete
retenue par aucun article particulier qui interdise
a I'AssembIee generale de formuler, a l'intention
du COl1seil economique et social, une recommandation de cette nature. Aucune stipulation
expresse, autant que j'ai pu m'en rendre
compte, ne s'oppose a ce que l'Assemblee fasse
au Conseil economique et social des recommandations du caractere de celles que nous nons
propo~ons de formuler.
Ind6pendamment de cette question, qu'il me
soit permis de faire observer qu'il y a une difference entre le statut dont jouissent les institutions
specialisees et celui qui a ete accord6 a la FSM.
L'OIT est une institution intergouvernementale
specialisee, d'un caractere particulier, qui, a
titre de reciprocite, peut participer, sans droit
de vote, aux deliberations du Conseil economique
et social. La lecture de l'accord conelu entre
l'Organisation des Nations Unies et l'OIT permet de se faire une idee tres nette de la situation.

I,

lS decembre 1946

1409

Soixante-sixieme seance pleniere

:WFTU has been given no such similar right for L~ FSM n'a aucun droit analogue puIS'q ,
, u on ne
It h~ n~t be~n conceded the right of a~tive lUl a p ~~ acco~ d'e cel'
Ul de participer activement
partlClpatiOn ID the Economic and· S 'al au~ dehberatlOns du Conseil cconom'
t
SOCIal.
lque e
Council.
OCl
The ~ght of making verbal recommendations
L~ dr,o~t de faire des recommandations verba~cept m accordance with the procedure no~ les n a ete accorde a la FSM que dans 1 li 't
a ml e.
laId down, ' has not been conceded . All th a t we de la proce' d
ured 'eterminee par 'les arrangeh ave d one IS to, concede to a world organization ments astuels. Tout cc que nous avons fait c'est
de conceder a une organisation mandiale ~ ui a,
of the status m the world of labour of th
WFTU a. right which will ensure that l'ts VIews
. e ~our le mon~e duo tr~vail, l'importance qu'a la
will receIve speedy ax:d prompt attention at the FSM, un ?r?lt qUl lUl garantira que ses avis sehands of the EconomIc and Social Council. The ~ont ex~mmes sans delai par les soins du Conseil
~embers of th~ WFTU will not now have to go e~OnOlTIlque e~ so~ial. Les membl'es de la FSM
about canvassmg each 1\1ember State before n auront pas a falre toutes sortes de demarches
~hey ~an l~ave a question, which they submit for aUfrcs de ch.aque Etat Membre afin d'obtenir
msertlon ill the agenda of the Economic and qu un~ que~tlon, qU,e leur organisation propose
~ociaI Council, considered by the Council. That ~our lI~SertIOn a 1 ordre du jour du Conseil
cconor:l1qu~ et social soit examinee par cc
IS all the concession that we have made to the
~FTU. Therefore, let us not exaggerate the C~nsc~l. C est la seule ~oncession que nous ayons
unportance of the concession that we have falte a l~. FSM, et 11 ne convient pas d'cn
made. We have not placed the WFTU on a exagerer 1Importance: Nous n'avons pas place
f~oting of equality in matters of consultation la"FSM, pour ee qUl est des consultations, au
WIth the ILO or any other specialized agency. meme rang.qu~ l'(~)lT ou, que l'une quelconque
All dlat we have done--and I should like to ~es autres mstltutIOns specialisees. Nous avons
emphasize this-is that the WFTU will not have slmplement fait en sorte, je tiens a le souligncl'
to go through the process of working through qu': l~ FSM ,n:a~t pa~ a s~ preoccuper de passe;
~om~ Member State interested in the questions pal lllltermedIalre dun Etat Membre interesse
aux questions qu'elle desire soulever.
It raISes.
Apres l'adoptio~ de la ,resolution, le represenMter the resolution was passed, the repretant d.es ~tats-Ums a pose la question des autres
~ntative of the United States raised the ques- organISatIOns non gouvernementales appartenant
non of other non-governmental organizations in a la categorie a). Il souhaitait voir accorder a
category (a). He wanted these other non-gov- ces autres organisations non gouvemementales
ernmental organizations in category (a) to be de la categorie a) des droits ~nalogues a ceux
conceded rights similar to those which have been qui ont ete accordes a la FSM. La delegation
conceded to the WFTU. The Indian delega- de l'Inde a vote contre la proposition du repretion voted against the proposal of the represen- sentant des Etats-Unis, non parce que l'lnde y
tative of the United States, not because it was etait forcement opposee en principe, mais paree
necessarily opposed to it in principle, but be- que cette proposition allait a l'encontre de la
cause that proposal raised, as an answer resolution sur la FSM et soulevait des problemes
and a challenge to the resolution on the' WFTlT. qui ne sont pas parmi eeux que la Commission
issues other than those which the Committee had avait ete appelee a examiner. En efIet, noUS
been called upon to consider. We were dealing, nous occupions alors, au sein de la Commission
in the Joint Committee, at that time, with a mixte, d'une demande bien precise emanant de
definite application from the WFTU, and we la FSM, et nous ne pouvions engager notre
could not commit our Government to any other Gouvernement sur une autre question dont on
issue supposed to be arising out of it. The Indian nous disait qu'elle etait lice a cette demande.
delegation feels that it cannot agree to any La delegation de l'Inde estime qu'elle ne peut
regional labour organization being treated on an pas se rallier a l'idee qu'une organisation
equal footing with a world organization, and ouvriere regionale quelconque jouisse d'un traitcthis is by way of answer to the resolution which ment egal a celui que l'on aceordc a une orgawas promoted by the representative of the nisation mondiale - et eette observation con~­
Argentine.
titue une reponse a la resolution proposee par le
representant de l'Argentine.
Pour les raisons que je viens d'exposer, nous
For the reasons which I have stated, we sup- appuyons la resolution telle qu'elle a ete votee
port the resolution as passed by the Joint Com- par la Commission mixte. Nons sommes opposes
mittee. We are opposed to the second part of a la seconde partie de l'amendement de l'Uninn
the Soviet Union amendment, as, if it is ac- sovietique parce que, si cet amendement ctait
cepted, the WFTU will occupy more or less a accepte, la FSM se trouverait plus nu mains
position of equality with the specialized placee au meme rang que les institutions spcagencies, and we are not prepared to go to that cialisees, et nous ne sommes pas disposes a aUer
extent. Wc think that we have provided a aussi loin. Nous estimons avoir prev u une proprocedure which would en~ble smooth co-.ope.ra- cedure qui permettrait une collaboration hartion to develop between thIS world orgamzatIOn monieuse entre l'organisation mandiale dont il
and this Assembly of all the countries of the s'agit et l~ presente Assemblee au tous les pays
world. We have, we think, provided machinery du monde sont representes. Nous penso ns avoir
.which would satisfy the legitimate aspiration of

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

1410

labour to have its voice heard in the Economic
and Social Council.

The Economic and Social Council, as we
know, has done good work in the year under
review, and it is an instrument which is capable
of doing an infinite amount of good work in the
future. If it is to do the work which has been
assigned to it by the Charter, it must have the
co-operation of the workers of the world, and
it is because we feel that the WFTU represents
the workers of the world that we think it but
right that,it should be conceded the right of
placing items for insertion in the provisional
agenda of the Economic and Social Council.
If this proposal is accepted by the Economic
and Social Council, the way will be prepared
for effective co-operation between this Assembly
and the world of labour, and we want, in this
world of ours, greater co-operation between
labour and govemment.
I am not a trade unionist, and I have not
the experience which my distinguished friend,
the representative of the United Kingdom, has
of the trade union movement. But I have felt
that closer co-operation between the trade unions and the governm'ents of today, Closer cooperation between trade unions and this Organization, will pave the way for a healthy and
rational world order. It is because' we stand
for a healthy and rational world order, which
will do justice to all sections and classes of our
population, that we think the recommendation
of the Joint Committee is right and proper.'
With these words I should like, on behalf of
India, to give our support to the first two parts
of the resolution of the Joint Committee; that is
to say, the part which places on record the position of the work of the Economic and Social
Council, and the part which concedes to the
WFTU the right of placing items for consideration before the Economic and Social Council.

15 December 1946

mis sur pied un mecanisme de nature a satisfaire les aspirations legitimes des travailleuTS qui
souhaitent que leur voix soit entendue au Conseil
economique et social.
Comme vous le savez, le Conseil economique
et social a fait du bon travail au COUTS de l'annee; il constitue un instrument propre a accomplir dans l'avenir un volume illimite de bon
travail. S'il doit remplir la tache qui lui a ete
assignee par la Charte, il lui faut la collaboration des travailleurs du monde; et c'est parce
que nous estimons que la FSM represente les
travailleurs du monde que, pour nous, il n'est
que juste de .lui conceder le droit de presenter
des questions pour inscription a l'ordre du joW'
provisoire du Conseil economique et social.
L'acceptation de cette proposition par le
Conseil economique et social ouvrira la voie
une collaboration effective entre l' Assemblee et
le monde des travailleurs; et nous souhaitons voir
les travailleurs et les Gouvemements de ce
inonde collaborer dans une mesure plus grande.
Je n'appartiens pas au monde syndical et je
ne possede pas l' experience de mon distingue
ami, le representant du Royaume-Uni, en matitre de syndicalisme, mais j'ai pense qu'une
collaboration plus etroite entre les syndicats
ouvriers et les Gouvemements d'aujourd'hui,
entre ces syndicats et notre Organisation, preparerait l'avenement d'un ordre mondial sain et
rationnel. C'est precisement parce que noUB
desirons voir s'instaurer un ordre mondial sain
et rationnel ou toutes les parties et toutes les
classes de notre population auront la part qui
leur revient, que nous trouvons juste et approprice la recommandation de la Commission
mixte.
Cela dit, je voudrais, au nom de I'lnde, apporter notre adhesion aux deux premieres parties de
la resolution de la Commission mixte, a savoir:
la partie qui -fait etat du travail accompli par
le Conseil economique et social, et cdle qui
accorde a la FSM le droit de soumettre des
questions a I'examen de ce Conseil.

a

a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Makin, representative of Australia.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parol~
M. Makin, representant de l' Australie.

Mr. MAKrN (Australia): When the resolution
regarding, relations between the World Federation of Trade Unions and the Economic and
SO,cial Council was discussed in joint meetings
of the Second and Third Committee, the Australian delegation voted against the resolution
now before this plenary session. For the same
reasons which actuated us then, we feel that we
must again vote against the resolution.

M. MAlUM (Australie) (traduit de I' anglais):
Lors de la discussion, a la Commission mixte des
Deuxiemc et Troisieme Commissions, de la resolution concernant les relations entre la Federation syndicale mondiale et le Conseil economique
et social, la delegation australienne s'est prononcee contre la resolution dont l' Assemblee
generale est actuellement saisie. Ce sont les
memes raisons qui, a ce moment-la, nous ont
guides, qui nous commandent aujourd'hui de
voter de nouveau contre la resolution.
Il est tellement evident que le mouvement
syndicaliste constitue une des forces les plus
puissantes de la vie sociale en Australie que les
Membres de cette Assemblee comprendront parfaitement que notre attitude a l'egard de cette
resolution ne saurait en aucune maniere etre

That the trade union movement is one of the
strongest forces in Australian social life is so clear
that Members of this Assembly will understand
that our attitude towards the resolution cannot
in any way be interpreted as directed against the
interests of the trade unions generally. The rea-

J

15 decembre 1946

1411

Soixante-slxleme seance plenler.

JSOns for our action are of an entirely different
character.

in~erpretee comme etant destince a porter atteI.nte aux interets des syndicats en general. Les
ralsons qui nous inspirent sont d'un caractere
tout a fait different.
In our view, the General Assembly should not
... A notre avis, l'AssembIee generale ne doit pal:!
embarrass the Economic and Social Council with gener l'action du Conseil economique et social
decisions upon matters which, under Articles 60 . par des decisions prises sur des questions qu'il
and 71 of the Charter, are better left to the dis- y aurait interet, aux termes des Articles 70 et 71
cretion of the Council itself. The Council has an ue la Charte, a laisser regler par le Conseil luiestablished procedure for consultation with non- meme. Le Conseil a une procedure fixe en ce
governmental organizations. Under these ar- qui concerne les c;onsultations avec les organisarangements, the World Federation of Trade tions non gouvernementales. Aux termes de ces
Unions has the right:
arrangements, la Federation syndicale mondiale
a le droit:
1. To send observers to meetings of the
1. D'envoyer des observateurs aux reunions
du Conseil;
Council;
2. To submit proposals for the Council's
2. De soumettre a un Comite special du
agenda to a Special Committee of the Council; Conseil des propositions relatives a l'ordre uu
jour du Conseil;
3. To circulate written statements as official
3. De remettre des declarations ecrites a distribuer comme documents officiels du Conseil;
papers of the Council;
4. To participate in Council discussions at
4. De participer aux discussions du Conseil a
the Council's request.
.
la demande de ce dernier.
These are substantial advantages which we
Tels sont les avantages importants qui ont ete,
feel have rightly been granted to the World a bon droit, nous semble-toil, accordes a la
Fed eration syndicale mondiale.
Federation of Trade Unions.
The Australian delegation cannot see, howLa delegation australienne ne voit pas, touteever, how greater claims than these can be ac- fois, comment on pourrait accorder des droits
corded to the World Federation of Trade Unions plus etendus a la Federation syndicale mondiale
without placing ~i(embers of the United Nations, sans que les Membres des Nations Unies qui ne
who are not members of the Economic and So- font pas partie du Conseil economique et social
cial Council, in a position inferior to the WFTU. se trouvent places dans une situation desavantagee par rapport a la FSM.
La Charte etablit une distinction trcs nette
The Charter distinguishes clearly the types of
relationship which shall exist between the Coun- entre les divers genres de relations qui devront
cil and (a) non-members of the ~ouncil, (b) exister entre le Conseil et: a) les Etats qui ne
specialized inter-governmental agencies, and (c) sont pas membres du Conseil, b) les institutions
specialisees intergouvernementales, c) les organon-governmental or~anizations.
nisations non gouvernementales.
Le Conseil n'a pas de regIe fixe pour la proThe Council has not settled procedure for
approving provisional agendas. At present any cedure d'approbation des ordres du jour provi.
item admitted to the provisional agenda is, in soires. Actuellement, tout point dont l'inscripfact, admitted to the Council agenda. We for~­ tion a l'ordre du jour provisoire a ete acccpt~e
see considerable embarrassment for the CouncIl est, en fait, inscrit a l'ordre du jour du Consel].
if the power accorded to the World F~deration On peut prevoir que le Conseil se trouvera dans
of Trade Unions is in fairness and eqUIty to be une grand embarras si la faculte accordee ~ la
accorded also to three other organizations; Federation syndicale mondiale est, en toute JUstice et equite, accordee egalement a trois autres
namely, the Intern,ational Chamb<:r of ~om­
merce, the International Co-operative Alliance organisations qui sont: la Chambre de ~om­
merce internationale, l'Alliance cooperative inand the Ameriran Federation of Labor. There
ternationale et la Federation americaine du
may still be more. There is a grave danger that
travail, 11 se peut mcme qu'il y en,.ait e~core
the agenda may become unmanageable.
davantage. I1 y a lieu de redouter qu 11 devlenne
alors impossible d'etablir l'ordre du jour.
Les faits invoques pour prouve~ que !e systcn:e
No ;ufficient evidence has been supplied to actllel de consultation entre la FederatIOn syndIshow that the preSent system of consulta~ion cale mondiale et le Const;il economique et social
between the World Federation of Trade Umons a ete prejudiciable a la Federation et a eu pour
and the Economic and Social Council has in- resultat de la placer sur un plan inferieur a
convenienced the World Federation of Trade celui auquel dIe avait droit, n'a~portent p~ une
Unions and ~ven it less than its due place. preuve suffisant~. La dele~at~on aust~~henne
Australia considers, therefore, that the present estime done qu'll faut contmuer a utilIser le
machinery should be used an~ further tested mecanisme actuel et le soumettre encore a
by time and for the above-mentIOned reasons we l'epreuvc du temps; e'est pourquoi, pour les
will vot~ against the resolution a~d the am~nd­ raisons indiquees ci-dessus, elle votera contre la
ment proposed by the Soviet Umon delegatIOn. resolution et contre l'amendement propose par
la delegation de l'Union sovietique.

----_...

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

15 December 1946

1412

If this resolution concerning the World Federation of Trade Unions were adopted, we
should be unable to support the second resolution in document A/246/ since this second
resolution would have the practical effect of
extending indefinitely the consequences of a
wrong decision taken on the first.

Si cette resolution relative a la Federation
syndicale mondiale etait adoptee, nous serions
dans l'impossibilite de donner notre appui a la
seconde resolution qui figure au document
A/246,l puisque cette seconde resolution aurait
pour etfet, dans la pratique, de prolonger indefiniment les consequences d'une decision prise a
tort, a propos de la premiere resolution.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Corominas, representative of
Argentina.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M.
Corominas, representant de 1'Argentine.

Mr. COROMINAS (Argentina) (translated
from Spanish): Argentina enters the discussion
in the most advantageous conditions, perhaps
because I am the last speaker, and also perhaps
because Argentina is a country which has
warmly defended the rights of workers throughout the world whenever the occasion has arisen.
If I had the time this afternoon, I could
present a case here against those States which
profess to be "labour" governments, but I will
leave that for next year's Assembly. When that
time comes Argentina will bring forward again
the proposal which was rejected in the Committee. For the time being, there are a few
practical points which need clearing up before
the debate is closed.
We are representatives of a constitutional,
democratic, popular Government; we are also
representatives of a Government of the working
classes. That is why I stand at this rostrum
now to speak in defence of the workers of the
world, in an effort to secure for them the
right to be heard in all the organs of the United
Nations.
Argentina voted in support of the World
Federation of Trade Unions, that is to say, to
further the interests of the workers of the world,
in conformity with Article 71 of the Charter.
On that occasion, Argentina maintained that
workers throughout the world, belonging to
trade unions and other organizations, should
have the right to be heard in the Economic
and Social Council in accordance with the
clearly expressed terms of Article 71 of the
Charter.
Later, as the Indian representative very rightly recalled, we also supported the United States
proposal that the American Federation of Labor
should be given the requisite rights in relation
to the Economic and Social Council, and when
Argentina submitted a proposal to the competent Committee that the general labour federations of the American continent should
have the right to be represented, to be heard,
and to present their desiderata and to express
their views in the Committee, the proposal was
l'ejec~ed in a memorable vote by roll-call, an
occaSIOn which I think justified me in saying
that there are few countries which defend more
vehemently than my own the interests of the
working classes. On the occasion of this 1'011call it was demonstrated that the proletarian
States are politicians as well as proletarians,

M. COROMINAS (Argentine) (traduit de
l'espagnol): L'Argentine entre dans ce debat
dans les meilleures conditions, peut-ctre parce
que je suis l'orateur qui clot la discussion, peutctre aussi parce que l'Argentine est l'Etat qui, ason heure, a defendu le plus chaIeureusement les
droits des travailleurs du monde.
Je pourrais ce soir, si j'en avais le temps,
mettre en accusation les Etats qui se disent Etats
de travailleurs; mais je remets cela a l' Assemblee de l'annee prochaine; a cette occasion,
l'Argentine insistera de nouveau sur le projet
qui n'a pas beneficie d'une decision favorable
au sein de la Commission. Pour l'instant, avant
que s'acheve le debat, il est necessaire de bien
marquer certains points concrets.
Nous SOlllmes les representants d'un Gouvernement constitutionnel, democratique, populaire
et aussi les representants d'un Gouvernement de
travailleurs. C'est a ce titre que je suis id, a.
cette tribune, pour 'prendre la defense des travailleurs du monde, pour faire qu'ils soient
entendus par tous les organismes des Nations
Unies.
L'Argentine a emis un vote favorable a la
Federation syndicale mondiale, c'est-a.-dire un
vote favorable aux travailleurs du monde,
conformement a l'Article 71 de la Charte. En
cette occasion, l'Argentine a soutenu que les
travailleurs du monde, syndiques et organises,
peuvent se faire entendre du Conseil economique
et social, conformement au texte clair de l'Article
71 de la Charte.

1

See annex 92.

Ulterieurement, comme l'a tres bien rappeIe
le representant de l'lnde, nous avons aussi
appuye la proposition des Etats-Unis tendant a
donner a la Federation americaine du travail,
aupres du Conseil economique et sodal, la situation a laquelle elle a droit; et quand I'Argentine
a propose a la commission competente que les
confederations generales du travail du 'continent
americain puissent se faire representer et se
faire enteridre, presenter leurs desiderata et
exprimer leurs sentiments au sein de la Commission, cette proposition a ete rejetee au cours d'un
memorable scrutin par appel nominal qui me
permet de dire que rares sont les nations qui
defendent comme nollS, avec vehemence, le sort
des travailleurs du monde. A l'occasion de ce
scrutin par appel nominal, nous avons vu que
les Etats proletaires sont proIetaires et aussi poli1

Voir l'annexe 92.

~,~

\ ..

"')~
'I

~

~

15 dec:embre 1946

1413

and often defend their political interests in
preference to their proletarian interests; and it
was also demonstrated how countries with socaIled Labour governments flourish their union
cards in defence of labour interests, but when
the time comes to vote, vote against the workers' interests.
We are real workers, straight from the workshops, and it is our desire that the working
people from all over the world should be heard
by the United Nations, an organ sensitive to the
needs of humanity. I cannot imagine how the
United Nations could work without listening to
the heartbeat of the working people.
.

f
I
rI

I

,~

I quoted Lenin in my speech, and those who
call themselves workers voted against Lenin. I
quoted the Labour leaders, and they voted
against the Labour leaders' ideas. I quoted the
working people of my country, and I voted on
their side, fOr the wholehearted defence of their
principles.
Argentina's vote will not be in discord or at
variance with the views expr~ed in the Committee. She will vote in favour of the resolution
before us, in conformity with the spirit of
Article 71 of the Charter, without believing that
the World F(~deration of Trade Unions may
become a dictator to the Economic and Social
Council. She will vote for the resolution to
want the same benefits to similar organizations,
and as she votes. not without some emotion, her
de:;:ir(" will he that the future A..c;;sembly of the
United Nations which may deal with this question, may be receptive to the requests of workers
from all part.~ of the world.

There are al<;o regional problems and these
cannot be dealt with by world organizations.
These regional problems of the working classes,
whether they relate to Argentina or any other
(:ountry, should find expression in the deliberative A'>Scmbly of the United Nations.
Since when have the United Nations had the
right to silence the working classes? It is easy
enough to come to this Assembly, the highest
tribune of contemporary thought, and make
grandiloquent speeches in defence of the workers. The effective way to give the working
people the help they need, is to defend them
in their everyday life, in their daily struggle for
food, for work and for their general welfare.
Wc people of America are used to hearing
fine words of support of the working classes.
'Ye know how at conferences everywhere the
working class has been given false hopes; we
know how cruellv and how often its hopes are
dashed, because ~e belong to a country in which
the people are just recovering their rights of
citizenship, a country which is struggling to
reaffirm the workers' views and consolidate their
gains, nnd above all to fonn a government of
workers which will march forward towards a
better world. Let us open the doors of the
United Nations to the working classes of the
world.
-

SOfxante-slxieme seance plenlere

tiques, et que bien des foi~ ils defendent les
interets politiques a~ant les interets proletariens;
nous .a~ons .vu aUSSl que les Etats qui se disent
trav~illist~ mvoq~ent les syndieats pour defendre
les mterets ouvners, mais que lorsque vient
I'heure du scrutin, ils votent co~trairement aux
interets des travailleurs.
Nous sommes Ies travailleurs authentiques
no~s venons d.es ateliers et nous desirons que l~
VOIX des travailleurs du monde entier soit entendue par les Nations Unies, organe sensible a tollS
les besoins de l'humanite. Je ne con~ois pas
co~ent !'Organisation des Nations Unies pourralt fonctlonner sans ecouter battre le creur de
la classe ouvriere.
J'ai cite Lenine dans mon discours, et ceux
qui se pretendent des travailleurs ont vote contre
Lenine; ils ont vote contre les conceptions des
chefs travaillistes - alors que j'avais cite les
chefs du travaillisme. J'ai cite les travailleurs
de mon pays et j'ai vote en consequence avec
eux pour la defense integrale de leurs principes.
L'Argentine votera, et son vote ne sera ni en
opposition ni en contradiction avec la pensee
exprimee en Commission. L'Argentine votera
pour la resolution qui nous est presentee, conformement a l'esprit de f'Article 71 de la Charte,
et sans penser que la Federation syndicale mondiale puisse se transformer en un organisme susceptible de dieter ses volontes au Conseil eeanomique et social. L'Argentine votera pour la
resolution qui accorde aux organisations similaires le meme traitement, et elle votera, peutetre avec un peu d'emotion, parce que dans
l'avenir l'AssembIee des Nations Unies qui
traitera cette question ne sera pas insensible aux
besoins des travailleurs du monde.
n y a des problemes regionaux que ne peuvent
regler les organismes mondiaux. Ces problemes
regionaux de la classe ouvriere, qu'ils se posent
en Argentine ou dans un pays quelconque du
monde, on doit les discuter au sein de l'Assemblee deliberante des Nations Unies.
Depuis quand les Nations Unies ont-elles
qualite pour faire taire la classe ouvriere? I1 est
tres facile de venir a cette tribune, la plus haute
tribune de la pensee cont'emporaine, et de prononcer de grands discours en faveur des classes
ouvrieres. Ce dont les classes ouvrieres ont efIeetivement besoin, c'cst qu'on les soutienne dans
leur vie quotidicnne, leur lutte de tous les jours,
leurs efforts pour gagner le pain quotidien, travailler et aSsurer leur. bien-etre collectif.
N ous sommes habitues, nous citoyens de
l'Amerique, aces jeuxfloraux de la parole en
faveur des classes ouvrieres. Dans tous les
congres du monde, nous savons bien comment
on cree l'illusion chez les travailleurs, nous savons
bien comment et dans quelle mcsure on le~
trompe - car nous appartenons a un pays qUI
se trouve actuellement au stade ou le peuple
reconquiert ses droits civi9ues et lutte pour
afIinner les vceux des travmlleurs, assurer leurs
conquetes et, par-dessus tout, pour constituer un
gouvernement de travailleurs en marche ver~ un
monde meilleur. Ouvrons les portes des NatIOns
Unies aux classes laborieuses du monde entier.

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

1414

15 December 1946

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Weshall now vote and I suggest the following
method. I shall put successively to the vote:
The resolution on the report of the Economic
and Social Council;
The Soviet Union amendment dealing with
the resolution concerning the request of the
World Federation of Trade Unions, then the
resolution itself.
The resolution concerning the consultative
arrangements with non-governmental organizations.
We shall now vote on the resolution concerning the report of the Economic and Social
Council.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous allons maintenant proceder au vote. Je suggere la procedure suivante,
je mettrai aux voix successivement:
La resolution sur le rapport du Conseil economique et social;
L'amendement de l'Union sovietique se rapportant a la resolution relative a la demande de
la Federation syndicale mondiale, puis cette
resolution elle-meme;
La resolution sur les dispositions a prendre en
vue des consultations avec les organisations non
gouvernementales.
Nous allons dortc voter maintenant sur la
resolution relative au rapport du Conseil economique et social.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The resolution was adopted by
forty-three votes to none with three abstentions.

Deeision: La resolution est adoptee par qua-

Decision:

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
now put to the vote the Soviet Union amendment to add the following words to the resolution "and also the right to present written and
verbal statements to the Economic and Social
Council on all matters of concern to the Federation".
,
Mr. OROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I ask for
a vote by roll-call.

A vote was taken by roll-call.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The result of the voting is as follows:

Il est procede au vote

amain levee.

rante-trois voix contre zero) et trois abstentions.
Le PRESIDENT: J e mets maintenant aux voix
l'amendement sovietique qui consiste a ajouter
a la resolution les mots suivants: " ... et aussi
le droit de faire au Conseil economique et social
des communications ecrites et orales sur toutes
les questions interessant la Federation".

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je demande un vote par appel nominal.

11 est procMe au vote par appel nominal.
Le PRESIDENT: Le resultat du vote le suivant:

Voted for: Argentina, Byelorussian Soviet SoVotent pour: Argentine, Republique socialiste
cialist Republic, Chile, Czechoslovakia, Den- sovietique de Bielorussie, Chili, Tchecoslovaquie,
mark, France, Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico, Nor- Danemark, France, Guatemala, HaIti, Mexique,
way, Poland, Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Norvege, Pologne, Suede, Republique socialiste
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, sovietique d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques
Yugoslavia.
socialistes sovietiques, Yougoslavie.
Voted against: Afghanistan, Australia, BelVotent contre: Afghanistan, Australie, Bel·
gium, Brazil, Canada, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, .gique, Bresil, Canada, Cuba, Equateur, Egypte,
El Salvador, Honduras, Iceland, India, Iraq, Salvador, HonduraS, lslande, lnde, Irak, Liban,
Lebanon, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zea- Luxembourg, Pays-Bas, Nouvelle-Zelande, Nicaland, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, ragua, Panama, Paraguay, Perou, Republique
Philippine Republic, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tur- des Philippines, Arabie saoudite, Syrie, Turqui~,
key, Union of South Africa, United Kingdom, Union Sud-Africaine, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Ums
United States of America.
d'Amerique.
Abstentions: Bolivia, China, Colombia, Costa
S'abstiennent : Bolivie, Chine, Colombie,
Rica, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Greece, Costa-Rica, Republique Dominicaine, Ethiopie,
Iran, Uruguay, Venezuela.
Grece, Iran, Uruguay, Venezuela.
Decision: The Soviet Union amendment was
Decision: L'amendement de l'Union sovierejected by twenty-eight votes to fifteen with ten
abstentions.

tique est rejete par vingt-huit voix ,ontre quinze.,
et dix abstentions.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We will now proceed to a vote on the resolution
concerning the request of the World Federation
of Trade Unions.

Le PRESIDENT: Je mets maintenant aux voix
la resolution relative a la demande de la Federation syndicale mondiale.

Mr. WELLS (United Kingdom): I would iike
the vote to be taken by roll-call.

M. WELLS (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de ~'an­
glais): J e demande un vote par appe1 nommal.
Il est procede au vote par appel nominal.

A vote was taken by roll-call.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The result of the voting is as follows:

Le PRESIDENT: Voici le resultat du vote.

Voted for: Afghanistan, Argentina, Belgium,
Bolivia, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,

Votent pour: Afghanistan, Argentine, Belgique, Bolivie, Republique socialiste sovietique de

15 decembre 1946

1415

Chile, Colombia, Czechoslovakia, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, France, Guatemala
Haiti, Iceland, India, Luxembourg, Mexico:
Norway, Panama, Poland, Sweden, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Venezuela, Yugoslavia.

V oted against: Australia, Brazil, Canada,
Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Honduras,
Iraq, Lebanon, Netherlands, New Zealand
·
,
Nlcaragua,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippine" Republic,
Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkey, Union of South
AIrica, United Kingdom, United States of
America.
AbsUntions: China, Costa Rica, Ethiopia,
Greece, Iran, Uruguay.

Soixante'5ixj(~me seance plenike

Bielorussie, Chili, Colombie, TchCcoslovaquie
Danemark, Republique Dominicaine, France'
Gua~emala, Haiti, lslande, lnde, Luxembourg:
MexJq~e, Norvcge, Panama, Pologne, Suede
Re~ubhq ue socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine:
Umon des Rcpubliques socialistes sovietiques,
Venezuela, Yougoslavie.
t
V otent contre: Australie, Bresil Canada
Cuba, ~quateur, Egypte, Salvador, 'Honduras;
Irak, Llban, Pays-Bas, Nouvelle-Zelande, Nica.
ra~~a, . Paraguay, Perou, Republique des
Phl}lppmes, Ara~ie saoudite, Syrie, Turquie,
Umon
,.Sud.Africame, Royaume-Uni , Etats-Urus'
d 'Amenque.

S'abstiennent : Chine, Costa-Rica, Ethiopie
Greee, Iran, Uruguay.
J

Decision: The resolution was adopted by
twenty-five votes to twenty-two with six absten·
,tions.

. Deci~ion: La r~solution est a~optee par vingtcmq VDtX contre vmgt-deux, et SIX abstentions.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We proceed to a vote on the resolution concerning the consultative arrangements with non.
governmental organizations.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous passons au vote sur la
resolution relative aux dispositions a prendre en
vue de consultation avec 1es organisations non
gouvernementales.

A vote was taken by roll-call.

Il est procMe au vote par appel nominal.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The result of the voting is as follows:
Voted for: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Ethiopia, Greece, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, Lebanon, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippine Republic, Sweden, Turkey, Union of
South Africa, United Kingdom, United States
of America, Uruguay, Venezuela.
Voted against: Afghanistan, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, Egypt,
France, Guatemala, Iraq, Poland, Saudi Arabia,
Syria, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.

Abstentions: Australia, Belgium, India, Iran,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Yugoslavia.

Le PRESIDENT: Void le resultat du vote.

V otent pour: Argentine, Bolivie, Bresil,
Canada, Chili, Chine, Colombie, Costa-Rica,
Cuba, Danemark, Republique Dominicaine,
Equateur, Salvador, Ethiopie, Greee, Haiti,
Honduras, Islande, Liban, Pays-Bas, Nouvelle·
Zelande, Nicaragua, Norvege, Panama, Paraguay, Perou, Republique des Philippines, Suede,
Turquie, Union Sud-Africaine, Royaume-Uni,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, Uruguay, Venezuela.
Votent contre: Afghanistan, Republique socialiste sovietique de Bie1orussie, Tehecoslovaq uie, Egypte, France, Guatemala. Irak,
Pologne, Arabie saoudite, Syrie, Republique SOcialiste sovietique d'Ukraine.
S'abstiennent: Australie, Be1gique, Inde, Iran,
Luxembourg, Mexique, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Yougoslavie.

Decision: The resolution was adopted by
thirty-four votes to eleven with eight abstentions.

Decision: La resolution est adoptee par
trente-quatre voix contre onze, et huit abstentions.

199. Final Report of the
Committee

Credentials

199. Rapport final de ra Commission de
veriflcation des pouvoirs

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item on the agenda is the final report
of the Credentials Committee.
I call upon Mr. Kauffmann, Chairman and
Rapporteur of the Committee.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous anons examiner maintenant le rapport final de la Commission de verification des pouvoirs.
La parole a M. Kauffman, President et Rapporteur de la Commission.
M. KAUFFMANN (Danemark), Rapporteur
(traduit de l'anglais): La Commission nommee
par l'AssembIee generale pour faire rapport sur
les pouvoirs des representants s'est reunic pour
la seconde fois le 13 deeembre 1946. La Commission etait composee des representants de la
Republique socialiste sovictique de Bielorussie,
de la Chine, du Danemark, de la France,
d'Haiti, du Paraguay, de la Rcpublique des

Mr. KAUFFMANN (Denmark), Rapporteur:
The Committee appointed by the General Assembly to report on the credentials of the representatives met for the second time on 13
December 1946. The Committee consisted of
representatives of Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, China, Denmark, France, Haiti, Paraguay, Philippine Republic, Saudi Arabia and
Turkey. The Committee examined documents

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

1416

emanating from nine Members submitted to the
Secretariat since the first meeting of the Committee. 1 It also examined documents from the
new Members of the United Nations, namely,
Mghanistan, Iceland and Sweden.

The Committee found that the full powers
or credentials conferred upon the representatives
of the Governments of Mghanistan, Australia,
Ecuador, Ethiopia, Greece, Iceland, Iraq,
Lebanon, Poland, Sweden, Union of South
Africa, and the United Kingdom fully satisfy
the requirements of rule 20 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
The Committee takes note that all Governments of Member States represented at the
second part of the first session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations have submitted
full powers or credentials which fully satisfy the
requirements of the above-mentioned rule.

15 December 1946

Philippines, de l'Arabe saoudite et de la Turquie.
La Commission a examine les documents emanant de neuf Etats Membres et qui avaient ete
remis au Secretariat depuis la premiere seance
de cette Commission!. Elle a egalement examine
les documents remis par les nouveaux Membres
des Nations Unies, a savoir: I'Afghanistan,
l'Islande et la Suede.
La Commission a conc1u que les pouvoirs ou
lettres de creances soumis par les representants
des Gouvernements de I'Afghanistan, de l'Australie, de l'Equateur, de l'Ethiopie, de la Gre~ce,
de I'Islande, de I'Irak, du Liban, de la Pologne,
de la Suede, de I'Union Sud-Africaine et du
Royaume-Uni remplissaient pleinement toutes
les conditions prevues a l'artic1e 20 du reglement
interieur provisoire.
La Commission prend note que tous Ies Gouvernements des Etats Membres representes a la
seconde partie de la premiere session de l'Assemblee generale des Nations Unies ont presente des
pouvoirs ou Iettres de creances en regIe, satisfaisant pleinement aux conditions stipuIees a
l'artic1e du reglement interieur susmentionne.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
If there are no observations, I shall consider the
report as adopted unanimously.

Le PRESIDENT: S'il n'y a pas d'observation,
je considererai le rapport comme adopte a
I'unanimite.

Decision: The report was adopted unanimously.

Decision: Le rapport est adopee a l'unanimiee.

200. Provisional scheme for staff retirement, insurance funds and related
benefits: report of the Fifth Committee: resolutions (do~ument A/262)

200. Projet provisoire relatif aux Caisses
de retraite et de prevoyance du personnel et aux prestations connexes.
Rapport de la Cinquieme Commission. Resolutions (document A/262J

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now consider the report of the Fifth
Committee concerning the provisional scheme
for staff retirement, insurance funds and related
benefits (annex 93).
I call upon Mr. Aghnides, Rapporteur.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous alIons examiner maintenant le rapport de la Cinquieme Commission
sur le projet provisoire relatif aux Caisses de
retraite et de prevoyance du personnel et aux
prestations connexes (annexe 93).
.
La parole est a M. Aghnides, Rapporteur.

Mr. AGHNIDES (Greece), Rapporteur: As
this is a long document, and as the representatives have had it in their hands for a
number of days, I do not propose to read it.
I should draw attention to the point which concerns the appointment of three members to the
Committee on staff benefits. You will see there
that the Fifth Committee proposes that you
should confirm their recommendation in respect
of the appointment of the following three members:

M. AGHNIDES (Grece), Rapporteur (traduit
de l'anglais): Comme le rapport de la Cin~
quiemc Commission est un long document et
qu'iI a ete distribue il y a quelque temps deja,
je n'ai pas l'intention d'en donner lecture. Je
veux attirer votre attention sur le point qui
concerne la nomination de trois membres au
Comit6 des pensions du personnel. Vous constaterez que la Cinquieme Commission propose que
I'Assemblee confinne la recommandation qu'elIe
soumet au sujet des nominations suivantes:

Members:
Mr. R. LEBEAU (Belgium)
Mr. P. M. CHERNYSHOV (Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics)
Mr. A. J. ALTMEYER (United States of
America)

Membres
M. R. LEBEAU (Belgique)
M. P. M. CHERNYSHOV (Union des Rcpubliques socialistes sovietiques)
M. A. J. ALTMEYER (Etats-Unis d~Ame­
rique)

Alternates:
Mr. S. K. KIRPALANI (India)
Mr. G. PEISSEL (France)
Mr. Diego MEJIA (Colombia)

Suppliants
M. S. K. KIRPALANI (Inde)
M. G. PEISSEL (France)
M. Diego MEJIA (Colombie)

See forty.{irst plenary meeting, 96.

~ Voir quarante. et unieme s6ance pleniere, 96.

I

15 decembre 1946

1417

In the name of the Fifth Committee, I request
you to he good enlHlgh to adopt the resolutions

~l1hll1itt('d by the Committee.

The PRF.SIlH'ST (translated from French):
If there arc 110 Ohf'Cl'\"atioI1S, I shall consider the
rt'S()llltioll~ :ldoptl'cl llnanimollsly.
Decision:

The

resolutions

were adopted

~ob(ante-!iixieme seance pleniAli'e

, Au nom de la Cinquieme Commission, j'ai
I ho~neur de .demander cl l'AssembIee generale
de blen VOUIOII adopter les resolutions presentees
par la Corrunission.
. Le PRESIDENT: S'il n'y a pas d'observation
Je considererai ces resolutions comme adoptee~
a l'unanimite.

a

tlnt.mimous[y.

Decision: Les resolutions sont adoptees
l' unanimite.

20L Organization and administration of
the Secretariat: report of the Fifth
Committee (document A/273l

201. Organisation et administration du
Secretariat. Rapport de la Cinquieme
Commission (document A/273)

The PRE::>mENT (translated from Frencl!):
We shall now tonsidt'l' the Fifth Committee's report concerning tht organization and administration of the S<~crctarjat \ ,1IllH:X ~l.t:'.

Le PRESIDENT: NOllS allons examiner maintenant le rapport de la Cinquieme Commission
relatif a l'organisation et a l'administration du
Secretariat (annexe 94).

1 ('aU upon :Mr. A~hnides, Rapporteur.

La parole est a M. Aghnides, Rapporteur.

Mt'. AmmIllES (Gretre) I Rapporteur: The
report 1 have to pr·c.~cnt is uu:rt'i}' an account
of the action tak(~n by the Fifth Committee on
certain reports by tlir. Secretary-General conM
cerning the organization and working of the
Secretariat, the recruitment and training of staff,
the ~lClmil1istrati\'e tribunal and the question of
staff retirement. ThL'l document is intended
solely for your information and doe., not call for
any action on the part of the Assembly. It need
therefore only be: placed OIl record.

M. AGHNIDES (Grece), Rapporteur (traduit
de l'anglais): Le rapport que j'ai a presenter
rend compte, en quelque sorte, it l' AssembIee,

de la suite donnee par la Cinquieme Commis-.
sion a certains rapports du 'Secretaire general
rdatifs a 1'organisation et au fonctionnemcnt du
Secretariat, au recruternent et a. la formation du
personnel, au tribunal administratif et aux retraites du personnel. Ce rapport n'a qu'une
portee d'information et ne requiert aucune
action de la part de l'Assemblc~e. Par consequent.
il n'y a lieu que d'en prendre actc.

Decision: The Assembly took note of the reDecision: D Assembltfe prend acte du rapport.
!Jort.
202. Houslng aHowances and cost of living
allowances for the staff of the United
Nations: report of the Fifth Committee
(document A/276)
'rhe

PIU:RmENT

(tT(msl(jtt~d from

French):

'Ve !{hntl now con~ider the report of the Fifth
Committee on homing allowances and cost of
living tlllclwances for the staff of the United
Nations (annex 95).

I eaU upon Mr. Aghnides, Rapporteur.

202. Indemnites de logement et indemnites de vie chere pour le personnel de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Rapport de la Cinquieme Commission
{document A/276l
Le PRESIDENT: Nous allons examiner le rapport de la Cinquierne Corrunission Sur les indemnites de logement et indemnites de vie chere
pour le personnel de l'Organisation des Nations
U nies (annexe 95).
La parole est

a M. Aghnidcs, Rapporteur.

M. AGHNIDES (Greee), Rapporteur (traduit
Cette question encore est tres
W38 introduced by the representative of Yugosimple. Eile a ete introduite par le representailt
slavia when we discussed housing allowances and de la Yougoslavie au moment ou la Cinquieme
cost of living allowances in the Fifth Committee. Commission a discute la question des indemnites
The proposal of the Yugoslav delegation has de logement et celle des indemnites de vie chere.
been examined with great care, and the Com- La proposition de la delegation yougoslave a
mittee decided to refer it to the Advisory Com- ete examinee tres attentivement et la Commismittee and to the Secretary-General for their sion a decide de la renvoyer pour etude au
consideration. I need not tell you that the Comite consultatif et au Secretaire general. Je
Advisory Committee, of which I have the honour n'ai pas besoin de vous dire que le Comite
to be the Chairman, has examined this with consultatif, dont j'ai l'honneur d'etre le President, I'a examinee avec la plus grande attention.
the greatest care.
Mr. AGHNU>ES (Greece), Rapporteur: This

is again a very simple matter. This question

Ilecision: The Assembly took note 0/ the re-

port.

de IJanglais):

Decision: LJAssemblee prend acte du rapport.

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

15 December 1946

1418

203. Election of the eighth member of the 203. Election du huitieme membre du

i:

,

,..

I

,

,

l!
,

Committee for studying information
submitted by States administering
Non-Self-Governing Territories

Comite charge d'examiner les renseignements fournis par les Etats administrcln'l' des territoires non autonomes

The proceedings which follow took place. at
various junctures in the course of the meetm7
but for the sake of clarity have been co-ordtnated here.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
propose that we now elect the eighth .member
of the committee which is to study the mformation supplied by States administering Non-Selfgoverning Territories. Seven memb.er~ have a~­
ready been elected. The only remammg candIdates are Uruguay and Norway, which obtained
twenty-four and twenty votes respectively in the
last ballot. Representatives will vote for one
candidate only: Uruguay or Norway. Otherwise the ballot-papers will not be valid.

Les operations de vote se sont d!rouUes er:
plusieurs phases au cours de la seance, mms
pour des raisons de clarte ant tte groupies
ci-dessous.

The votes of the delegations were taken in
turn by secret, ballot.

Le PRESIDENT: Je propose que nous procedions a l'election du huitieme membre du comite
charge d'examiner les renseignements foumis par
les pays administrant des territoires non autonames. Sept membres ont ete elus jusqu'a present. Les deux seuls candidats en presence sont
l'Uruguay et la Norvege qui, au dernier tour,
ant obtenu respectivement vingt-quatre et vingt
voix. Les representants doivent voter pour un
seul candidat qui ne peut etre, pour que les
bulletins soient valables, que l'Uruguay ou la
Norvege..

Il est procMe au scrutin secret par appel
nominal.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Le PRESIDENT: Le resultat du vote est le
The result of the voting is as follows :
suivant:
53
Number of Members voting
,
"......... 53
Votants .. ,
Number of blank or invalid papers. . .. 1
BuUetins nuls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Number, of abstentions
1
Abstentions
1
In accordance with yesterday's decision, the
La majorite qui, suivant la decision prise hier,
majority is to be calculated on the basis of doit ~tre calculee sur le nombre de cinquantefifty-three votes and therefore amounts to twen- trois, est de vingt-sept.
ty-seven.
'
The number of votes obtained is as follows:
Number of votes

Ont obtellu:
Nombre de 1I0ix

Uruguay
',....... 26
Norway
, .....•........... , . , .. 25
Neither country has therefore obtained an
absolute majority, and we shall have to take a
fresh vote.

Uruguay.,
,..
26
Norvege
,
,................ 25
Il n'y a done pas de majoritc absolue et il
faut proceder a un nouveau tour de scrutin.

Mr. Wellington Koo (China): In order to
preserve the rule, which was adopted during
the first part of this Assembly in London, and
permit it to be applied successfully, we shall
need to exercise care in voting. Here we have
a case where we are limited to a choice between two countries. It is conceivable that
some delegations, unwittingly perhaps, may vote
in a way that their ballots cannot be counted
as valid, but it is also conceivable that there
may be a delegation or delegations who do not
wish to vote for either of them,
If there should be any delegations with the
latter idea, then the way to help the Assembly
succeed in the election-I offer the suggestionis to deposit a blank ballot and not to write any
name which corresponds to either one or the
other candidate country. Then, we would
avoid invalid ballots because, by depositing a
blank ballot, a delegation would thus have, in
appearance, gone through the motion of voting,
but it really would not have voted. In that
way, the blank ballot is not included in the
total number.
I think that if we adopt this method the

M. Wellington Koo (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais): Afin de maintenir la regIe qui a ete
adoptee a Londres durant la premiere partie
de cette session, et de l'appliquer avec de bans
resultats, il faut etre prudent en proccdant au
vote. Nous sommes ici en presence d'un cas ou
notre choix est limite a deux pays. n est possible que certaines delegations, sans le savoir peutetre, votent de telle fac;on que leurs bulletins
soient nuls, mais il peut aussi y avail' une o~
plusieurs delegations qui ne desirent voter m
pour l'un, ni pour l'autre des pays en question.
Si certaines delegations se trouvaient dans ce
dernier cas, je suggere un moyen d'aider l'Assem:
bUe a proceder a l'election: les delegations qUI
ne desirent voter ni pour l'un, ni pour l'autre
des deux pays candidats deposeraient un bulletin
blanc. On eviterait ainsi l'inconvenient des bulletins nuls, car, en deposant un bulletin blanc,
les delegations auraient fait le geste de voter,
alors qu'en realite il n'y aurait pas eu de vote.
De cette fac;on, les bulletins blancs pourraient ne
pas entrer dans le total des voix.
Je crois que si nous adoptons cette maniere

15 decembre 1946

1419

Soixante~sixieme s~ance pl6nierli!'

next ballot will succeed ill producing a positive
result.

de faire, le prochain scrutin nous pennettra
d'obtenir un resultat positif.

The PRESIDENT (tr.anslated from French):
I would ask Mr. Wellmgton Koo to bear with
mc for a moment. What he has just said about
the interpretation of the rules of procedure is
imp~rtant. If I understand him correctly, abstentIons should not be counted amonr, the
votes cast, whereas non-valid ballots should be.
If the rule is t? be interpreted in this way, the
result I have Just announced lUust be altered.
In any ca.c;e the outcomc is inconclusive since
either way the majority
. . is twenty-six. B;It, the
Important questIOn IS whether we are to disregard abstentions and to count non-valid ballots
in the next vote.

Le PRESIDENT: Je voudrais demander a
M. Wellington Kon un moment d'attention. Ce
qu'i] vie,nt de dire sur l'interpretation des regles
d~ procedure est i~portant. Si je le comprends
bIen, les abstentIons ne devraient pas etre
comp!ees parmi le~ vot<; emis tandis que les
bulletms nuls devralent l'etre. S'il faut interpre...
t~r la regIe de cette fac;on, le resultat que je
Vlens d'annoncer doit etre transforme. De toute
fac;on, Cc resultat -ne doit pas etre retenu car
la majorite est de vingt~six dans tous les cas'
mais la question importante est de savoir si, a~
prochain tour de scrutin, nous considererons les
abste~tions comme. ne devant pas etre comptees
parmr les votes emlS, et les bulletins nuts comme
devant l'etre.

Mr. AGHNIDES (Greece): I wonder if it is
too late to correct something which 1 think is
not rj~ht.
I think that a vote which is blank is a vote
which has not taken place. My friend, Mr.
Nisot, pointed this out last night, and I am very
sorry we did not take any action then. If it
is not too late, I do not think we should let this
opportunity pass without correcting the mistake.
In what manner can one vote? One can vote
for; one can vote against; one can abstain. Abstention is as deliberate an act as voting for or
voting against.
The Charter speaks of "Members present and
voting." \Vhen it says "voting," the Charter
understands three possibilities: voting for, voting
against and abstaining. A vote which is blank is
neither a vote for nor a vote against. Therefore
it i'l again an abstention. Whichever way you
take it, either in a purely juridical way-as my
friend Mr. Nisot did yesterday----or in the other
manncr, it does not countj therefore it is an
abstcntion.
I do not know if I have made myself clear.
A vote Can be for; it can be against; it can
be an abstention. If a vote is null and void,
it is neither a vote for nor a vote against. What
is it then, I ask you. It is an abstention. That
is to say, it is tantamount to an abstention.

M. AGHNIDES (Grece) (traduit de l'anglais):
Je me demande s'il n'est pas trop tard pour
reparer ce que je crois etre une erreur.
A mo.n avis, un vote nul est ~n vote qui n'a
pas eu heu. Mon ami M. Nisot l'a dit hier soir
et je regrette que l'on n'ait pas tenu compte de
son observation. S'il n'est pa~ trop tard, il me
semble que nous ne devrions pas laisser pac;ser
ceUe occasion de reparer l'erreur.
Comment peut-on voter? De trois maniereo;,
differentes: pour, contre ou par abstention.
L'abstention est un acte aussi delibere qu'un
vote affirmatif ou un vote negatif.
La Charte emploie l'expression "Membre.~
presents et votants." Lorsque. la Charte dit
"votant", elle sous-entend trois possibilites: vote
affirmatif, vote negatif et abstention. Un vote
nul n'est ni affirmatif, ni negatif, il equivaut
donc a une abstention. De quelque fac;on que
1'on examine ce probleme, sous son aspect purement juridique, comme fa fait hier M. Nisot,
ou comme je viens de le faire, on aboutit au
meme rcsultat: le vote nul ne compte pas, i1
equivaut a une abstention.
Je ne sais si je me suis fait clairement comprendre. On peut voter pour, voter contre, Oll
s'abstenir. Si un bulletin est nul, ce n'est ni un
vote pour, ni un vote contre. Qu'est-ce done
alors, je vous le demande, ~inon une abstention,
ou, plutot, cela equivaut a une abstention.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
You all know that I share the view expressed
by Mr. Nisot and Mr. Aghnides. However,
when the same point came up in London, in
similar circumstances, the majority was in fav~
our of Dr. Wellington Koo's view. Now that
we have started to vote in accordance with
certain rules of procedure, it is not possible to
change them in the middle of the vote in view
of the results obtained. I hope that, one day,
the Assembly will revise the procedure it has
adopted, but this i~ not the right time to do so.
Wc must continue to vote as in the past. Otherwise we should have to look through all the
previous hallots, in order to verify the manner
of counting the votes. Such a procedure would
lead to great complications.

Le PRESIDENT: Vous savez tous que mon
opinion est conforme a celle de M. Nisot et
de M. Aghnides. Cependant, a Londres, lorsque
la meme question s'est posee, de la memc
fa~on, la these de M. Wellington Koo a obtenu
la majorite. Il n'est pas possible, maintenant que
nous avons commence a voter en suivant certaines rcgles de procedure, de les modifier au
milieu du vote, devant le resultat obtenu. respert
qu'un jour l'Assemblee reviendra sur la proc~~
dure qu'el1e a adoptee, mais le moment n'est pas
venu actuellement. Nous devons continuer
voter de la mcme maniere, sans quoi nous de·
vrions revoir tous les scrutins anterieufll pour
verifier la faGon dont les votes ont ete comptes;
une telle procedure engendrerait de grandes
complications.

.

a

Sixty~s~xth Plenary Meeting

1420

15 December 1946

I therefore propose that a vote be taken now.
The papers should be \filled in very carefully,
since we have acceded to Mr. Wellington Koo's
view that non-valid ballots will not be counted
as votes. If no comments are forthcoming, I
take it that the Assembly shares my view.

Je vous propose done de voter maintenant en
faisant grande attention, etant donne que nous
avons accepte la these de M. Wellington Koo, a
savoir que les bulletins nuJs ne seront pas comptes
parmi lcs votants. Si aucune observation n'est
formulce, je considererai que l'Assemblee partage
mon opinion.

The votes of the delegations were taken in
turn b)' secret ballot.

II est procMe au scrutin secret par appel
nominal.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Frellch):
The result of the voting is as follows:
Number of Members voting '" . . . . . .. 53
Number of abstentions
1
The absolute majority is twenty-seven. The
n urnber of votes obtained ic; as follows:

Le PRESIDENT: Voici le resultat du vote:
Votants
"
, 53
Abstention .. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
La majoritc absoluc est de ,ringt-sept. Ont
obtenu:

Number of voter

Nombrs de voix

Uruguay
Norway

"

29
23

Uruguay
Norvege

,...............
'" .
..

29
23

Decision: Umgua'Y was elected a member of
the Committee.

Decision: L'Uruguay est llu membre du
Comite.

204. Refugees and displaced persons:
report of the Third Committee (document A/26S1. Financial and budgetary questions relating to the International Refugee Organization: report
of the Fifth Committee (document
A/2751

204. Refugies et personnes deplacees.
Rapport de la Troisieme Commission
(document A/2651. Questions financieres et budgetaires concernant
l'Organisation internationale pour les
refugies. Rapport de la Cinquieme
Commission (documen~ A/275)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now begin· the discussion on the reports of the Third and Fifth Committee on the
question of refugees (annexes 96 and 97).

Le PRESIDENT: Nous allons maintenant
aborder la discussion des rapports des Troisieme
et Cinquieme Commissions sur la question des
refugies (annexes 96 et 97) .

As both these items may give rise to proEtant donn6 que la discussion sur ces deux
longed discussion, I would ask the Rapporteurs . points risque d'etre longue, je demande aux Rapto refrain from introducing their reports unless portenrs, s'ils n'ont rien de special a reIever, de
they have some spedal comments to offer.
ne pas presenter leurs rapports.
I call upon Mrs. Roosevelt, representative of
le donne la parole a Mme Roosevclt, reprethe United States of America.
sentante des Etats-Unis d'Amerique.
Mrs. ROOSEVELT (United States of America) :
Mme Roos EVELT (Etats~U nis d'Amerique )
[ think perhaps that those who are interested in (traduit de l'anglais): Ceux qui s'interessent a.
this Organization may have been a little startled, cette Organisation ant pu, comme moi-meme,
as I was, tllls morning to read in one of our big eprouver que1que surprise ce matin en lisant
papers an article which seemed to take it for dans un des grands journaux americains un
granted that we had already set up the Inter- . article qui donnait pour chose faite la creation..
national Refugee Organization,·and I know that de l'Organisation internatianale pour les refugies.
we are going to do so, but if you read that, you Certes, je compte bicn que nous allons creer
must have been as startled as I was. The point cette Organisation, mais si les membres de l' Asof the story, however, was that it mentioned semblt~e ant lu l'article dont je parle, ils ant
the fact that over a million people would feel surement du partager ma surprise. Quoi qu'il
much relieved when this Organization was set en soit, ce qui ressortait surtout de cet article,
up, and I want to remind you all that we are e'est que plus d'un million de personnes al1aient
dealing, in the work which we are now going eprouver un grand soulagement du fait de l'insto consider, with more than a million people. titution de l'Organisation pour les refugics; et, en
Some of them wiU be repatriated; some of them ciIet, je desire rappeler Et l'Assemblce que la.
are looking forward to having their rights as question qui nous occupe aujourd'hui touch.e
human beings assured, and if they, for valid plus d'un million d'individus. Un certain noIn.1'easons, wish to b,e resettled, they look to re- bre d'entre eux seront rapatries; d'autres attensettlement. They still seek a haven, at home or dent impatiemment le jour OU ils pourront jouir
abroad, a home where they may work in peace des droits qui s'attachenf a la personne humaine
and lead useful lives, surrounded by the mem- -si pour des raisons valables ils desirent ne plus
bers of their families. They have suffered cruelly vivre la. oil ils vivaient auparavant-ils attendent
at the hands of the aggressors. As United Na- cette reinstallation. 11s appeIlent toujours de
tions Members, we owe them a place to live. leurs vreux un refuge, soit clans leur pays, sait

15 dec:embre 1946

1421

They shared our fight; they are still seeking their
share in victory-a modest share, a place to live
under conditions acceptable to them.

We have before us the draft constitution for
the establishment of the International Refugee
Organization with the provisional budget for
the first year of operation and the draft interim
arrangement for the establishment of a preparatory commission of the International Refugee
Organization. It is now for the Assembly to
decide whether these proposals are in order
and suitable for presentation to Governments
for their signatures.
We are not now voting as representatives of
our respective Governments on the question of
joining the International Refugee Organization
nor of adopting its budget-but rather, as Members of. the General Assembly, we are passing
expert Judgment upon a plan to be submitted
to Governments. The Governments will themselves decide at the proper time whether they
, will participate in the plan by joining the International Refugee Organization.
This plan has been drafted by the Economic
and Social Council ana its Sub-Committees at
the request of the General Assembly which met
in London last February. The draft constitution
is the product of continuous labour since that
meeting. It is not a casual document. Every
word and paragraph has been hammered out
through painstaking effort and discussion. No
one Government or group of Governments has
'written the text. All Governments have contributed to it. Opposing concepts have been tested
in the democratic process of reaching decisions.

This document was referred to the Governments for comment before the third session of
the Economic and Social Council. Their comments are reflected in the final text before us.
Fifty-four Governments have participated in its
development. Therefore this is a. document
which merits the approval of the General Assembly. Probably no Government is completely
satisfied with it, and that is natural and understandable, but it is a document for which no
apologies need be made. It constitutes a rule
and a guide for the International Refugee .Organization on the basis of which its operatIOns
may begin.
I have made clear, I hope, the humanitarian
task that we are considering, but that is not
the whole story. Each Member Government of

Soixante-sixieme seance pfenlere

~ l'etr~nger; ils aspirent a trouver un foyer ou
lIs pUlssent travailler en paix et mener une
existence feconde, au sein de leur famille. Ils
ont cruellement souffert aux mains des agresseurs. En notre qualite de Membre des Nations
Unics,. nous leur devons un endroit oll iIs puissent Vlvre. lls ont comhattu a nos cotes' i1s
at~endent encore aujourd'hui leur part de 'vietOlre, ?ne part modeste: un endroit Oll ils puissent Vlvre dans des conditions acceptables.
~ous avons sous les yeux le projet de constit~tIO~, de ~'~rganisation intcmationale pour les
refug;cs, amSI que le budget provisoire pour la
~remlcre annee des operations de cctte institutIon et le projct des dispositions provisoircs a
arreter en vue de l'institution d'une commission
preparatoire de l'Organisation internationale
pour les refugics. Il appartient maintcllant aI'Asscmblee de decider si ces projets ont la forme
voulue pour ctre prcsentes a- la signature des
Gouvernements.
I1 ne s'agit pas maintenant pour nous de voter,
en notre qualite de representants de nos Gou·
vernements respectifs, sur la question de llotrL
participation a l'OIR ou sur celle de l'adoptioll
du budget de cette organisation, mais de relldre,
en notre qualite de Membres de l' Assemblee, un
jugement autorise sur un projet a soumettrc aux
Gouvernements. Ces Gouvemements decideront
eux-memes, le moment venu, s'ils desirent participcr a l'execution de ce projet en se joignan1
a l'Organisation internationale pour les refugies.
Ce projet a cte elabore par le Conseil economique et social et ses Sous-Commissions, a la
suite de la demande faite par l'Assemblee generale lors de sa session de Londres, au mois de
£evrier de cette annee. Le projet de constitution
est le fruit de travaux assidus qui se sont poursuivis depuis lors. C'est un document qui ne
doit rien a I'improvisation; chacun de ses arti·
cles, et chacun de ses mots, a fait I'objet d'une
mise au point ardue, qui a exige de patients
efforts et de longues discussions. Ce texte n'est
I'reuvre d'aucun Gouvernement ou groupe de
Gouvernements en particulier; tous les Gouvernements ont participe a la redaction. LelI
tendances opposees ont subi l'epreuve de libres
discussions, selon les methodes democratiqucs,
avant que des decisions ne soient prises.
Ce document a ete renvoye aux Gouvemements, en vue de recueillir leurs observations
avant la troisieme session du Conseil economique et social. Le tcxte definitif que nouS
avons sous les yeux tient compte de ces observations. Cinquante-quatre Gouvernements ont participe a la redaction de ce texte. Il s'agit done
d'un document qui merite I'approbation de
l'AssembIee generale. Il est possible que le texte
ne donne complete satisfaction a aucun Gouvernement; cela est naturel et comprehensible,
mais il n' est pas necessaire de presenter des excuses. Ce document constitue, pour I'Organisa.tion internationale pour les refugies, un reglement et un guide, sur la base desquels e1le peut
commencer a agir.
J'espere avoir fait nettement apparaitre. la
tache humanitaire qui reclame notre attentIOn,
mais ce n'est pas tout. Les Gouvemements de

Sixty·sixth Plenary Meeting

1422

tile United Nations has a direct, selfish interest
in the early disposal of this problem. As long
af a million persons remain with refugee status,
they delay the restoration of peace and order in
the world. They contribute to the impairment
of good relations between friendly Governments.
They represent, iil themselves, political, economic and national conflicts which are symbolic of
the work that lies before nations if peace is to be
restored. While they remain a solid mass in
assembly centres, they deteriorate individually,
and collectively they present a sore on the body
of mankind which it ill not safe for us to ignore.

This situation cannot be ignored. It calls for
heroic treatment. It cannot be resolved by indifference or by leaving it to the resources of
a few Governments charged by accident of war
with immediate responsibility. There is no Government or people so far removed from the
source of infection as to feel any sense of sec.urity from its effects. Some may argue that
they are geographically far removed, or that in
their countries there are priorities of need. Ml'llY
GDvernments face serious problems of rebuilJing
llnd reconstruction and of new development to
bring about a better sandard of living in their
home populations.
( :1
I

I

All these things are so, but every Government
requires peace and order and the restoration of
confidence in the world. Peace, order and confidence contribute to the rebirth of economic
activity. The labour of a million persons is an
asset which cannot be permitted to go to waste.
Every day during which it is not utilized adds
to the waste.
The Governments of countries of ongm
clamour for the repatriation of their nationals,
as many of them as possible, because they need
their work. And the world needs the work of
all these people, and those, who for valid reasons
decide they cannot go home, must be settled
somewhere so that the world may profit by their
work as well as by the work of those who can go
home.

.,
I

· .!

The budget for this Organization has been
estimated at one hundred and sixty million
United States dollars. It represents the cost of
staff to do the job, of food and supplies Ior the
persons involved, of transport to their home~
from their places of displacement, of emigration
to friends' and relatives overseas and of resettlement for those who have to be colonized in the
new areas.
I do not minimize the cost or the sacrifice
it represents, but spread among all the nations
this is not a large sum in view of the size and
importance of the problem. Each nation has

15 December 1946

tous les Etats Membres des Nations Unies ont
un interet personnel et direct a ce que ce probleme soit resolu a bref delai. En dIet, aussi
longtemps qu'un million d'etre humains clemeureront dans la condition de refugies, ils retarderont le retablissement de la paix et de l'ordre
dans le monde. Ils contribuent a compromettre
les bonnes relations entre Gouvernements amis.
lis incarnent les conflits politiques, economiques
et nationaux qui donnent une idee de la tkhe
qui attend les nations, si elles veulent rctablir la
paix. Tant que ccs personnes restent groupees
en grand nombre dans des centres de rassemblement, eUes perclent individuellement de leur
valeur et constituent collectivement, sur le corps
de l'humanite, une plaie dont il serait imprudent
d'oublier l' existence.
On ne peut fermer les yeux clevant cette situation. EUe rcclame des decisions energiques. Le
probleme qu'elle pose ne saurait se resoudre de
lui-meme, ni par les soins de quelques Gouvernements auxquels il se trouve que la guerre a Iegue
des responsabilites immediates. Nul Gouvernement, nul peuple n'est assez eloigne du foyer
de l'infection pour se croire surement hors
d'atteinte. Certains peuvent exciper de leur
eloignement geographique ou faire valoir que
leurs pays ont des besoins qui doivent passeI'
avant tout. De nombreux Gouvernements ant a
resoudre de graves problemes de reconstruction
et de developpement pour relever le niveau de
vie de leurs propres populatio~s.
Tout cela est vrai, mais tous les Gouvernements ont interet a ce que la paix et l'ordrc
rcgnent et que la confiance revienne dans le
monde. La paix, l'ordre et la confiance sont des
facteurs qui contribuent a la renaissance de l'activite economique. Le travail d'un million d'etres
humains represente un capital que personne n'a
le droit de gaspiller. Chaque jour qui s'ecoule
sans que ce capital soit utilise voit le gaspipage
s'accroltre.
Les Gouvernements des pays d'origine des
personnes dont i1 s'agit reclament le rapatricment du plus grand nombre possible de leurs
nationaux, dont les bras leur font defaut. Le
monde a egalement besoin de ces bras, et si,
pour des raisons valables, des personnes decident
de ne pas retourner chez dies, il faudra les
reinstaller quelque part afin que le mondc puisse
beneficier de leur travail, comme du travail de
ceUes qui peuvent rentrer dans leur pays.
Le budget de 1'0lR est evalue a cent soixante
millions de dollars des Etats-Unis. Cette sommc
represente les appointements du personnel de
l'organisation, les depenses entralnees par l'achat
de denrees alimentaires et de fournitures destinees aux individlls interesses, les frais de voyage
de ces individus de l'endroit ou ils ont ete
deplaces jusqu'a leur foyer ou jusqu'au domicile
d'amis Oll de parents outre-mer, ainsi que les
frais de reetablisscment des individus qu'il
faudra installer dans de nouvelles regions.
le ne sous-estime pas l'importance de la depense ni du sacrifice que ce budget represente;
mais si on le repartit entre toutes les nations~ la
somme n'est pas cnorme en comparaison de

15 decembre 1946

1423

bee? alloc~ted its proportionate share. In com~anson wIth U.NRRA bUdgets and appropriations, the total I~ ?ot so staggering. The task is

Soixante-sixieme seance pJeniere

l'ampl.eur et de l'importance du probleme. On
a at.tnbu,e a chaque pays une quote-part pro-po;t~onnee. En co~paraison des budgets et des
one of the unf~llIshed tasks of the war. The credIts ·accordes a 1UNRRA, le .total n'est pas
results to be gamed far outweigh the financial tellement effrayant. II s'agit d'une des taches
cost.
q~e la guerre, nous a imposees et qu'il faut termmer. Les :esultats que 1'on peut attendre de
son accomphssement l'emportent de loin en importance sur la depcnse d'argent.
After .the action of the Assembly there will
Apres l'Assemblee, il s'ecoulera plusieurs mois
be a .p~nod. of mo~ths during which government pendant lesquels les Gouvemements consulteront
admlmstratlOns will consult their Parliaments leur Parlement et leurs Commissions des finances
~nd appropriating .bodie~ as to their participation . sur leur p~rticipati~n ~ l'OIR. Pendant ce laps
ll1 the. I~O. Du~m.g thIS period, a preparatory
de temps, 11 faudra mstItuer une commission precommission consIStmg of those Governments paratOlre composee des Gouvernements qui auwhich initially sign the constitution of the Inter- ront signe a l'origine la constitution de l'Organational Refugee OrganizatIOn will be required. nisation internationale pour les refugies.
La resolution dont nous sommes saisis contient
The r(,solution before us contains a proposal
to the Governme~ts. for the setting up of this une proposition adressee aux Governements en
preparatory commISSIOn. Its function will be to vue d~ l'inst!tution de cette commission preconslIlt with Govcrnr~ents, control authorities, paratOlre, qUI aura pour fonctions d'entrer en
UNRRA, and other mternational bodies with c?nsultation avec les Gouvernements, les autorespect to the ways and means by which there ~Ites de ~ontrole, l'UNRRA et autres organismes
can be an orderly transfer of functions and mternatIonaux, sur la maniere et les moyens de
transferer methodiquement a 1'0IR les attriburesponsibilities for this problem to the IRO.
tio?s et responsabilites afi'erentes au probleme
qUI nous occupe.
.Ces travaux preparatoires peuvent etre accomThis preparatory work can be done in the
plIs
p~ndant la periode transitoire, dans la pleine
intervening months in full awareness of the resources that will be made available to the IRO connalssance des ressources dont disposera 1'OIR
?y.the decisions of Governments to participate ~u. fait de la decision de~ Gouvernements de partlclper a son reuvr«,;. Blen entendu, la commisI~ Its \~()rk. Naturally, the preparatory commission
preparatoire n'assumera de fonctions d'exesIOn Will not assume operating functions until
cution
que lorsqu'il s'averera que l'Organisation
it becomes very clear that the International
internationale pour les reIuiges va reellement
Refugee Organization is to come into being.
prendre corps.
Le Gouvemement des Etats-Unis a toujours
My Government has always supported the
ete
partisan d'une Organisation internationaIe
c.oncept of the International Refugee Organizales refugies. Aujourd'hui, il appuie la pre>pour
tion. It supports the proposal now. My Government holds strongly to the view that this position presentee dans ce sens. Mon Gouvemeproblem should be handled by international ment est fermement d'avis que le probleme pose
action. We believe that nothing short of inter- par les refugies doit etre traite par une action
national action can deal effectively with the internationale et que rien, en dehors d'une telle
problem. We subscribe to the principles em- action, ne saurait en venir a bout. Il souscrit
bodied in the constitution before us, and join in aux principes contenus dans la constitution que
the invitation to all Governments to give im- nous avons sous les yeux et s'associe a l'invitamediate and serious consideration to this pro- tion adressee a tous les Gouvernements de donposal. In the case of my own Government, full ner a la proposition une attention approfondie
powers have been issued to the Chairman of et immediate. En ce qui concerne le Gouvernethe delegation to sign the constitution of the ment des Etats-Unis, le chef de la delegation
International Refugee Organization. This will americaine a rec;u tout pouvoir de signer la
be done immediately and the Constitution will constitution de l'Organisation internationale
then be submitted to the Congress for its ap- pour les refugies. Cette fonnaIite sera accompIie
sa'ns delai, et la constitution sera ensuite soumise
proval.
al'approbation du Congres.
.
les
intentions
du
Cependant,
en
precisant
In making the position of my Government
des
Etats-Unis
a
I'egard
de
1'0rGouvernement
clear as to its intentiolls with respect to the International Refugee Organization, I wish to say ganisation internationale pour les refugies, je
agaill that our votes on this constitution now tiens a declarer de nouveau que les votes des
have no connexion with the question of whether representants a l'Assemblee, sur cette constituour respective Governments will join the Organi- tion, ne prejugent aucunement la question de
savoir si leurs Gouvemements respectifs adherezation later. A vote of "yes" now does not
ront ulterieurement a l'organisation. Le fait de
represent a commitment by a Government to voter "oui" a present n'entraine, pour aucun
join the IRO later. As Members of the General Gouvernement, l'engagement de faire ulterieureAssembly, we are passing judgment on a draft
ment partie de l'OIR. En tant que membres de
proposal to be submitted to Governments, That
l'Assemblee
generale, nous donnons notre avis
judgment we confidently believe will be that

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

1424

this proposal is in order and suitable for presentation to Governments.

I urge all nations here represented to sign and
support the constitution in their own interests
and in the interest of over a million people who
have suffered long enough.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):

r call upon Mr. Gromyko, representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian); The qUeition of refugees and displaced persons is one of
the most important questions on the agenda of
the General Assembly. The General Assembly
has of course already dealt with thi8 question. At
the session of the General Assembly held at the
beginning of this year in London, a special resolution OIl' this question was adopted on 12
February, in which it was pointed out that the
problem of refugees and displaced persons was
one of immediate urgency. The resolution also
contains certain provisions the implementatbn
of which was intended to accelerate the solution
of the task of repatriating displaced per~ons
torn away from their countries as a result of
war and enemy occupation.
The aforementioned resolution was only the
first step taken by the United Nations towards
the solution of this important problem, and by
no means all the measures envisaged in the
resolution fulfil the requirements for the urgent
settlement of the whole question of displaced
persons and refugees. The resolution of t 2
February has not ensured the solution of the
problem of repatriating these people to their
countries of orgin, which is the fundamental
problem with which the United Nations is
faced in this field.

,.:

Up to the present, of course, a certain amount
of work has been accomplished for returning
displaced persons to their countries of origin.
But we must admit that the few positive results achieved in this field are not so much the
result of the efforts of the United Nations as
of measures taken by individual States through
the Military Commands of the Allied powers.
This circumstance, however, not only does not
diminish the obligations of the United Nations
in respect of the repatriation of displaced persons, but, on the contrary, emphasizes the responsibility incumbent on our Organization to
take such measures as would ensure the solution
of the repatriation question. For this very reason the General Assembly is again devoting
considerable attention to this problem at the
present session.

, i'

At the present moment the position regarding refugees still presents a ~omplicated and
acute problem. From the time of the adoption
of the resolution of 12 February 1946 the situa-

15 December 1946

sur un projet de proposition qui doit etre soumis
aux Gouvernements. J'espcre fermement que
l'Assemblee sera d'avis que la proposition se
trouve dans la forme voulue pour etre presentee
aux Gouvernements.
J'engage instammcnt toutes les nations representees ici a signer et a appuyer la constitution,
dans lenr propre interet et dans l'interet de
plus d'un million de personnes dont les SQuffrances n'ont que trop dure.
Le PRESIDENT: le donne la parole a
M. Gromyko, representant de l'Dnion des Republiques socialistes sovi6tiques.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe); La ques.tion des refugies et des personnes deplacees est
l'une des questions les plus importantes qui
figurent a l'ordre du jour de I'Assemblce generale. On sait que l'Assemblce a examine cette
question precedemment. Lors de la session
qu'clle a tenue a Londres au debut de cette
annee, l'Assemblee a adopte le 12 fevrier une
resolution relative a cette question; il y est
precise que le probleme des refugies et des
pcrsonnes deplacees est un probleme qu'iJ faut
resoudre sans delai. Cette resolution contient
egalement certaines dispositions dont l'application devait hater le rapatriement des personnes
deplacees qui ont ete arrachees a leur patrie du
fait de la guerre et de l'occupation ennemie.
La resolution que je viens de citeI' ne constituait qu'une premiere mesure prise par l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour rcsoudre cet
important probleme; d'autre part, les'mesures
envisagees dans cettc resolution ne tiennent pas
toutes compte de la necessite qu'il y a de regler
d'urgence toute cette question des refugies et
des personnes d6placees. La resolution du
12 fevrier n'a pas permis de resoudre le probleme du rapatriement de ces personnes dans
Ieur pays d'origine, le probleme fondamental
qui se pose pour l'Organisation des Nations
Unies dans ce domaine.
Sans doute, certains efforts ont ete faits
jusqu'a ce jour pour rapatrier les personnes
deplacees dans leur pays d'origine. Neanmoins,
il faut reconnaitre que les quelques resultats
positifs obtenus dans ce domaine sont dus moins
aux efforts de l'Organisation des Nations Dnies
qu'aux mesures qu'ont prises les differents Etats
par l'intermediaire du Commandement militaire
allie. Cette circonstance ne diminue pas 1es
obligations qui pesent sur l'Organisation des
Nations Unies en ce qui concerne cette tache
du rapatriement des personnes deplacees; au
contraire, cela souligne la responsabilite de nOtre
Organisation en ce qui concerne l'application
des mesures a prendre pour resoudre la question
du rapatriement. C'est precisement pour cette
raison que l'Assemblee generale, a cette presente
session egalement, accorde une attention particuliere a cette question.
La situation des refugies pose encore aujourd'hui un probleme ardu et complexe. Depuis
l'adoption de la resolution du 12 fevrier 1946,
la situation ne s'est pas amelioree, elle s'est, au

.r»':'.

L

15 decembre 1946

1425

tion has not changed for the better, but, on
the contrary, has become more complicated.
The repatriation of a considerable number of
displaced persons carried out up till now relates
mainly to the period immediately after the end
of the war. During the ensuing period repatriation work has been completely unsatisfactory.
Specific proof of this is to be found in the
official data Oil repatriation contained in a statement on the activities of UNRRA, dated 15
Octoher 19·Hi. In this connexion the stall'ment
of the Director-General of UNRRA.. is worthy of
attention; he declared on 29 October 1946 that
it was impossible to expect that UNRRA could
repatriate more than 150,000 persons before
the end of its activities on 30 June 19·17, Such
a prospect must, of course, cause anxiety
amongst the United Nations concerning the fate
of more than a million dL<iplaced persons. Our
Organization mlL';t, therefore, take immediate
stePs towards an appropriate solution of the
refugee problem, which is one of immediate
urgency.
An analysis of the actual situation prevailing
in camp.'1 and other assembly points of refugees
indi(~(\tes that cv(~n the figure quoted, Le. 1:iO.000 persons destined for repatriation during
the next seven month.'l, i~ an optimistic estimate
of the situation, t1nlc..~ suitable measures are
taken with the help of the United Nations.
One such measure is the envisaged establish~
ment by the United Nations of a special Refugee Organization, the draft constitution of which
is submitted for our approval today. It is weU
known to all that any organization can carry
out its tasks in the proper manner only if its
constitution, or other provisions regulating its
work, are drawn up precisely and clearly, in
confomlity with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations. The constitution of the
Refugee Organization can fonn a sound basis
for the work of thL.,; organization only if it does
not allow any kind olltsiders to use its name
and protection for their own selfish and criminal
purpose:;, wJlich have nothing in common with
the purposes and problems of the United Na~
tions.
Can wc say that the constitution of the
Refu~ee Organization, submitted today for the
approval of the General Assembly, fulfils these
requirements? The Soviet Union delegation
considers that the constitution does not fulfu
these requirements. The existing refugee situa~
tion is such that we have no grounds to expect
a correct solution of this problem with the
assistance of an organization established on the
ha.<;i!l of the proposed constitution.
1bt: Soviet Union delegation has frequently
drawn the attention of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council to numerous instances of hostile propaganda conducted
amongst refugees, which hinders the work of
repatriation. 'Such propaganda is usually conducted by pC'roon.<; who, in the past, bore anns
again..~ the Soviet Union and other States Members of the United Nations, and who collaborated with the German aggressors. Hostile

Soixante-sixieme seance pleniere

contraire, aggravee. Un nombre considerable de
pcrsonnes deplacees ont ete rapatriees a ce jour,
mais la plupart 1'ont ete pendant la periode qui
a suivi inunediatement la fin de la guerre.
Depuis lors, le rapatriement ne marche pas bien
du tout. Ceci ressort, en particulier, des donnees
officieUes sur le rapatriement qui ont ete publiees'
dans le rapport sur l'activite de l'UNRRA, du
15 octobre 1946. 11 faut noteI', a ce propos, la
declaration faite par le Directeur general de
l'UNRRA, le 29 octobre 1946, aux termes de
laquelle il ne faut pas s'attendre a ce que
l'UNRRA puisse rapatrier plus de 150.000 personnes d'ici le 30 juin 1947, date a laquelle elle
cessera son activite. Cette perspective est evidem~
ment faite pour susciter de l'inquietude parmi
les Nations Unies quant au sort de plus d'un
million de personnes deplacees. C'est pourquoi
notre Organisation doit prendre des mesures
immcdiates pour resoudre d'une fat;on satisfaisante le problcme des refugies, qui est un problcme urgent.
L'examen de la situation reelle des camps et
des autres centres de rassemblement des refugies
montre que ce chiffre de 150.000 personnes a
rapatrier au cours des sept mois a venir resulte
d'une vue optimiste des choses, a moins qu'oD ne
preDne, avec l'aide des Nations Unies, les
mesures appropriees.
L'une de ces mesures, c'est la creation, envisagee par les Nations Unies d'une Organisation
speciale pour les refugies, Organisation dont le
projet de constitution est actuellement soumis a
notre approbation. Tout le monde sait qu'une
organisation, queUe qu'elle soit,· ne peut accomplir les taches qui lui incombent que si sa
constitution ou ses statuts sont rediges d'une
fa~on claire et precise, conformement aux buts
et aux principes des Nations U nies. La constitution de l'Organisation pour les refugies pourra
constituer une bonne base de travail lorsqu'elle
interdira aux tierces personnes de se servir de son
nom et de sa protection pour leurs propres desseins egoi'stes et criminels, qui n'ont rien de
commun avec les buts et les taches des Nations
Unies.
.
Peut-on dire que la constitution de l'Otgamsation pour les refugics qui a ete soumise aujour~
d'hui a 1'approbation de l'Assemb,Ie,e g~nerale
reponde a ces exigences? La delega~lOn de
l'Union sovietique estime qu'il n'en est nen. La
situation actuelle des refugics est telle que nous.
n'avons aucune raison de croire que ce probleme
puisse etre resolu de £at;on .satis,faisante par une
otganisation qui serait etabhe sur la base de cette
constitution.
La delt~gation de l'Union sovietique a maintes
fois attire l'attention de l'AssemblCe generale et·
du Conseil economique et social. sur les nom:
breux faits qui temoignent de l'exlsten~e, parml
les refugies, d'une propagande ennemle de na:
ture a entraver leur rapatriement. Ceux qUl
menent cette propagande sont, en regIe ge~erale,
des gens qui dans le passe ont porte les armes
contre l'Union sovietique et contre d'a.utres
Membres des Nations Unies, des gens qUl ont

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

1426

propaganda directed against some of the United
Nations is also conducted by military units and
semi-military organizations, as yet not disbanded, which were composed of elements belonging to various nationalities, which collaborated with the enemy and which were officially
under the control of the Allied military authorities.

15 December 1946

collabore avec les occupants allemands. Cette
propagande hostile contre certains Membres des
Nations Unies provient egalement des formations
militaires et des organisations paramilitaires qui
n'ont pas encore ete dissoutes, qui sont constituees par des individus de diverses nationalites
ayant collabore avec l'ennemi et qui, officieUement, sont places sous le contrale des autorites
militaires alliees.
Dans leur propagande contre le rapatriement,
ces collaborateurs du fascisme allemand et autres
traitres preconisent ouvertement la lutte armee
contre I'Union sovietique et contre certains autres Membres des Nations Unies, tout en menant
une campagne haineuse contre le rapatriement.
Desireuse d'assurer la creation d'une veritable
Organisation internationale pour les refugies, qui
puisse jouer son role dans le rapatriement des
refugies, la delegation sovietique a propose certains amendements au projet de constitution afin
de l'ameliorer. Mais la plupart des ces amendements ont ete rejetes et le projet de constitution,
meme apres avoir ete discute au sein de la Commission competente de l' Assemblee generale,
reste tout a fait insuffisant.

In their propaganda against repatriation
these collaborators with German fascism and
other traitors openly appeal for the organization
of an armed struggle against the Soviet Union
and certain other States Members of the United
Nations, and at the same time conduct malicious
propaganda against repatriation. The Soviet
delegation, desirous of ensuring the establishment of a real International Refugee Organization which would be capable of discharging its
functions with regard to the repatriation of
refugees, has submitted its amendments to the
draft constitution in order to improve it. But
the majority of these amendments were rejected and the draft constitution is still completely unsatisfactory, even after having been
considered by the relevant Committee of the
General Assembly.
In order to remove from the draft constitution
Afin d'eliminer du projet de constitution les
certain irregular provisions which can only hin- dispositions mal venues qui ne peuvent qu'ender the proper functioning of the Organization traver le bon fonctionnement de l'Organisation
and the proper solution of the problem of re- et l'empecher c;I.'accomplir comme i1 convient sa
patriation with which it will be faced, the Soviet t~che de rapatriement, la delegation sovietique
delegation formulated its concrete proposals a presente, au caurs de cette session, des produring the present session. We recommended positions concretes qui, a son avis, doivent servir
that these proposals should serve as a basis for de base a l'etablissement d'un Organisation inthe solution of the problem of establishing the ternationale pour les refugies et a l'elaboration
International Refugee Organization and the du projet de constitution de cette Organisation.
elaboration of a draft constitution for this
Organization.
What was the substance of the Soviet amendQue1 etait le sens de ces arnendements soviements, and what was the purpose of their sub- tiques et que1 but se proposait-on en les presenmission? The purpose of the Soviet amendments tant? 11 s'agissait de donner a l'Organisation une
was to insure for this Organization a sound basis base solide pour lui permettre de resoudre le
for the solution of the repatriation problem. The probleme du rapatriement. Estimant que la
Soviet delegation, considering that repatriation t~che principale de l'Organisation pour les reshould indeed be th~ main task of the Refugee fugies devait etre precisement le rapatriement, la
Organization, has proposed a number of amend- delegation sovietique a propose une serie
ments to the draft constitution, intended to en- d'amendements au projet de constitution afil1
sure the fulfilment of this fundamental task. In d'assurer l'accomplissement de cette tache fonparticular, the Soviet delegation proposed that damentale. La delegation sovietique a propose
the constitution should state that:
en particulier d'inscrire dans cette constitution
que:
"The functions of the Organization . . . shall
"L'Organisation doit faciliter le rapatriement
be e.xe:cised with a ~ew . . . to facilitating re- par tous les moyens et, notamment, interdire
patnatlOn by all pOSSIble means, and in this con- dans les camps et les centres de rassemblement
nexi~n :lOt permitting any hostile propaganda des refugies et personnes deplacees toute propaand InCItement t~ refuse repatriation in camps gande hostile qui inciterait ces personnes i\. ne
and assembly statlOns of refugees and displaced pas retourner dans leur pays."
persons."
.This amendment of the Soviet delegation Was
Cet amendement de la delegation sovi6tiqlle
reJect:d. One more vote was needed for its a ete rejete. 11 s'en est fallu d'une voix qu'il ne
adoptlOn. The delegations 'lYhich objected to the soit adqpte. Les delegations qui ne sont opposees
adoption of this amendment brought forward a l'adoption de cet'amendement ont toutes inall the old, hackneyed arguments of the right of voque les arguments uses et ressasses du droit
refugees to express their opinion, of freedom of des refugies a exprimer leurs opinions, de la
speech and of the press, and so forth. A careful liberte de la parole, de la liberte de la presse, et
study of the situation of displaced persons, the cretera. Une etude attentive de la situation des.
\

15 decembro 1946

1427

majority of whom. are unfortunate people torn
away from their country as a result of enemy
action, shO\vs that such arguments are unsubstantial. It is time for us to distinguish between
honest people, forcibly torn from their homes as
a rcsult of enemy action, nnd criminal, Fascist
elements, quislings and traitors. The rejection
of the aforementioned Soviet amendment creates
I'onditions which make it easier for such traitors
to continue their criminal activities, conditions
which allow the .continuation of hostile propaganda amongst diSplaced persons, of the dissemination of lies and slander against certain States
Members of the United Nations. The rejection
of thi..o; amc:ndment has created conditions which
enable hostile elements concealed amongst the
displac{~d persons to continue their criminal activities in prc'venting people from returning to
their countries of origin and turning them into
traitors to their countries.
Ho."itik propaganda against repatriation, in
the form of appeals again!>t return to countries
of origin nnd calls to armed combat against
thC$C countries, hinders not onlv the work of repatriation, but aL'io the work of increasing international co-ope.ration in the solution of this
problem. Instances of such hostile propaganda,
which in many cases is conducted openly and
....·ith the full knowledge of the representatives of
military authorities of certain Allied States, are
u:'lually denied by the delegations of those States,
which either declare that such propaganda does
Ilot c:xist Of, at be..st, try to present the situation
in a mLcilemiing light. In this counexion, I would
lik(~ to give you an example of such a "denial" of
reported facts of hostile propaganda.
General RObertsOll, representative of the High
Command in the British zone, in his reply at the
be~inning of July thL.. year to Marshal Sokolovsky, who had reported a number of instances of
.mti.Soviet propaganda conducted in refugee assembly stations in the British zone, writes as follows, {or in.c;lance, about an organization conc·emccl with such hostile activities:
liNo trace of such an organization exists.
•Klcirnoviccs' apparently refers to a certain
Kleimovices who is the head of a camp. I am
checking up on the report that this man fought
again.'>t the Germans with the armies of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and was
taken a prL..aner. There are reports .that ~t a
later time he was welfare officer for Llthuamans
who served in the German Air Force, but was a
non-combatant. During a recent visit to the
camp by Souiel liaison office,!s,. he cove.rtly ex-

pressed himself against repatr~atlOn, b.ut zt seems
Shot this UlOS only an expresston of Ius own perwnal view."

These are the words of General Robertson. I
\"'ouId like to draw your attention to these last
words and would ask you to bear in mind that
this Kleimovices served voluntarily in an S.S.
formation of the German army and collaborated

Soixanfe-slxieme seance pJeniere

personnes deplacees, qui sont en majorite des
malheureux arraches a leur patrie par l'action
de l'ennemi, montre la faiblesse de tels arguments. 11 est temps de faire une distinction entre
les honnetes gens qui ont ete arraches de Corce
a leurs foyers par l'action de l'ennemi et les
criminels fascistes, les quislings et les traitres. Le
rejet de l'amendement sovietique que je viens de
mentionner permet aces traitres de poursuivre
leurs activites criminelles, de continuer leur
propagande haineuse parmi les personnes de·
placees et de repandre le mensonge et la calomnie a l'egard de certains pays Membres de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Le rejet de
cet amendement permet aux ennemis qui se
cachent parmi les personnes deplacees de poursuivre leur activite criminelle en vue de detourner ces personnes de leur pays d'origine et d'en
faire des traitres a leur patrie.
La propagande contre le rapatriement, qui
incite les personnes deplacees a ne pas retourner
dans leur pays d'origine, qui les appelle a la
lutte armee contre leur patrie, nuit non seulement au rapatriement lui-meme, mais encore au
renforcement de la collaboration internationale
necessaire pour resoudre ce probleme. Lorsqu'on
cite des faits precis temoignant de l'existence de
ceUe propagande hostile, qui se fait souvent
ouvertement, au vu et au su des representants
des autorites militaires de certaines Puissances
alliees, les delegations de ces Puissances contestent d'habitude ces faits en affirmant que ceUe
propagande n'existe pas, ou en essayant tout au
mains de representer la situation sous un jour
different. Je voudrais citer, a ce propos, un
exemple de ces "dementis" portant sur des faits
de propagande hostile qui avaient ete signales.
Repondant, au debut de juillet. 19.46. a u~e
lettre du marechal Sokolovsky, qUI lw signalait
une serie de faits relatifs a la propagande antisovietique menee dans les centres de re£ugies de
la zone britannique, le general Robertson, representant du haut commandement de la zone britannique, ecrivait, par exemple, au sujet d'une
association qui se livrait a des activites hostiles
de ce genre:
.
"I! n'y a pas trace de ceUe organisation. Le
Kleimovices en question est probablement le chef
de camp de cc nom. Je fais verifier actuellement
les renseignements selon lesquels cet homme aurait combattu contre les Allemands dans les
rangs de l'armee sovietique et aur~it et~ f~i~
prisonnier. Selon certains rapports, 11 auralt ete
ensuite officier des services sociaux aupres des
Lithuaniens qui servaient dans l'armee de l'air
allemande mais sans etre du service arme (sans
etre comb~ttant). Lors d'une recente visite du

camp par des officiers de liaison soviltiques, cet
homme lest prononce a mots couverts contr~ le
rapatriement, mais il semble qu'il n'ait exprtme
lii. qu'une opinion personnelle."
Voila ce qu'ecrivait le ge!1eral Robertson.
J'attire l'atten~ion des r~presentan~s sur ces derniers mots et Je voudralS vous falre remarq~er
que ce Kleimovices a servi comme volont~ire
dans les unites S.S. de l'armee allemande, qu I1 a

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

1428

with the Gestapo, and now he is head of an
organization which incites the inhabitants of the
Baltic Soviet Republics not to return to their
native lands, and is also the source of various
slanderous lies against the Soviet Union. This
same person is the administrator of a refugee
camp.

,i -

,, ';

Here is another example. General McNarney,
representative of the High Command in the
American zone of Germany, wrote as follows in
his reply to Marshal Sokolovsky, of 18 July this
year:
"The dissemination of rumours about an inevitable war bet~een the Western Powers and
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics worries
me very much. Such rumours are obviously
harming the friendly relations which exist between our two countries. We shall take all necessary counter-measures. We shall see that the
displaced persons in our zone cease such activities, which are contrary and dangerous to the
policy of the United States and the existing regulations."
Such are the words of General McNarney. It
may be seen that the Allied Military authorities
on the spot do not deny the facts pointing to
the prevalence of hostile propaganda, but confirm them. However, as I have already pointed
out, the Soviet amendment which was intended
to protect refugees from hostile propaganda was
rejected. The persons conducting this propaganda continue their subversive work, making
use of the services of their protectors. Under
the guise of talk about freedot:U of speech, of
the press and so forth, they are continuing their
vile work of undermining repatriation and
poisoning the atmosphere of international relations.
'
The Soviet Union delegation also proposed the
amendment of those provisions in the draft constitution which envisage the resettlement of refugees and displaced persons in other countries
as one of the fundamental tasks of the organization. The amendment of the Soviet Union delegation also provided for this task of resettlement,
but considered it to be of secondary importance,
and possible only in exceptional cases and with
the knowledge of the government of the native
country of the displaced persons destined for
resettlement. This amendment of the Soviet
Union delegation was also rejected.
Certain representatives explained to us that
this amendment was not adopted because, allegedly, many of the displaced persons and refugees did not wish to return to their native
lands, chiefly for reasons of political dissent from
the regime of their countries of origin.
In actual fact we are not speaking only of
those who are not in agreement with the political
regime in one country or another. We are speaking of the hirelings and agents of Hitler, such as
the Hitlerite hangman Omelchenko, Andrei Melnikov, leader of a Fascist band, and Simchenko,
the former mayor of the City of Kharkov during
the German o'ccupation of th~t town. Why is

15 December 1946

ete un agent de la Gestapo et qu'il est a I'heu:r:e
actuelle le chef d'une organisation qui mene
campagne contre le retour des ressortissants des
Republiques sovietiques de la Baltique dans leur
pays d'origine et qui, en outre, repand toutes
sortes de calomnies a l'endroit de I'Union sovietique. Or, c'est cet individu qu'on a charge
d'administrer un camp de refugies.
Voici un autre exemple: le general McNarney, representant le haut commandement de la
zone americaine en Allemagne, ecrivait de son
cote, le 18 juillet dernier, en reponse a une lettre
du marechal Sokolovsky:
"Les bruits que 1'0n repand sur la guerre qui
serait inevitable entre les Puissances occidentales
et I'Union sovietique m'inquietent profondement. Ces bruits nuisent sans aucun doute aux
relations amicales qui existent entre nos deux
pays. Nous prendrons toutes les mesures necessaires pour y mettre un terme. N ou~ exigerons
des personnes deplacees qui se trouvent dans
notre zone qu'elles cessent ces activites reprehensibles qui sont contraires a la politique des
Etats-Unis et aux dispositions en vigueur."
Voila ce qu'ecrivait le general McNamey.
Ainsi done 1es autorites militaires alliees qui
sont sur place ne nient pas les faits qui temoignent de l'existence de cette propagande hostile;
au contraire, elles les confirment. Et pourtant,
comme je l'ai deja dit, l'amendement sovietique
qui avait pour but de proteger les refugies contre
cette propagande hostile n' a pas et6 adopte.
Ceux qui menent cette propagande poursuivent
leurs activites subversives en utilisant les services
de leurs protecteurs. En invoquant la liberte de
la parole, de la presse, et cretera, ils continuent
leur ceuvre infame, sabotent le rapatriement et
empoisonnent l'atmosphere des relations internationales.
La 'delegation de l'Union sovietique a propose
d'autre part de modifier les dispositions du projet
de constitution qui rangeaient parmi les taches
fondamentales de l'organisation la reinstallation
des re£ugies et des personnes deplacees dans
d'autres pays. L'amendement de la delegation.
sovietique envisageait egalement la question de
la reinstallation, mais au second plan seulement,
dans des cas exceptionnels et en avertissant le
Gouvemement du pays d'origine des personnes
deplacees a reinstaller. Cet amendement de la
delegation sovietique a ete rejete lui aussi.
Si cet amendement n'a pas ete adopte, nous
ont explique certains representants, c'est qu'il y
a, parait-il, parmi les refugies et les personnes
deplacees, un grand nombre de gens qui ne
veulent pas rentrer chez eux, notamment parce
qu'ils ne sont pas d'accord, au point de vue
politique, avec le regime d.e leur> pays d'origine.
. En realite, il ne s'agit pas simplement de ceux
qui ne sont pas d'accord avec le regime politique
de tel ou tel pays. I1 s'agit d'agents a la solde
d'Hitler, te1 que le bourreau hitIerien Omeltchenko, le chef, de bande fasciste Andr6 MeInikov, ou l'ancien bourgmestre de la ville de
Kharkov sous 1'0ccupation hitlerienne, Sirntchenko. Pourquoi les representants qui s'oppo-

I

15 decembre 1946

1429

it that the representatives who object to the proposal of the Soviet Union delegation do not
mention another resolution of the General Assembly, dated 13 February 1946, concerning
war criminals? Why do they not mention the
necessity of ensuring the surrender of war criminals to the appropriate authorities, when they
talk of the necessity of giving shelter to war
criminals under the wing of certain representatives of Allied Military authorities in Europe?
Furthermore, some people seem to consider it
normal that under the guise of refugees, such a
large number of war criminals and persons, who
have compromised themselves by collaboration
with the enemy, have found shelter in territories
of Europe occupied by Allied troops, that we
are now dealing with actual military formations,
amongst whom systematic activities are being
conducted against certain States Members of the
United Nations. Such a situation is not only
inadmissible, but also dangerous. It is not compatible with the purposes of the United Nations
to develop and strengthen friendly relations
amongst States.
In the first place, resettlement measures create
conditions which enable war criminals, quislings
and other traitors to escape punishment. In the
second place, even from the purely humanitarian
point of view, we cannot approve of those who
advocate the resettlement of these persons in
other countries thus turning them from refugees
into emigrants, condemned to a joyless existence.
far from their native countries and subjected to
all manner of discrimination.
It appears that those who speak in favour of
resettlement and those who express the desire
to accept such emigrants wish to take this opportunity of obtaining cheap labour. We have
recently read in American newspapers indications
of the desirability of bringing 20,000 women refugees to New York to be used for domestic
service. '
It is also well known that settlers in Canada
from the notorious Anders army are entitled, by
agreement between the Canadian authorities and
General Anders, to organize various unions and
political parties, but these contracting parties
"forgot" to grant the settlers, who are being
used as agricultural labourers, the elementary
rights of social insurance, medical aid and so
forth.

Soixante-sixieme seance pleniere

sent a l'amendement propose par la delegation
sovietique ne parlent-ils pas d'une autre resolution de l'AssembIee generale, en date du 13 fevrier 1946, sur les criminels de guerre? Pourquoi
ne souffient-ils mat de la necessite de livrer les
criminels de guerre aux autorites competentes,
alors qu'ils parlent de la neeessite de permettre
a ecs criminels de guerre de se refugier sous
!'aile de certains reprcsentants des autorites
militaires alliees en Europe? Il ya plus: d'aucuns
jugent normal que certains territoires d'Europe
occupes par les forces alliees abritent, sous le
nom de refugies, un nombre de criminels de
guerre et d'individus ayant collabore avec l'ennemi, si considerable qu'on peut parler de
veritables elements militaires, au sein desquels se
poursuit une activite dirigee systematiquement
contre certains Etats Membres de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies. Une teIle situation est non
seulement inadmissible, eIle est dangereuse; dIe
est incompatible avec la tache qui incombe a
I'Organisation des Nations Unies de deve10pper
et de renforcer les liens d'amitie entre les pays.
Tout d'abord, les mesures de reinstallation
creent des conditions qui permettent aux crimineIs de guerre, aux quislings et autres traitres,
d'cchapper aisement au chatiment. En second
lieu, on ne saurait approuver, meme d'un point
de vue purement humallitaire, ceux qui preconisent cette politique de reinstallation dans d'autres pays, qui trallsfonne 'les retugies en emigrants voucs a une existence sans joie, loin de
leur pays d'origine, et qui les reduit a un etat
d'infcriorite.
On est tentc de croire que ceux qui preconisent cette reinstallation, et ceux qui manifestent
le desir d'accueillir ces emigrants, veulent profiter de l'occasion pOUf obtenir de la main-d'ceuvr,e
a bon m~rche. Recemment, des joumaux amerieains ont 1aisse entendre qu'il serait souhaitable
de faire venir a New-York, comrne domestiques,
20.000 femmes recrutees panni les refugies.
On sait egalement que Ies Iloldats de la
fameuse almee Anders qui ont ete reinstalles
au Canada ant le droit, en vertu d'un accord
concIu entre les autorites canadiennes et le general Anders, de creel' diverses associations et
partis politiques; mais les parties contractantes
ont "oublie" de reconnaitre a ces emigrants, qui
sont employes comme ouvriers agricoles, les
droits les plus eIementaires dans le domaine des
assurances sociales, de l'assistance medicale et
c~tera.

The Soviet delegation believes that the con~
stitution of the Refugee Organization should envisage repatriation and the return of refugees to
their native countries as its main task. The
Soviet Union delegation has always held and
continues to hold the opinion that the Organization ought not by rights to give help to those who
are unwilling to return to their country from
hostile motives, those who do not wish to avail
themselves of help from the government of their
country of origin and do not wish to participate
along with their fellow country'tnen in the rehabilitation of their country which has suffered

La delegation sovietique estime que la constitution de I'Organisation pour les refugies doit
specifier que le rapatriement des refugies constitue la tache principale de cette Organisation.
La delegation sovietique a toujours ete d'avis
q u'i! serait juste de priver du secours de I'Organi~
sation, ceux qui par hostilite, refusent de rentrer
chez eux, n<;: veulent pas accepter l'aide du
Gouvernement de leur pays d'origine et ne desirent pas prendre part aux cotes de leurs compatriotes a la reconstruction de leur pays
devaste par l'invasion ennemie. Le sens de
l'amendement sovietique etait clair et ne deman-

Sixty-sixth Plenary Meeting

., '
i i

,i

1430

15 December 1946

enemy invasion. The meaning of the amend- dait aucune explication. Neanmoins, cet amenment was clear and required no explanation. dement aussi a ete repousse. Les adversaires
However, this amendment was also rejected. de l'amendement ont invoque une fois de plus
Those who were opposed to its adoption brought les arguments concernant les divergences d'opiforward the same arguments about personal dif- nions politiques, l'opposition des refugies au
ferences of political views, the dissent of the regime de leur pays, et cretera.
refugees from the regime in their country, and
so forth.
La delegation sovietique a cite de nombreux
The Soviet Union delegation has cited
faits
qui etablissent le caractere veritable de ceux
numerous instances of the real character of such
persons, who hide behind the mask of political qui, sous pretexte de s'opposer a un regime
dissension from the regime, but who are in fact politique, sont, en fait, traitres a leur patrie et
enemies and traitors both to their own countries a la cause des Nations Unies, ennemis de leur
and to the entire cause of the United Nations. , pays et de notre Organisation. Sous cette etiThis mask of political dissension conceals many quette de dissidents politiques se dissimulent
leaders of Fascist bands, who were faithful nombre de chefs de bande fascistes qui ont servi
servants of their German masters and slaughtered fideIement leurs maitres allemands en massacrant '
the civilian populations of the Soviet Union, les populations pafsibles de l'Union sovietique,
Poland, Yugoslavia and certain' other countries de la Pologne, de la Yougoslavie et d'autres pays
which suffered enemy occupation. I shall not soumis a l'occupation ennemie. Je ne parle pas
mention the leaders of the Anders army, whose des chefs de l'armee Anders, dont l'activite
criminal activities are well known to all who wish criminelle est bien connue de tous ceux qui veulent se renseigner.
to know of them.
On pourrait allonger cette liste, et cependant,
I could continue this list. However, though
malgre
l'evidence des faits cites, certaines delethe facts I have presented are perfectly obvious,
gations
se
permettent de nier ces faits sans fournir
certain delegations find it possible to deny these
de
preuves
ou declarent tout au moins que les
facts by unfounded statements and, at best, by
personnes
en
question n'ont pu etre retrouvees
pointing out that these persons could not be
found in places which we have indicated. For aux endroits que nous avions indiques. Et cela
some reason these grounds were considered constitue, on ne sait pourquoi, une raison suffi.sufficient for disagreement with the Soviet saute pour ne pas adopter l'amendement sovieamendment, which was intended to prevent tique qui tend a empecher ces crimine1s de
these criminals from continuing their hostile poursuivre leur activite hostile tout en etant a
activities while obtaining the support of the la charge de l'organisation internationale.
International Refugee Organization.
La constitution actuellement soumise a l'exaThe constitution now under consideration by
men
de l'Assemblee generale ne contient aucune
the General A~sembly does not contain any
disposition
qui puisse empecher ces crimine1s de
provisions to prevent these criminals from continuing their activities while sheltering under poursuivre leur activite sous le couvert de 1'01'the name of the United Nations and, moreover, ganisation des Nations Unies et avec l'aide de
celle-ci.
receiving its help.
La delegation sovietique estime enfin que si
Finally, the Soviet delegation considers that
for the Refugee Organization to discharge its Pon veut que 1'0rganisation pour les refugies
functions properly, the administrators of refugee s'acquitte comme il convient de ses fonctions, iJ
camps and assembly stations must be persons est indispensable de ne designer le personnel
appointed with the knowledge of and after administratif de chaque camp ou centre de
consultation with the governments of those rassemblement des rCfugies qu'apres avail'
States whose citizens compose the majority in consulte le gouvernement du pays dont les reseach such unit. This provision is essential to sortissants y sont en majorite. C'est la une condiensure more normal conditions for refugees and tion necessaire pour assurer aux refugies et aux
displaced persons,. to ensure an administration personnes deplacees des conditions de vie plus
which through its knowledge of the language normales, pour avoir des administrateurs qui,
and customs of these people might do everything en raison de leur connaissance de la langue et
possible for the refugees, and chiefly to ensure des habitudes de ces re£ugies et personnes dethat no hostile propaganda is allowed against placees, puissent subvenir a tous leurs besoins,
the repatriation of displaced persons. That et surtout pour garantir qu'il n'y aura pas de
is the reason why the Soviet delegation sub- propagande hostile contre le rapatriement des
mitted the appropriate amendment to the con- personnes deplacees. Tel est l'objet de l'un des
stitution.
amendements a la constitution propose par la
delegation sovietique.
The situation in the camps is completely abLa situation dans les camps est actuellement
normal because of the unsatisfactory quality of tout a fait anormale en raison de"la mauvaise
the administrative personnel. Pro-Fascist ele- qualite du personnel administratif. Souvent ce
ments are frequently to be found in administra- sont des individus profascistes qui detiennent les
tive posts in these camps.
postes admini&tratifs des camps.
Bearing in mind the numerous instances of
Etant donne les nombreux faits qui attestent
hostile activities in the camps against certain l'existence dans les camps d1activites hostiles a

15 decembre 1946

1431

Soixante-septieltle seance pleniere

States Members of the United Nations, the
fact that responsible administrators in camps
are not suited to their posts and a number of
other causes which hinder the solution of the
refugee problem, and also bearing in mind that
the representatives of certain other States arc
endeavouring to challenge these facts, the Soviet
delegation considered it necessary to submit a
proposal to the General Assembly to establish
and to send to refugee assembly points, a special
commission, consisting of several persons, including representatives of the native countries
of the refugees, in order that this commission
might investigate carefully the actual situation
on the spot and suggest the measures necessary
to promote a solution of the refugee problem.
However, this proposal also was not adopted.
It is obvious that not everyone wishes to investigate the situation on the spot and to reveal
the true facts which, for some reason, are being
concealed from public opinion.

certains pays Membres des Nations Unies; etant
donne que le personnel qui a ete designe pour
administrer ccs camps ne convient pas et que
d'autres causes encore retardent la solution du
problcme des refugies; considerant enfin que les
representants de certains pays essaient de
contester ccs faits, la delegation sovietique a
juge nccessaire de proposer l'Assembl€e generale la creation et l'envoiaupres des refugies
d'une commission speciale composee de quelques
membres, notamment de represent ants des pays
dont les refugies sont originaires. Cette commission devait avoir la possibilite d'etudier soigneusement, sur place, la situation reelle et de
proposer les mesures necessaires pour contribuer
a. la solution du probleme des re£ugies.
Mais cette proposition sovietique n'a pas ete
acceptee non plus. On voit que tout le monde
n'est pas dispose a etudier la situation sur place
et a mettre au grand jour les faits que l'on
dissimule actuelIement a. J'opinion publique) pour
je ne sais queUes raisons.

Taking into account the urgency of the situation of displaced persons and the obstacles
which lie in the path of their repatriation, and
bearing in mind the serious shortcomings of the
draft constitution of the Refugee Organization,
the Soviet delegation voted against the adoption
of this constitution and the relevant resolution
both in the Third Committee and at the General Assembly, since that constitution does not
ensure the solution of the problem of refugees
and displaced persons.

Tenant compte de la situation critique des
personnes deplacees, des obstacles que 1'on
accumule pour empecher leur rapatriement et
des graves imperfections que comporte le projet
de constitution de l'Organisation pour les refugics, la delegation sovietique s'est prononcee
contre l'adoption de cette constitution et de la
resolution correspondante lors du vote qui a eu
lieu la Troisicme Commission. Elle s'y oppose
egalement
l'Assemblee general e) car ceUe
constitution est loin d'assurer la solution du problcme des refugies et des personnes deplacees.

The continuation of the discussion was adjourned to the next meeting.

La stdte de la discussion est remise ala seance
S'uivante.

a

a

a

La seance est levee

The meeting rose at 7: 15 p.m.

SIXTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING
Held on Sunday, 15 December 1946, at 8.30 p.m.

a19 h. 15.

SOIXANTE-SEPTIEME SEANCE PLENIERE
Tenue le dimanche 15 decembre 1946,
20 h. 30.
TABLES DES MA'TIERES

CONTENTS

Pagl

205. Refugees and displaced persons: report

r
r

a

of the Third Committee: resolutions.
Financial and budgetary questions relating to the International Refugee Organization: report of the Fifth Committee: resolution (continuation of the
discussion)
1432
206. Measures to economize the time of the
General Assembly: report of the Gen1454
eral Committee: resolution
207. Admission of Siam to membership in
the United Nations: report of the Gen1458
eral Committee: resolution
208. Question of holding the second regular
session of the General Assembly in
Europe
1459
209. Rules governing the admission of new
Mcmb('rs to the United Nations. Appointment of members to the Committee on procedure
1466

Pt1.gBS

205.

206.
207.

208.
209.

Rerugit~s et personnes deplacees.

Rapport de la Troisieme Commission. Resolutions. Questions financieres et budgetaires concernant l'Organisation internationale pour les refugies. Rapport de
la Cinquieme Commission. Resolution
1432
(suite de la discussion)
Mesures destinees a. economiser le temps
de ]'Assemblee generale. Rapport du
1454Bureau. Resolution
Admission du Siam a l'Organisation des
Nations Unies. Rapport du Bureau.
1458
Resolution
Question de la convocation en Europe
de la seconde session ordinaire de l'Assemblee generale
1459
Regles pour l'admission de nouveaux
Membres de I'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Nomination desmembrcs de la
Commission de procedure
146&
