UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1285
28 December 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 23 DECEMBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1270 (1999) of
22 October 1999 by which the Security Council established the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) with an authorized strength of a maximum of
6,000 military personnel. As I described in my report of 28 September 1999
(S/1999/1003), the Secretariat has made every effort to expedite the deployment
of UNAMSIL. A substantial number of UNAMSIL troops, in particular from Ghana,
Kenya and India, are already on the ground. The deployment of UNAMSIL is
currently expected to be completed in January 2000.
At the same time, the report indicated that the deployment of UNAMSIL at
its currently authorized strength was predicated on the continuing presence in
Sierra Leone of the Military Observer Group (ECOMOG) of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS). In this regard, I had extensive contacts with
leaders from the region to impress upon them the need to maintain a sizeable
presence of ECOMOG in Sierra Leone to perform the vital functions of providing
security at Freetown and the international airport at Lungi, and protecting the
Government of Sierra Leone.
In a letter dated 7 December 1999, President Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria
notified me that his country would be withdrawing its troops from ECOMOG as
United Nations troops are deployed in Sierra Leone. In this connection,
President Obasanjo informed me that Nigeria could not accept the presence in the
same country of two peacekeeping forces under separate commands and operating
under different conditions. On 15 December, I had a telephone conversation with
President Obasanjo to convey my deep concern about the repercussions which a
premature withdrawal of ECOMOG might have on the security situation in Sierra
Leone. In particular, I appealed to the President to review his decision to
withdraw Nigerian troops from ECOMOG, and asked that their departure be
postponed at least until further discussions had taken place between the
Government of Nigeria and the United Nations. To this end, I suggested that a
high-level military delegation from Nigeria visit United Nations Headquarters.
I confirmed these views in a letter dated 16 December 1999 addressed to
President Obasanjo. At present, the Nigerian Chief of Army Staff is visiting
United Nations Headquarters for discussions on the incorporation of Nigerian
units in UNAMSIL and the modalities of the withdrawal of Nigerian troops from
ECOMOG.
99-40264 (E)

281299

/...

S/1999/1285
English
Page 2

However, on 21 December 1999, President Obasanjo confirmed to my Special
Representative for Sierra Leone, Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji, that Nigeria would
gradually withdraw its troops from ECOMOG in the following manner: Nigeria
would deploy the two battalions it has pledged to contribute to UNAMSIL and
repatriate two of its battalions serving with ECOMOG in the first half of
January 2000. By the end of January, two other Nigerian battalions would be
withdrawn from ECOMOG. The repatriation of Nigerian troops from Sierra Leone
would be completed in February 2000. In addition, I have been informed that the
remaining contributors to ECOMOG, Ghana and Guinea, are also preparing to
withdraw their troops from ECOMOG as well. This implies that, for all intents
and purposes, by the beginning of the new year ECOMOG would be unable to
continue performing its vital functions of providing security at Freetown and
the international airport at Lungi, and protecting the Government of Sierra
Leone. At present, UNAMSIL has neither the mandate nor the means to perform
these tasks.
As the Security Council will recall, in paragraph 50 of my report of
28 September (S/1999/1003), I indicated that, in the eventuality of the
withdrawal of Nigerian troops, a reassessment would be required of the security
conditions in Sierra Leone as it passed through the sensitive process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. I also indicated that I would
revert to the Security Council with further proposals, addressing the additional
tasks for and the possible strengthening of the United Nations force to assume
the functions now fulfilled by ECOMOG. In the eventuality of a full withdrawal
by ECOMOG, I envisaged that a much stronger United Nations force of about 10
infantry battalions would be required.
I am very much concerned that the repatriation of ECOMOG troops in the
immediate future, without adequate security protection provided by other
peacekeepers, would create a dangerous security gap in the key areas of Lungi
and Freetown. It could also have a negative impact on the maintenance of a
climate of confidence, which is crucial to the successful execution of the
programme of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of the many Sierra
Leonean ex-combatants.
The situation in Sierra Leone continues to pose a threat to peace and
security in the region. I therefore recommend that the Security Council
authorize, as soon as possible, the expansion of UNAMSIL with the addition of up
to four infantry battalions and necessary military support elements. The total
strength of an expanded UNAMSIL would thus be close to 10,000 military
personnel. I also recommend that the mandate of UNAMSIL be broadened to enable
it to assume the functions now performed by ECOMOG, in particular the provision
of security at Lungi airport and at key installations, buildings and government
institutions in and around Freetown. These new tasks would also require more
robust rules of engagement for the entire United Nations force.
It is important that UNAMSIL, through its military capabilities and
posture, be able to deter any attempt to derail the Sierra Leonean peace
process. The four additional battalions would therefore have to be robustly
equipped, including the necessary force multipliers. The additional troops and
their equipment should arrive as soon as feasible in Sierra Leone and would
therefore have to be transported by air. The expansion of UNAMSIL, as described
/...

S/1999/1285
English
Page 3

above, would also imply a strengthening of its administrative and logistical
support capacity.
A more detailed concept of operations for an expanded UNAMSIL and an
estimate of the financial costs will be included in my next periodic report to
the Security Council on UNAMSIL, which is due on 20 January 2000. In this
report, I will also include recommendations concerning the strengthening of the
United Nations role in support of the Sierra Leonean police, since the
withdrawal of ECOMOG forces is likely to have immediate repercussions on the
maintenance of law and order in Sierra Leone in which ECOMOG has been playing an
important role.
In the meantime, the Secretariat has initiated planning and discussions
with potential contributors on the expeditious deployment, if authorized by the
Security Council, of additional troops to UNAMSIL. I am also informing the
Government of President Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah of Sierra Leone of the
modalities of the deployment of an expanded UNAMSIL.
As I make these recommendations, I should like to reiterate my deep
appreciation for the vital role which ECOMOG has played in bringing peace to
Sierra Leone. The international community owes a debt of gratitude to those
countries and to the troops who, at high cost and considerable sacrifice,
remained alongside the people of Sierra Leone during their darkest hour. Their
contribution will not be forgotten.
I should be grateful if you would bring this urgent matter to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
