S/PRST/2021/14

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 August 2021
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8829th meeting of the Security Council, held on 2 August 2021, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“As the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) completed its drawdown on 30 June 2021, the Security Council
recognises the progress made in Darfur since 2007.
“The Security Council takes note of the oral report delivered by the Under
Secretary-General for Operational Support at the 8825th meeting of the Security
Council, held on 27 July 2021, entitled “The Reports of the Secretary -General
on Sudan and South Sudan”, including details on UNAMID’s drawdown and the
remaining liquidation phase. The Security Council looks forward to rec eiving
an assessment of lessons learned from the experience of UNAMID no later than
31 October 2021, as requested in resolution 2559 (2020). The Security Council
expresses its intention to consider these lessons learned in its ongoing work to
enhance the overall effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping, including its
approach to peacekeeping transitions.
“Recalling resolution 2559 (2020), the Security Council welcomes the
Government of Sudan’s cooperation with the United Nations and African Union
during UNAMID’s drawdown, and reiterates its call on the Government of
Sudan, at all levels, as well as other relevant stakeholders including the Juba
Peace Agreement signatories, and non-signatory armed opposition movements,
to cooperate fully with the United Nations and the African Union during
UNAMID’s liquidation phase, including by fully respecting all provisions of the
Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) of 9 February 2008. The Security Council
welcomes the signing of the Framework Agreement of 4 March 2021 between
the United Nations and the Government of Sudan and, in this regard, urges the
Government of Sudan to ensure that handed-over UNAMID team sites are used
exclusively for civilian end-user purposes. The Security Council takes note of
UNAMID’s near completed efforts to destroy expired ammunition, which will
positively reduce safety hazards and the probability of their misuse. The
Security Council also notes that in implementing UNAMID’s liquidation, the
United Nations will comply with general United Nations practices and financial
regulations.
“The Security Council expresses its deep appreciation for the important
contribution of UNAMID and its civilian and uniformed personnel, particularly

21-10617 (E)

040821

*2110617*

S/PRST/2021/14

those who gave their lives while serving to promote peace and stability
throughout UNAMID’s operations in Darfur over a period of more than thirteen
years. The Security Council commends the people of Darfur f or their resilience
and cooperation with UNAMID to contribute to peace efforts in Darfur. The
Security Council also takes this opportunity to express its appreciation for the
efforts of the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, their Joint Special Representative (JSR), Mr Jeremiah Kingsley
Mamabolo, and all the preceding JSRs of UNAMID. In this regard, the Security
Council commends the unique partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in the establishment and operation of UNAMID. The Security
Council further commends the contribution of troop- and police-contributing
countries and donors in support of UNAMID’s mandate.
“The Security Council recognises improvements in security conditions in
some areas of Darfur and stresses the need for continued progress to consolidate
peace and security, including through comprehensive implementation of the
Juba Peace Agreement. The Security Council reaffirms the primary
responsibility of the Government of Sudan to protect civilians across its
territory, and urges the Government of Sudan to implement swiftly its National
Plan for Civilian Protection (S/2020/429). The Security Council encourages
further steps to promote and protect women’s rights and full, equal and
meaningful participation in all social, political, economic aspects of life, as well
as efforts to include youth in such spheres. The Security Council also
encourages further efforts to build confidence of local communities in the ability
of the rule of law institutions to deliver justice and ensure accountability.
“The Security Council underscores the importance of the continued
support of bilateral, regional and multilateral partners and encourages continued
support to Sudan in order to further consolidate peace and stability in Darfur. In
this regard, the Security Council underscores the important role being played by
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan
(UNITAMS) and its integrated United Nations Country Team (UNCT) in
support of the Government of Sudan’s efforts.”

2/2

21-10617
