A/RES/65/95

United Nations

Distr.: General
10 February 2011

General Assembly
Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 124

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 December 2010
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/65/L.27 and Add.1)]

65/95. Global health and foreign policy
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 63/33 of 26 November 2008 and 64/108 of
10 December 2009,
Recalling also the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related fields, especially those related to global
health,
Welcoming the outcome document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, 1 including the section
entitled “Promoting global public health for all to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals”,
0F

Welcoming also the launching of the Secretary-General’s Global Strategy for
Women’s and Children’s Health, which aims at supporting national plans and
strategies in health matters, including for the reduction of maternal and child
mortality,
Welcoming further the establishment of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),
Recalling its resolution 64/265 of 13 May 2010 on the prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases, and welcoming the decision to convene a high-level
meeting of the General Assembly in September 2011, with the participation of
Heads of State and Government, on the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases,
Welcoming the plans to hold in 2011 the Second Global Forum on Human
Resources for Health, in Bangkok from 25 to 29 January, during the Prince Mahidol
Award Conference, the World Health Organization World Conference on Social
Determinants of Health, in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 19 to 21 October, and the
first Global Ministerial Conference on Healthy Lifestyles and Non-communicable

_______________
1

10-51824

See resolution 65/1.

*1051824*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/95

Diseases, in Moscow on 28 and 29 April, and for the General Assembly, also in
2011, to undertake a comprehensive HIV/AIDS review,
Acknowledging the emergence of a growing worldwide movement in support
of universal access to health care as a means to promote and protect the right of
every human being to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical
and mental health,
Reaffirming the commitment to fully and effectively implement the Beijing
Platform for Action, 2 the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development 3 and the outcomes of their review conferences,
including the commitments relating to sexual and reproductive health and the
promotion and protection of all human rights in this context,
1F

2F

Acknowledging that inequities in access to health care can increase during
times of crisis and that special efforts should be made to maintain public health and
primary health-care functions during these periods,
Stressing the importance of aid targeted to the health sector as a complement to
domestic financing, as well as of innovative sources of financing and North-South
cooperation in support of national plans and strategies aimed at strengthening
national health systems,
Calling for the fulfilment of all existing official development assistancerelated commitments,
Acknowledging the various national, regional and subregional initiatives to
enhance South-South cooperation, particularly in the field of health, and that SouthSouth cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South
cooperation,
Reiterating the willingness of Member States to cooperate in health issues and
in promoting universal access to medicines that are safe, affordable, effective and of
good quality, and to continue efforts to increase global vaccine production capacity
in order to increase availability of and achieve equity in the access to vaccines in
situations of pandemics,
Reaffirming the right to use, to the fullest extent, the provisions contained in
the World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), 4 the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS
Agreement and Public Health, 5 the decision of the General Council of the World
Trade Organization of 30 August 2003 on the implementation of paragraph 6 of the
Doha Declaration 6 and, when formal acceptance procedures are completed, the
amendments to article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement, as proposed by the General
Council of the World Trade Organization in its decision of 6 December 2005, 7
which provide flexibilities for the protection of public health, and in particular to
3F

4F

5F

6F

_______________
2

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
3
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4
See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations,
done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994–7).
5
World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
6
See World Trade Organization, document WT/L/540 and Corr.1. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
7
See World Trade Organization, document WT/L/641. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.

2

A/RES/65/95

promote access to medicines for all, encouraging the provision of assistance to
developing countries in this regard, and calling for a broad and timely acceptance of
the amendments to article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement,
Acknowledging the need to improve research and development in neglected
tropical diseases, and welcoming in this regard the first World Health Organization
report on neglected tropical diseases, 8
7F

Welcoming the adoption by the sixty-third World Health Assembly of the
World Health Organization Global Code of Practice on the International
Recruitment of Health Personnel 9 as a guide to respond to the concerns over the
lack of and imbalanced distribution of health workers within countries and
throughout the world, in particular the shortage in Africa, and the retention of health
personnel, in a manner that strengthens the health systems of developing countries,
countries with economies in transition and small island developing States,
8F

Noting with appreciation the adoption by the World Health Assembly on
21 May 2010 of its resolution 63.15 on the monitoring of the achievement of the
health-related Millennium Development Goals, as well as its resolution 63.19, in
which it requests the preparation of a World Health Organization HIV/AIDS
strategy for 2011–2015, to be submitted to the sixty-fourth World Health Assembly,9
Recognizing that mental health problems are of major importance to all
societies and are significant contributors to the burden of disease and the loss of
quality of life, and have huge economic and social costs, and welcoming the 2010
report of the World Health Organization on mental health and development, 10
9F

Noting the role of the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative in promoting
synergy between foreign policy and global health, as well as the contribution of the
Oslo Ministerial Declaration, 11 which was reaffirmed, with renewed actions and
commitments, by the ministerial declaration of 22 September 2010, 12
10F

1F

1.
Notes with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General 13 and the
recommendations contained therein;
12F

2.
Calls for more attention to health as an important policy issue on the
international agenda;
3.
Encourages Member States to consider the close relationship between
foreign policy and global health and to recognize that global health challenges
require concerted and sustained efforts in order to further promote a global policy
environment supportive of global health;
Recognizes that, despite some progress made, challenges in global health,
4.
including major inequities and vulnerabilities within and among countries and
regions, still remain and demand persistent attention;

_______________
8

Available from www.who.int/neglected_diseases/2010report/en/index.html.
See World Health Organization, Sixty-third World Health Assembly, Geneva, 17–21 May 2010,
Resolutions and Decisions, Annexes (WHA63/2010/REC/1).
10
Available from www.who.int/mental_health/policy/mhtargeting/en/index.html.
11
A/63/591, annex.
12
See A/65/538.
13
See A/65/399.
9

3

A/RES/65/95

5.
Acknowledges that progress in global health is dependent primarily on
national policies and actions and on international cooperation and partnerships,
which could help to respond to major global challenges and crises;
Underscores the urgency of strengthening health systems by improving
6.
basic infrastructures, human and technical resources and the provision of health
facilities, and of ensuring the accessibility, affordability and quality of health-care
services as well as sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation;
Stresses the importance of achieving the health-related Millennium
7.
Development Goals, especially with the objective of eradicating poverty and
ensuring socio-economic development;
Underlines the importance of realizing the right of everyone to education
8.
as an integral part of a healthy society, and in this context reaffirms that access to
primary education for all constitutes one of the most effective means to promote
public health and basic sanitation and to prevent diseases;
Acknowledges that gender equality, the empowerment of women, the full
9.
enjoyment by women of all human rights and the eradication of poverty are
essential to economic and social development;
10. Underlines the central role of the global partnership for development and
the importance of Goal 8 in achieving the Millennium Development Goals, and
recognizes that without substantial international support, several of the Goals are
likely to be missed in many developing countries by 2015;
11. Reiterates that each country has primary responsibility for its own
economic and social development and that the role of national policies, domestic
resources and development strategies cannot be overemphasized;
12. Stresses the need to strengthen health systems so that they deliver
equitable health outcomes as a basis for a comprehensive approach to achieving
Millennium Development Goals 4, 5 and 6, underlining the need to build sustainable
national health systems and strengthen national capacities through attention to, inter
alia, service delivery, health systems financing, including appropriate budgetary
allocations, the health workforce, health information systems, the procurement and
distribution of medicines, vaccines and technologies, sexual and reproductive health
care and political will in leadership and governance;
13. Acknowledges the need to further address the issue of governance for
global health as health is increasingly being challenged by new realities of an
interdependent world;
14. Acknowledges also the need to make the global health architecture more
effective, efficient and responsive, in order to, inter alia, bring more coherence to
the delivery of health outcomes and enhance health equity;
15. Reaffirms the central role of the United Nations system in meeting the
challenges of global health in a changing environment and the need to enhance the
visibility of health issues in the different United Nations forums;
16. Recognizes the leading role of the World Health Organization as the
primary specialized agency for health, including its roles and functions with regard
to health policy in accordance with its mandate;
17. Stresses the continued need for coordination and coherence at national
and international levels to enhance the effectiveness of health initiatives and
partnerships;
4

A/RES/65/95

18. Urges Member States to continue to consider health issues in the
formulation of foreign policy;
19. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system, academic
institutions and networks to further increase their capacity for the training of
diplomats and health officials, in particular those from developing countries, on
global health and foreign policy, by developing best practices and guidelines for
training and open-source information, and educational and training resources for
this purpose;
20. Requests the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization and with other relevant multilateral
institutions, as appropriate, to give high priority to generating and collecting
comparable and reliable data on health-worker migration, distribution and coverage
within the framework of the World Health Organization Global Code of Practice on
the International Recruitment of Health Personnel;9
21. Also requests the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the
Director-General of the World Health Organization, with the participation of
relevant programmes, funds and specialized agencies of the United Nations system,
and in consultation with Member States, to submit a report to the General Assembly
at its sixty-sixth session, under the item entitled “Global health and foreign policy”,
which, inter alia:
(a) Reflects on ways to improve the coordination, coherence and
effectiveness of governance for global health;
(b) Discusses the role of the State and other stakeholders in improving the
coordination, coherence and effectiveness of governance for global health;
(c) Presents recommendations on enhancing the coordination of policies
addressing the social determinants of health.
61st plenary meeting
9 December 2010

5
