S/2015/776

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 October 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation with respect
to piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 31 of Security Council
resolution 2184 (2014), in which the Council requested me to report on the
implementation of that resolution and on the situation with re spect to piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia.
2.
The report covers major developments since my previous report, of 16 October
2014 (S/2014/740), until 11 October 2015. The assessment and observations herein
are based on information provided by Member States and regional organizations, in
conformity with paragraph 30 of resolution 2184 (2014). Information was provided
by Germany, India, Japan, Latvia, Serbia, Turkey and the United Kingdom of G reat
Britain and Northern Ireland, as well as by the European Union and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The United Nations system, the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the Monitoring Group on Somalia
and Eritrea were also consulted.

II. Main developments and trends regarding piracy off the
coast of Somalia
3.
It has been more than two years since a large commercial vessel has been
hijacked and held for ransom by Somali pirates. Following the trend in 2013, the
total number of incidents caused by pirates based in Somalia continued to fall, from
20 in 2013 to 12 during the reporting period, according to figures provided by the
International Maritime Organization (IMO). This represents a significant decrease
from the 78 reported in 2007, when Somalia-based piracy was prevalent, and the
237 ships targeted by Somali pirates in 2011. The total number of seafarers from
large commercial vessels who are being held hostage by Somali pirates currently
stands at 26, compared to 37 in October 2014.
4.
The positive overall trend notwithstanding, credible reports suggest that
commercial ships remain a target of Somali pirates. In most cases, ships were
successful in preventing attacks through vigilance, situational awareness an d an
assertive response, in accordance with the Best Management Practices for
Protection against Somalia-based Piracy. Combined threat assessments by the
European Union Naval Force (EUNAVFOR), NATO and the Combined Maritime
15-16737 (E)

191015

*1516737*

S/2015/776

Forces with regard to the threat of piracy, in terms of capability, intent and
opportunity, suggest that the continued suppression of piracy is reliant on the
maintenance of collective response mechanisms by Member States, regional actors
and the United Nations system. In addition, it is stressed in the assessments that root
causes, such as a fragile economy, the lack of alternative livelihoods and weak
governance structures, continue to require the attention of the Federal Government
of Somalia, with support from the international commun ity.
5.
Smaller vessels remain vulnerable. Figures for 2014 from the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) show that there were 18 pirate attacks on
fishing vessels and two dhows were held. In addition, in early 2015, 37 Iranian
fishermen aboard two fishing vessels, the Siraj and the Jaber, were seized by pirates
after allegations of illegal fishing activities. The Jaber subsequently escaped with
its crew; 19 hostages continue to be held, however.
6.
There is evidence of a complex relationship between piracy and illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing. The Secure Fisheries programme, in its report
of 16 September 2015, and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) noted a marked increase in reports of such fishing by foreign vessels
off the coast of Somalia, reflecting the perceived reduction in the threat of piracy in
the area. Noting the upturn in attacks on fishing vessels close to the Somali coast
since the beginning of 2015, it was noted by Secure Fisheries and FAO that local
frustration with such activities may be contributing to a reappearance of coastal
community support for piracy.
7.
It also remains clear that despite a marked reduction in the commission of
piracy attacks, the criminal networks behind such acts have not been defeated.
During the reporting period, crime trends indicated that the Indian Ocean was
increasingly exploited by criminal organizations to engage in seaborne transnational
criminal activities, including trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants, drug
trafficking, illegal fishing and wildlife and forestry crime. Such activities leverage
the existing resources and expertise of criminal syndicates, including pirate and
terrorist networks, and take advantage of normative vacuums in the regulation of
international and territorial waters and maritime law -enforcement capacities to
further illicit activities.

III. Hostage release and support efforts
8.
In February 2015, four Thai nationals from the fishing vessel Prantalay 12
were released and repatriated. All crews held hostage had been mistreated; some of
the hostages released had suffered torture and ill-treatment during captivity and will
require significant aftercare.
9.
Twenty-six crew members of the fishing vessel Naham 3 have remained in
captivity since 2012. As noted above, 19 fishermen from the Siraj were taken
hostage on 26 March 2015. In addition, a pirate group has been holding two Kenyan
citizens taken hostage on land in 2014. The Hostage Support Programme, which is
funded by the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia, constantly monitors the conditions of individuals held in
captivity, provides medical support, and engages in dialogue with both government
counterparts and pirate groups to advocate and secure the release of such
individuals. UNODC and partners continue to support efforts to achieve the

2/13

15-16737

S/2015/776

objective of zero ships and zero seafarers in the hands of Somali pirates, adopted by
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.

IV. Development of counter-piracy efforts in Somalia
A.

Legal and policy frameworks
10. The reporting period saw notable progress by the Federal Government of
Somalia in developing relevant legal, policy and coordination frameworks to
address the threat of piracy. With support from the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and EUNAVFOR, the Federal Government
completed a draft coastguard law, which was submitted to the Council of Mini sters
for subsequent approval by Parliament. IMO also provided the Ministry of Ports and
Marine Transport of the Federal Government with draft guidelines for the
establishment of a maritime administration department, with the goal of enabling
Somalia to diligently undertake its flag, port and coastal State responsibilities.
11. Further to discussions with international partners within the framework of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, steps were taken to ensure proper
management and coordination among Somali federal and regional authorities
regarding the exploitation of maritime resources. At a meeting held on 7 July 2015,
representatives of the relevant entities agreed to operationalize a maritime security
coordination committee to facilitate cooperation between the national maritime
coordination committee of the Federal Government of Somalia, the Somali regional
maritime coordination committees (including the Puntland and Galmudug
administrations, the Interim Jubba Administration and ot her current and future
regional administrations) and “Somaliland”. The committee is expected to serve as
an important mechanism for information-sharing and cooperation to optimize the
implementation of counter-piracy and maritime security capacity-building
programmes.
12. Coordination between the Somali authorities and international partners was
further institutionalized within the framework of the Somali Compact. With the
support of UNSOM, a Somali navy and coastguard working group was established
in alignment with Priority 4 (maritime strategy) of Peace and State -building Goal 2
(Security) of the Compact. This coordination, which brings together the Federal
Government of Somalia and international partners, is aimed at advising and
assisting the Ministry of Defence in developing its maritime security forces.

B.

Capacity-building
13. Numerous international partners contributed to building the capacity of the
Federal Government of Somalia and the interim regional administrations to fully
exercise law-enforcement powers in coastal areas. In this regard, financial support
from Germany, the United Kingdom and other Member States to INTERPOL, the
European Union civilian mission, EUCAP Nestor, which assists host countries in
building self-sustaining capacity on counter-piracy, maritime governance and
security, and United Nations programmes and projects, notably the UNODC
Maritime Crime Programme, helped to strengthen the capacity of prosecution

15-16737

3/13

S/2015/776

authorities and maritime security entities, build a maritime administration, and
promote livelihood development in Somalia.
14. In addition, on 16 October 2014, 61 Somali cadets from the coastguard and
port police graduated from a seven-week training course in Djibouti. The UNODC
Maritime Crime Programme provided maritime law-enforcement and engineering
mentors, who delivered on-the-job training and mentoring within the Somali
maritime police and coastguard units.
15. UNODC continued to build the capacity of maritime law -enforcement
authorities in Somaliland, Puntland and southern and central Somalia. Prison
operations were supported through the provision of food, health-care services and
medicines and other procurement activities, while Custodial Corps staff received
training on security and information management. In collaboration with UNODC,
prison mentors routinely reviewed security conditions to reduc e the risk of escape or
mistreatment, particularly with respect to prisoners transferred under the Piracy
Prisoner Transfer Programme and other high-risk offenders.
16. In Mogadishu, the UNODC mentoring programme focused on building the
maritime and policing skills of the maritime unit of the Somali police force. During
the reporting period, 22 officers received advanced training and 20 new recruits
received initial training. The first group of trainees is supporting maritime forces of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (Uganda People’s Defence Forces) in
patrolling the waters off Mogadishu International Airport. On land, UNODC
continued its multi-year programme of training, procurement and construction work
at the Mogadishu prison and court complex, which is set to be a unique facility in
southern and central Somalia that will provide a secure environment for trials of
high-risk prisoners such as pirates, terrorists and former combatants. During the
reporting period, construction work was undertaken to expand the prison’s secure
area and thus reduce overcrowding. Training was delivered to 75 custodial officers
and uniforms were issued to 350 officers, with a view to improving security and
professionalism. The project will continue until the end of 2016.
17. In Puntland, UNODC supported the port police through the provision of
equipment and the construction of the port police headquarters, which will serve as
a training and operations planning centre. Work commenced in 2015 and will
continue throughout 2016. In Galmudug, the police station in south Gaalkacyo was
refurbished as part of the UNODC programme, with a view to building the capacity
of law-enforcement authorities based there that are responsible for conducting
investigations into piracy and other maritime crime. The activities were funded by
the Trust Fund and will be completed in 2015.
18. In Somaliland, the same programme provided six boats and trained five teams
of eight officers on vessel handling and boarding tactics, safety of life at sea and t he
use of force. In addition, UNODC provided three intensive training courses to
existing boat crews, and 15 senior officers received dedicated training on
operational readiness and standard operating procedures. Such training and
mentoring efforts have led to 51 interdictions of illegal fishing vessels by
“Somaliland” authorities since December 2014, including the interception of an
illegal consignment of weapons, the rescue of the crew aboard a burning ship, and
the provision of support for the safe passage of refugees and Somali returnees
fleeing the conflict in Yemen.

4/13

15-16737

S/2015/776

19. The Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea within the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat, with the support of UNSOM, conducted two
training activities, one for officials of the Federal Government of Somalia and the
interim regional administrations and one for parliamentarians, which were financed
through the Trust Fund. The objective was to build the knowledge and capacity of
Somali legislators and technical officials regarding the rights and duties of States in
the maritime zones set out in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
including in relation to the repression of piracy. From May to September 2015, the
Division also provided one Federal Government official with specialized training on
issues relating to ocean affairs and the law of the sea, which was funded through a
special strategic fellowship award from the United Nations-Nippon Foundation of
Japan Fellowship Programme.
20. Noting the link between illegal fishing and piracy, FAO facilitated capacitybuilding and training of fisheries observers and inspectors in order to build the
capacity of the Federal Government of Somalia to effectively monitor, control and
exercise surveillance of its waters, ensure that national and international fishing
vessels comply with local and international regulations, and collect fisheries data. A
small team of officials from the Federal Government and the interim regional
administrations received fisheries management training in the United Republic of
Tanzania. FAO also provided technical support to Somalia in meeting its obligations
as a Contracting Party of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission.

C.

Tackling root causes of piracy
21. The underlying factors enabling piracy include a fragile economy, the lack of
alternative livelihoods, insecurity and weak governance structures. Efforts to
address these issues are continuing within the framework of the Somali Compact for
peacebuilding and State-building. The latest developments are reflected in my
reports on Somalia of 11 September (S/2015/702), 12 May (S/2015/331) and
23 January 2015 (S/2015/51).
22. During the reporting period, FAO provided technical and legal support for the
establishment of a federal Somali fisheries authority under the Ministry of Fisheries
and Marine Resources. This would enable Somalia to benefit from revenue
generated by licences issued to foreign-flagged fishing vessels and to effectively
exercise surveillance of its waters, with the potential to curtail illegal fishing and
associated community support for such activity.
23. Meanwhile, with support from the Trust Fund, FAO provided technical
assistance to Somalia in building a registration scheme enabling Governments,
non-governmental organizations and international naval missions to confirm the
identities of fishermen and thereby protect their livelihoods. More than
4,500 fishermen in Puntland were registered and 3,500 identification cards were
distributed. Similarly, 700 fishermen have been registered by the Galmudug and
Jubba interim regional administrations.
24. FAO also supported rehabilitation and construction initiatives for improving
access to markets for fishermen in Mogadishu, Kismayo, the towns of Eyl and
Boosaaso in Puntland and the port of Berbera in Somaliland, and introduced two
new vessel designs to help fishermen to increase their catches. Local c apacity to
build the new vessels in Boosaaso and Berbera will be fully established by the end

15-16737

5/13

S/2015/776

of 2015. Following successful pilot projects to produce value -added sundried tuna
in Boosaaso and Mogadishu during the reporting period, FAO initiated plans to
extend the work to fishing communities and communities of internally displaced
persons in coastal areas, which it hopes will make a major contribution to food
security and employment.
25. The deployment in Puntland early in November 2015 of 25 fish aggregat ing
devices to collect fish, which are on contract to FAO, should underpin related efforts
to improve coastal livelihoods without increasing competition or conflict within
coastal communities, and may stimulate youth employment in such communities.

V. International cooperation
A.

Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
26. The Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia held its seventeenth
plenary session in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, on 28 October 2014 and its
eighteenth plenary session in New York on 8 July 2015. It endorsed the offer of the
Government of Seychelles to chair the Contact Group during 2016.
27. At the eighteenth plenary session, in addition to receiving updates and
presentations from the Federal Government of Somalia and FAO, participants
discussed the scope of the high-risk area, the eastern limit of which had been
extended in 2011 from longitude 65° east to longitude 78° east in response to the
rise in incidents of piracy. Many Member States with coastlines bord ering the Indian
Ocean, including India, Oman and Pakistan, and other Member States in the Horn of
Africa, the Arabian Peninsula and South Asia, called for the revision of the
coordinates of the high-risk area, since no incidents of piracy east of longitud e 65°
east have been reported in the past three years. In particular, India highlighted
adverse consequences arising from the continued extension of the high -risk area,
including the rerouting of merchant vessels closer to the coast of India, excessive
false alarms that could undermine the military effort, the presence of “floating
armouries” and armed guards without proper regulation in India’s maritime zones
and adjacent waters, and the increased cost of shipping owing to higher insurance
charges. In the light of these concerns, the Contact Group called upon the insurance
and maritime industries to take the steps necessary for a substantive review of the
high-risk area within three months and report back to the Chair, while noting that a
consideration of revision did not imply reduced vigilance or disengagement. On
2 October 2015, representatives of the insurance and maritime industries agreed to
revise the limits of the high-risk area, which will significantly reduce the areas at
sea deemed to be at high risk of piracy.
28. The working groups of the Contact Group also continued their work. At its
meeting of 7 July 2015, the Working Group on Capacity-Building welcomed the
agreement by the Federal Government of Somalia, “Somaliland”, Puntland and the
interim regional administrations to operationalize the Maritime Security
Coordination Committee, noting that emphasis should be placed on implementing
the Somali Maritime Resource and Security Strategy. It took note of the agreement
between representatives of the Federal Government of Somalia, “Somaliland”,
Puntland and the interim regional administrations that, once established, the

6/13

15-16737

S/2015/776

Coordination Committee should in due course assume the role and functions of the
Working Group.
29. The Working Group on Disrupting Pirate Networks Ashore observed that
pirate leaders and financiers based in Somalia are enjoying de facto impunity there.
They are neither arrested, prosecuted nor extradited, and can often invest the illegal
proceeds of piracy in other trades, both legal and illegal, or move them abroad.
30. The Working Group on Maritime Counter-Piracy and Mitigation Operations
reported on the work of the technical subgroup on maritime situational awareness,
which had stated that the current maritime situational awareness framework and its
associated system architecture must be sustained. Meanwhile, regional stakeholders
have started to form a maritime situational awareness organization that will combine
the action of existing centres with a regional network of information -sharing and
fusion centres. A joint maritime communications initiative for Somalia is being
developed by UNODC, EUCAP Nestor and Oceans Beyond Piracy, which will
provide initial operating capability for Somalia and its regions.
31. A law enforcement task force was formed in 2014 in recognition of the need to
bring together law enforcement partners from around the world to coordinate
investigations into and share information on land-based Somali pirate leaders. In
October 2014, the task force identified pirate leaders against whom investigators
and prosecutors would work by sharing information, advising one another on
strategy and best practices and carrying out investigations. Meanwhile, the Legal
Forum of the Contact Group discussed and adopted its missio n as a platform for the
study, analysis and discussion of legal matters relating to piracy issues.

B.

Trust Fund to Support the Initiatives of States Countering Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia
32. As at 30 June 2015, the total balance of the Trust Fund stood at $1.8 million.
Since December 2012, the Trust Fund has received a total of $12.7 million from
17 donors.
33. On 28 October 2014, the Board of the Trust Fund convened in Dubai, United
Arab Emirates, for its sixteenth meeting, chaired by the Dep artment of Political
Affairs. The Board approved three projects submitted by FAO and UNODC, which
amounted to $900,000. The two FAO projects approved by the Board provide
biometric-based database systems for fishermen and vessels to the Ministry of
Fisheries and Marine Resources, the ports of Galmudug and the Ministry of
Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries of the Interim Jubba Administration. The
UNODC project is designed to equip 80 at-risk young people in Boosaaso with
livelihood skills, thereby deterring them from involvement in piracy and violent
activities and contributing to the economic development of their communities.
34. On 7 July 2015, the Board of the Trust Fund at its seventeenth meeting
reviewed a total of five new projects for funding, three of which were approved for
a total amount of $808,487. The projects were (a) a request by UNODC for an ad
hoc replenishment of $200,000; (b) a UNODC project on detention and transfer in
the areas of Garoowe, Puntland, and Hargeisa, Somaliland; and (c) a p roject by IMO
on support to maritime governance in Somalia. It was further agreed that (a) gender
analysis should be included in the development of all future project proposals; and

15-16737

7/13

S/2015/776

(b) steps should be taken to increase links between the Trust Fund and the Somali
Compact to ensure complementarity between projects supported under the Trust
Fund and the goals of the Compact, as well as with the United Nations
Multi-Partner Trust Fund established within the framework of the Compact. The
representative of Somalia stressed the need for the Federal Government of Somalia
to be fully consulted on projects.

C.

Cooperation on piracy-related prosecutions
35. The United Nations, Member States and regional organizations continue to
support Somalia and other States in the region in their efforts to prosecute suspected
pirates and punish convicted pirates, including onshore facilitators and financiers,
consistent with applicable international human rights law. The UNODC Maritime
Crime Programme in particular continues to support States in the region that are
prosecuting piracy.
36. To date, naval forces operating in the Gulf of Aden and the western Indian
Ocean have detained a total of 323 suspected pirates, of whom 164 have been tried
in Kenya, 147 in Seychelles and 12 in Mauritius. EUNAVFOR detained 155 of the
suspected pirates, while others were detained by international naval forces operating
under NATO Operation Ocean Shield or by the Combined Maritime Forces. The
Seychelles coastguard detained 41 suspected pirates. A total of 48 men have been
transferred for trial in Seychelles. On 13 March 2015, the Supreme Court of
Seychelles returned a guilty verdict against nine pirates handed over by Denmark in
November 2013. Eight adult defendants received sentences of 14 years each, while
the juvenile defendant was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment.
37. Judgements in two cases were delivered by the Seychelles Court of Appeal on
28 August 2015. In the case of seven Somali men detained by EUNAVFOR in
February 2013, the Court of Appeal found that insufficient consideration had been
accorded to the defence at the trial before the Supreme Court of Seychelles, and
quashed their convictions. In the case of six Somali men detained by the navy of the
Netherlands in August 2012, an appeal was made by one of the men for the court’s
consideration and the remaining five sentences were reduced from 24 to 12 years.
EUNAVFOR continues to support the prosecution in one further trial in Seychelles,
including assistance with the location and attendance of witnesses.
38. In June 2015, the Supreme Court of Mauritius heard the prosecution appeal in
the case of 12 suspected pirates acquitted by the Intermediate Court in November
2014. It is anticipated that the Supreme Court will provide its judgement in 2015.
39. Five suspected pirates remain on remand in Seychelles. The UNODC Maritime
Crime Programme supported regional prosecution efforts through the provision of
interpretation services, support to prosecutors, travel of witnesses and video
evidence facilities for witnesses.
40. To alleviate the burden on prosecuting and detaining States while promoting
closer ties with families and countries of origin, the UNODC Maritime Crime
Programme facilitated the transfer and repatriation of Somalis convicted or
acquitted of acts of piracy. During the reporting period, the Programme carried out
two post-sentence repatriations and five repatriations of acquitted Somali men from

8/13

15-16737

S/2015/776

Seychelles, and six post-sentence repatriations from Kenya. As piracy trials
progress, more repatriations and transfers are expected in the final quarter of 2015.
41. Prosecutions and court procedures also continued in Germany, with
cooperation between the Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection and
law-enforcement and military authorities.
42. There were no transfers of prisoners by UNODC during the period under
review.

D.

Naval activities off the coast of Somalia
43. International naval missions from the European Union, NATO and the
Combined Maritime Forces, in addition to counter-piracy missions of several
Member States, including China, Colombia, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), the
Republic of Korea and the Russian Federation, continued to ensure security at sea
by protecting merchant vessels and deterring pirate activity in the Gulf of Aden and
the Indian Ocean, as authorized by the Security Council in its resolution 2184
(2014).
44. The European Union Naval Force operation Atalanta continued to deter and
disrupt piracy off the coast of Somalia. It comprises up to five warships, three
maritime patrol aircraft and more than 1,000 personnel, and includes contributions
from Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Serbia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom. It has to date provided
complete protection to World Food Programme shipping, as well as to vessels
supporting the African Union Mission in Somalia, such that no ship operating for
either organization has been attacked by pirates since the beginning of the operation
in 2008. In December 2014, the European Union extended the operat ion for a
further two years until December 2016, with a revised mandate to support other
European Union missions and instruments in Somalia, as a secondary task, upon
request and within its means and capacities, as part of the European Union’s
comprehensive approach to Somalia.
45. NATO Operation Ocean Shield also continued to make a significant
contribution to the international response to piracy off the Horn of Africa by
deploying up to four vessels and, at times, maritime patrol aircraft. As decided by
the North Atlantic Council, the operation will continue until the end of 2016 with a
focused presence in the Indian Ocean during the inter-monsoon periods, when the
risk of possible pirate attacks is at its highest. Operation Ocean Shield continues to
coordinate its activities at the tactical level with other counter -piracy stakeholders.
In 2015, Australia participated in the operation for a limited period, and Colombia
has been supporting the operation since 14 September. The NATO Shipping Centre
in the United Kingdom has continued to support merchant shipping in the high -risk
area of the Indian Ocean by providing timely information. NATO continues to chair
coordination meetings of the Shared Awareness and Deconfliction mechanism on a
rotational basis with the Combined Maritime Forces and EUNAVFOR.
46. The counter-piracy efforts of the Combined Maritime Forces in the Gulf of
Aden, the Arabian Sea, the Indian Ocean, the Somali Basin and the Red Sea are
managed by Combined Task Force 151, which is one of thre e task forces of the

15-16737

9/13

S/2015/776

Combined Maritime Forces with the objective of disrupting piracy and armed
robbery at sea. Combined Task Force 151 works in close cooperation with the
European Union and NATO and maintains a consistent air and sea presence, with a
variable force flow of vessels, aircraft and personnel from contributing States.
During the reporting period, it was under the command of New Zealand, Thailand,
Pakistan and Japan, and is currently under the command of Turkey.
47. The naval forces of Turkey have been participating in both Combined Task
Force 151 and NATO Operation Ocean Shield. The Indian Navy continues to
conduct anti-piracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden. Japan is also continuing its
anti-piracy operations through the deployment of Maritime Sel f-Defence Force
destroyers and maritime patrol aircraft in the Gulf of Aden.

E.

International capacity-building
48. In addition to the many capacity-building activities in support of Somalia
already listed, the IMO programme for implementation of the Code of Conduct
concerning the repression of piracy and armed robbery against ships in the Western
Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden continues to deliver results in the four thematic
areas of information-sharing, training, national legislation and capacity-building. To
date, more than 60 training courses have been delivered under the programme,
benefiting more than 1,000 trainees, with more courses scheduled. The establishment
of the information-sharing network and the enhancement of maritime domain
awareness in the region were noted as significant achievements.

F.

Emerging issues in the Indian Ocean rim
49. To address the evolving nature of the maritime threats in the Indian Ocean and
their transnational links, the Indian Ocean Forum on Maritime Crime has emerged
as a regional network among Indian Ocean States to tackle broader maritime crime.
It is supported by the UNODC Maritime Crime Programme, the engagement of
which in the implementation of Security Council resolution 2182 (2014) is also part
of new efforts to disrupt maritime crime originating in the region. The Forum was
welcomed at the African Union Extraordinary Summit on Maritime Safety and
Security in February 2015 and at the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice.

VI. International legal and judicial issues, including human
rights considerations
50. Pursuant to resolutions 1976 (2011), 2015 (2011) and 2020 (2011), in which
the Security Council called upon States to criminalize piracy under their domestic
law, some Member States reported progress in enacting the requisite national
legislation. Latvia reported that it continues to work on improvements in its national
laws to enhance the safety of ships, shipping companies, ports and port installations,
and to recognize maritime and shipping organizations at the national level. Germany
reported that it has provisions in its national legislation to tackle piracy and
exercises jurisdiction in accordance with the principle of universal jurisdiction in
cases in which the crime of an attack on maritime traffic has been committed.

10/13

15-16737

S/2015/776

51. A key outstanding issue is the regulation of sea-based private security
contractors and their activities in counter-piracy operations. In particular, the use of
force and possible detention of pirates by such contractors may affect the
international regulatory framework governing private security companies. The
matter was discussed during the fourth session, held from 27 April to 1 May 2015,
of the open-ended intergovernmental working group to consider the possibility of
elaborating an international regulatory framework on the regulation, monitoring and
oversight of the activities of private military and security companies.
52. The IMO Maritime Safety Committee held its ninety-fifth session from 3 to
12 June 2015, at which it approved revised interim recommendations for flag States
regarding the use of privately contracted armed security personnel on board ships in
the high-risk area (see annex to MSC.1/Circ.1406/Rev.3). In accordance with the
revised interim recommendations, if the use of such personnel is determined to be
an appropriate and lawful measure, the flag States are recommended to establish a
policy that ensures that private maritime security companies employing such
personnel on board ships hold valid accredited certification to Ships and Marine
Technology — Guidelines for Private Maritime Security Companies providing
privately contracted armed security personnel on board ships (ISO 28007-1:2015),
the objective of which is to improve sector-specific security and human rights, or
meet applicable national requirements.
53. In line with its monitoring obligations, UNODC continued to support six monthly visits by the International Monitoring Committee, an independent
mechanism based on an agreement between UNODC and the Somali authorities, to
prisons holding prisoners transferred under the Piracy Prisoner Transfer Programme
to ensure that conditions remain secure and humane and that minimum detention
standards are upheld, in accordance with international human rights law.

VII. Observations
54. I welcome the continuing decline in piracy off the coast of Somalia. This
sustained trend is a tribute to extraordinary and innovative international cooperation
to address a threat to our shared peace and security. I commend the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and the international naval forces for their work.
The continuing decrease in piracy is due in no small measure to their efforts,
support and coordination.
55. I welcome the substantial gains made by Somalia and its efforts to develop and
coordinate maritime governance mechanisms. I note with appreciation that the
Somali coastguard took up its operational duty station at the entrance of Mogadishu
seaport in October 2014, after 23 years. I also encourage the convening of the
Maritime Security Coordination Committee at the earliest opportunity, which will
bring all of the necessary parties together to establish Somali maritime governance
and prioritize the maritime security forces. The United Nations stands ready to
support the Federal Government of Somalia on this front.
56. The multinational forces’ combined threat assessments suggest that —
provided the collective response mechanisms are maintained — piracy will continue
to be suppressed successfully off the coast of Somalia, even if the intent or
capability are never entirely eliminated. In this regard, I note the key challenges
highlighted by the Combined Maritime Forces, NATO and the European Union

15-16737

11/13

S/2015/776

Naval Force, which include the variable force flow of vessels, aircraft and personnel
of the three multinational naval operations; weaknesses in the regional capacity for
arrest, prosecution and detention of pirates; the root causes of piracy, such as a
fragile economy, including high youth unemployment, linkages to illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing and weak governance structures; the need to
strengthen regional and national capacity, including by addressing identified gaps;
the unstable situation in Yemen, the implications of which are not yet fully
understood but have the potential to profoundly affect the region; and the ongoing
discussions on the transition of military operations beyond 2016.
57. I remain concerned that, without the continued support provided by the
international naval presence and the self-protection measures adopted by the
shipping industry, large-scale piracy may return. While capacity-building efforts
ashore are under way, they have yet to produce lasting and sustainable effects. I cal l
upon the international community to increase its support to Somali efforts in the
areas of governance, the rule of law and economic development to tackle the root
causes of piracy off the coast of Somalia. Although the Trust Fund to Support the
Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and its partners have
been tackling some root causes, including livelihoods for at -risk young people, more
needs to be done on a systematic and larger scale, in coordination with the Somali
Compact.
58. In addition, I call upon the international community to cooperate in halting
foreign illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing in the Somali exclusive
economic zone through the sharing of information, the regulation of foreign fishing
vessels, and support to the Somali authorities in developing a licensing regime for
foreign vessels. This has the potential to generate much -needed revenue, which
could be invested in tackling the root causes of piracy.
59. The importance of following a complete judicial process, which involves
support to the region to carry out the arrest, detention, prosecution, trial and
conviction of pirates in compliance with human rights, is crucial to breaking the
“catch and release” cycle of impunity. To enable this, a clear legal framework
governing maritime security must be in place throughout Somalia. In this regard, the
commitments made by the Federal Government of Somalia, the interim regional
administrations and the “Somaliland” authorities to enact appropriate legislation to
enable governance and policing of the maritime domain are very welcome.
60. The international community should continue to support the efforts of the
Somali authorities to prosecute and punish individuals suspected of piracy in
compliance with international human rights law. Adherence to international human
rights standards is fundamental in tackling not only maritime piracy but also larger
threats to international peace and security. I welcome efforts by States to ensure that
suspects are given a fair trial and that their conditions of imprisonment are humane
and secure.
61. I also welcome Seychelles taking on a leadership role as the next Chair of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. I further welcome the initiative
of Seychelles of commencing the first trial before the country’s newly established
court for piracy and maritime crime. Funding for the facility was obtained through
an exemplary collaboration between UNODC, the Governments of the Netherlands
and the United Kingdom and the Trust Fund.

12/13

15-16737

S/2015/776

62. In addition to efforts towards the prosecution and sentencing of pirates, it is
important to coordinate international efforts that target the financing, money laundering and support structures on which the piracy networks survive. It is
therefore important to continue international support for the work of the law
enforcement task force of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. It
is also important that the Federal Government of Somalia implements international
standards, including by becoming a State party to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, strengthening its law enforcement capacity,
and enhancing collaboration with other countries, including on extradition
agreements.
63. Pirate criminal enterprises are often also involved in other organized criminal
activities, such as human trafficking and the drug trade. The Indian Ocean Forum on
Maritime Crime, which involves more than 20 coastal States, from South Africa in
the west to Australia in the east, is the type of regional body that is needed to tackle
wider maritime criminality.
64. I applaud the continued programmatic support of stakeholders to regional
organizations of Eastern and Southern Africa, including the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa, the East African Community, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the Indian Ocean Commission, to combat maritime
crime in the Indian Ocean. Such support remains critical to strengthening the
capacity of the region to respond to maritime crime.
65. I reiterate my call for the immediate and unconditional release of all innocent
seafarers held hostage in Somalia so that they can be reunited with their families. I
call upon the Somali authorities and all relevant stakeholders to re double their
efforts to secure the immediate release of the hostages. Meanwhile, I encourage
Governments, industry and humanitarian organizations to help to alleviate the
suffering of piracy survivors and their families, including by contributing to the
Piracy Survivor Family Fund of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia.
66. The activities to support development, governance and the rule of law in
Somalia are the final “hard laps” that must be run if we are to secure sustained
victory against piracy. Only through such efforts can we reach the bedrock that will
underpin the elimination of piracy as a threat, namely, a peaceful and stable
Somalia. Sustained international cooperation and the support of naval forces must
also continue to further suppress organized criminal networks that target merchant
vessels. The United Nations remains committed to continuing its support to the
efforts of the people and Federal Government of Somalia to eliminate the scourge of
piracy.

15-16737

13/13
