S/2020/1280

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 22 December 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2559 (2020), related
to the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South
Sudan” and adopted on 22 December 2020. Resolution 2559 (2020) was adopted
in accordance with the voting procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council dated 27 March 2020 (S/2020/253), a procedure agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Pursuant to that procedure, I enclose herewith copies of the related documents:
My letter dated 21 December 2020, addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (see annex 1), putting to the vote the draft
resolution contained in document S/2020/1270 (see enclosure to annex 1);
Letters received in reply from Security Council members indicating their
national positions on the draft resolution (see annexes 2 to 16).
Statements subsequently submitted by Security Council members providing
their explanations of vote (see annexes 17 to 20).
This letter and its enclosures will be issued as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
President of the Security Council

20-17701 (E) 301220 220121

*2017701*

S/2020/1280

Annex 1
Letter dated 21 December 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council
In accordance with the procedure agreed upon by the members of the
Security Council in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
coronavirus disease pandemic, as set out in the letter dated 27 March 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the members of the Council
(S/2020/253), I would like to draw your attention to the following.
The members of the Council have discussed a draft resolution, submitted
by Germany and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, in
connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
and South Sudan”. That draft resolution, contained in document S/2020/1270 and
enclosed herein, has been put into blue.
In my capacity as President of the Security Council, I hereby put the
above-mentioned draft resolution to a vote. The non-extendable 24-hour voting
period for this draft resolution will begin at 4 p.m. on Monday, 21 December
2020. The non-extendable 24-hour voting period will expire at 4 p.m. on Tuesday,
22 December 2020.
Please submit your vote (in favour, against or abstain) on the draft resolution,
as well as your possible explanation of vote, by sending a letter signed by the
Permanent Representative or Chargé d’affaires a.i. within the non-extendable
24-hour voting period set out above to the Officer-in-charge of the Security Council
Affairs Division in the United Nations Secretariat (sutterlin@un.org).
It is my intention to circulate a letter listing the outcome of the vote within
three hours of the conclusion of the 24-hour voting period. I also intend to convene
a video-teleconference of the Security Council to announce the outcome of the
vote shortly after the conclusion of the voting period, on the afternoon of Tuesday,
22 December 2020.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
President of the Security Council

2/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

Enclosure

S/2020/1270

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional
21 December 2020
Original: English

Germany and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland: draft resolution
The Security Council,
Reaffirming all its previous resolutions and presidential statements concerning
the situation in Sudan and underlining the importance of full compliance with and
implementation of these,
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, unity, independence
and territorial integrity of Sudan and its determination to work with the Government
of Sudan, in full respect of its sovereignty, to assist in tackling the various challenges
in Sudan,
Reaffirming the primary responsibility of the Government of Sudan to
protect civilians across its territory, acknowledging in this regard the Government
of Sudan’s National Plan for Civilian Protection (S/2020/429) and taking note of
the commitment of the Government of Sudan, as expressed in the letter of the
Permanent Representative of Sudan of 21 May 2020 (S/2020/429), to assume full
responsibility for the protection of its civilian citizens, to comply strictly with
all international standards for the protection of civilians, including proactive
monitoring and anticipation, increased army and judicial police deployment, and
community protection, and to facilitate humanitarian assistance, including through
full and unhindered humanitarian access and ensuring the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel,
Emphasizing the need for the orderly and safe drawdown of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur’s (UNAMID) military and police
components in line with United Nations best practice,
Expressing its deep appreciation for the work of UNAMID in Sudan and its
overall contribution to the maintenance of peace and security in Darfur since its
establishment in 2007, commending the contribution of troop- and police contributing
countries to UNAMID, and underlining the importance of the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union in Sudan,
Expressing its support for a seamless transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in Darfur, and in this respect underscoring the importance of close
collaboration between UNAMID and the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) and its integrated United Nations

20-177013/27

S/2020/1280

Country Team (UNCT) based on good practices in relation to the transition from
peacekeeping operations to special political missions,
Encouraging the Secretary-General to increase swiftly the capacity of
UNITAMS to provide effective assistance, within its mandate, to the Government
of Sudan,
Welcoming the signing of the Juba Peace Agreement in Juba on 3 October
2020 by the Government of Sudan, the Sudan Revolutionary Front and the Sudan
Liberation Movement-Minni Minawi, congratulating Sudan and its people for this
historic achievement, which represents a significant opportunity for comprehensive
and sustainable peace in Sudan and an important milestone of the transition period
towards a peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous future for Sudan, commending
the parties to the negotiations for their political will and commitment, and also
welcoming the role of the Government of South Sudan in facilitating the negotiations,
Encouraging the signatories of the peace agreement to begin swiftly the
process of implementation, particularly of key provisions of the agreement pertaining
to security arrangements and addressing the root causes of conflict in Darfur and the
Two Areas and to ensure the full, effective and meaningful participation of women
in its implementation, urging the armed movements that have forces in Libya, as
documented by both the United Nations Panels of Experts for Libya and for Sudan,
to withdraw them immediately, and noting that the peace agreement provides
for a specific role for the United Nations in supporting the implementation of its
provisions,
Urging those who have yet to join the peace process with the Government
of Sudan to do so immediately, constructively and without pre-conditions in order
to conclude swiftly negotiations on a comprehensive peace agreement, and calling
upon all international actors to continue encouraging non-participatory parties in
this regard,
Taking note of the Special Report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations (S/2020/1115),
in particular the recommendation that UNAMID’s mandate be terminated by 31
December 2020 and the estimate that the environmental clean-up, the removal of
UNAMID’s footprint and the repatriation from closed locations of staff, troops
and police will take an estimated six months, subject to COVID-19 and the rainy
season, and underscoring that a reasonable time will be required for the liquidation
of UNAMID following its withdrawal,
Taking note of the African Union Peace and Security Council’s Communiqué
of 30 November 2020 (PSC/PR/COMM. (CMLXVIII)),
Acknowledging the views expressed by the Government of Sudan regarding
the future of UNAMID during the consultations between the Government of Sudan,
the United Nations and the African Union in Khartoum between 22 and 25 October
2020, as documented, inter alia, in the abovementioned Special Report,
1. Decides to terminate the mandate of UNAMID as of 31 December 2020;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to commence the drawdown of UNAMID
personnel on 1 January 2021 and to complete the withdrawal of all uniformed and
civilian UNAMID personnel by 30 June 2021, other than those required for the
mission’s liquidation;
3. Decides to authorise, for the duration of UNAMID’s drawdown and
liquidation, the retention of a guard unit from within UNAMID’s existing footprint
to protect UNAMID’s personnel, facilities and assets;
4/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

4. Urges the Government of Sudan to fully and swiftly implement the
National Plan for Civilian Protection (S/2020/429) and to protect civilians in Darfur
in accordance with international human rights law and international humanitarian
law and underscores the need to build confidence of local communities in the ability
of the rule of law institutions to deliver justice, ensure accountability and provide
legal protection to vulnerable communities, including displaced persons, women,
youth, and other marginalised groups;
5. Requests the Government of Sudan to fully respect all provisions of the
Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) of 9 February 2008 until the departure of the
final element of UNAMID from Sudan, in particular the provisions relating to the
safety and security of UNAMID which inter alia stipulates that the Government of
Sudan shall take all appropriate measures to ensure the safety, security and freedom
of movement of UNAMID, its members and associated personnel and their property
and assets, and shall take all appropriate steps to protect members of UNAMID and
its associated personnel and their equipment and premises;
6. Calls upon the Government of Sudan, at all levels, to cooperate fully with the
United Nations and the African Union during UNAMID’s drawdown and liquidation
in order to ensure the orderly and safe withdrawal of the mission, in line with the
agreed outcome of the 28th Tripartite Coordination Mechanism (TCM) meeting on
UNAMID on 25 October 2020, and in particular by granting unimpeded access
by the United Nations to UNAMID premises until an agreed handover, ensuring
full freedom of movement of UNAMID, its personnel and its contractors as well as
of their vehicles and aircrafts, unimpeded redeployment of UNAMID’s equipment,
supplies and other assets within Sudan, the unimpeded export by the United Nations
of its equipment, supplies and other assets, and the continued granting of visas for
personnel required for the drawdown and liquidation of UNAMID, and noting that
in implementing UNAMID’s drawdown and liquidation the United Nations will
comply with general United Nations practices and financial regulations;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Government of Sudan, via TCM, to assess on a regular basis
the progress of drawdown and withdrawal and act as a clearing-house to address any
issues that might arise in this context;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to continue and expedite
transition planning and management in accordance with the established policies,
directives and best practices in order to ensure that the transition from UNAMID
to UNITAMS is phased, sequenced and efficient, and further reiterates in this
regard, that UNAMID and UNITAMS should continue to closely cooperate via the
established coordination mechanism to determine the modalities and timelines for
the transition of responsibilities where the two missions have common strategic
objectives and priorities in Darfur and to ensure close coordination and cooperation,
information and analysis sharing, and to maximise synergies, leverage resources and
prevent the duplication of efforts;
9. Calls on UNAMID to establish with the United Nations Country Team,
as part of the UNAMID transition and drawdown process, appropriate arrangements
enabling the United Nations Country Team to oversee the residual activities of
programmatic cooperation which was initiated by UNAMID in 2020 but which
has not yet completed implementation due to the COVID-19 pandemic, to ensure a
smooth transition of peacebuilding support and support for capacity development of
the Government of Sudan in Darfur;
10. Further reiterates its requests to UNAMID to ensure that team sites and
assets are handed over in line with general United Nations practices and financial
20-177015/27

S/2020/1280

regulations, taking all practical steps and precautions to ensure the assets are safely
transferred to the control of the designated entity, and calls upon UNAMID and
the Government of Sudan to finalise swiftly a revised framework agreement which
ensures the principle of civilian end-use and the security and physical integrity of
the handed-over UNAMID team sites and assets that will not be used by UNITAMS
and its integrated United Nations Country Team partners;
11. Acknowledges the Government of Sudan’s commitment, in line with
United Nations rules and regulations, to use handed-over UNAMID team sites
exclusively for civilian end-user purposes, and urges the Government of Sudan to
ensure that UNAMID team sites previously handed-over and team sites that will be
handed over in the future are utilised to this effect;
12. Further reiterates its call upon the Government of Sudan to swiftly
conclude its ongoing investigations into looting of previously handed-over UNAMID
team sites, and further calls upon the Government of Sudan to continue to hold
accountable individuals who participated in such looting incidents;
13. Requests UNAMID, member states and the Government of Sudan to take all
appropriate steps to protect the safety, security and health of all UNAMID personnel,
in line with resolution 2518 (2020), including by allowing medical evacuations, in
order to prevent the spread of COVID-19 during the course of UNAMID’s drawdown
and withdrawal;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Security Council regularly
informed about the all relevant developments in relation with the drawdown and
withdrawal of UNAMID as an annex to the regular reporting requested on UNITAMS
in resolution 2524 (2020), and an oral briefing by 31 July 2021 on the completion of
UNAMID’s drawdown and closure;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Security Council with an
assessment on lessons learned from the experience of UNAMID no later than 31
October 2021;
16. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

6/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

Annex 2
Letter dated 22 December 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Belgium to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to the letter dated 21 December 2020 from the President of the
Security Council relating to draft resolution S/2020/1270 under the agenda item
entitled “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”.
In accordance with the procedure set forth for the adoption of draft resolutions
under the current extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, I am pleased to indicate that Belgium votes in favour of
this draft resolution. At this stage, my delegation does not intend to deliver an
explanation of vote.
(Signed) Philippe Kridelka
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations

20-177017/27

S/2020/1280

Annex 3
Letter dated 21 December 2020 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I would like to thank you, Sir, and your team for the strong support in
facilitating the voting procedure.
Please be kindly informed that China votes in favour of draft resolution
S/2020/1270, submitted by Germany and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland in connection with the agenda item “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”.
(Signed) Dai Bing
Ambassador
Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations

8/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

Annex 4
Letter dated 21 December 2020 from the Special Envoy to the
Security Council of the Dominican Republic addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I refer to your letter dated 21 December 2020, regarding the draft resolution
contained in document S/2020/1270 under the agenda item “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”.
Upon instructions from my Government, the delegation of the Dominican
Republic votes in favour of the above-mentioned draft resolution.
(Signed) José Singer Weisinger
Ambassador
Special Envoy to the Security Council of the Dominican Republic

20-177019/27

S/2020/1280

Annex 5
Letter dated 22 December 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Estonia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to inform you that, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, my delegation votes in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by Germany and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland regarding the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, contained in document S/2020/1270.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Estonia to the United Nations

10/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

Annex 6
Letter dated 22 December 2020 from the Deputy Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
[Original: French]
I refer to the letter dated 21 December 2020 calling on the members of the
Security Council to vote on the draft resolution submitted by Germany and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland under the agenda item “Reports
of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, put into blue under the
symbol S/2020/1270. France votes in favour.
(Signed) Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
Ambassador
Deputy Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations

20-1770111/27

S/2020/1280

Annex 7
Letter dated 22 December 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
It is my honour to write to you in response to the letter from the President of
the Security Council dated 21 December 2020 initiating a written voting procedure
in line with the agreement reached among the members of the Security Council.
The vote of the Federal Republic of Germany on the draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
Federal Republic of Germany in connection with the agenda item “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan” and as contained in document
S/2020/1270 is as follows.
The Federal Republic of Germany votes in favour of the above-mentioned
draft resolution. Please find attached an explanation of vote in this regard (annex 17).
(Signed) Christoph Heusgen
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations

12/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

Annex 8
Letter dated 21 December 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Indonesia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I am writing in reference to the letter dated 21 December 2020 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa to the United Nations, in his capacity as the
President of the Security Council, regarding the draft resolution for the withdrawal
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2020/1270).
I hereby indicate that Indonesia votes in favour of the said draft resolution.
(Signed) Dian Triansyah Djani
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Indonesia
to the United Nations

20-1770113/27

S/2020/1280

Annex 9
Letter dated 21 December 2020 from the Chargé d’affaires of
the Niger to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I am writing in response to the letter dated 21 December 2020 from the
President of the Security Council, calling on the members of the Council to vote on
the draft resolution (S/2020/1270) submitted by Germany and the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in connection with the agenda item “Reports
of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”.
In accordance with the agreed temporary procedures for the adoption of draft
resolutions during the coronavirus disease pandemic restrictions, I have the honour
to indicate that the Republic of the Niger votes in favour of the said draft resolution.
(Signed) Niandou Aougi
Minister Counsellor
Chargé d’affaires of the Niger to the United Nations

14/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

Annex 10
Letter dated 22 December 2020 from the First Deputy Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 21 December
2020, on the beginning of the voting procedure for the draft resolution in connection
with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South
Sudan” (S/2020/1270).
In accordance with the procedure for the adoption of draft resolutions of the
Security Council being in place for the duration of the restrictions on movement
in New York due to the coronavirus disease pandemic outlined in a letter dated
27 March 2020 from the President of the Security Council (S/2020/253), I have
the honour to inform you that the Russian Federation votes in favour of the draft
resolution contained in document S/2020/1270.
(Signed) Dmitry A. Polyanskiy
Ambassador
First Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations

20-1770115/27

S/2020/1280

Annex 11
Letter dated 22 December 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the draft resolution (S/2020/1270) submitted
by Germany and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in
connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
and South Sudan”.
In that respect, I wish to inform you that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
votes in favour of the above-mentioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
to the United Nations

16/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

Annex 12
Letter dated 21 December 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council
I refer to your letter dated 21 December 2020 regarding the draft resolution
submitted by Germany and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland in connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General on the
Sudan and South Sudan”, contained in document S/2020/1270.
The delegation of the Republic of South Africa votes in favour of the abovementioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of South Africa to the United Nations

20-1770117/27

S/2020/1280

Annex 13
Letter dated 21 December 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
Further to the letter dated 21 December 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, in his capacity as President of the Security Council,
regarding the draft resolution submitted by Germany and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland in connection with the agenda item “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, as contained in document
S/2020/1270, I would like to inform you that Tunisia votes in favour of that draft
resolution.
(Signed) Tarek Ladeb
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations

18/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

Annex 14
Letter dated 21 December 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
With reference to the letter from the President of the Security Council dated
21 December 2020, the United Kingdom votes in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2020/1270) in connection with the agenda item “Reports of the Secretary-General
on the Sudan and South Sudan”.
(Signed) Barbara Woodward
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations

20-1770119/27

S/2020/1280

Annex 15
Letter dated 21 December 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
On the draft resolution submitted by Germany and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland in connection with the agenda item “Reports
of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan” (S/2020/1270), the United
States of America votes in favour.
(signed) Kelly Craft
Ambassador
Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations

20/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

Annex 16
Letter dated 22 December 2020 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of
Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
In reference to the letter from the President of the Security Council dated
21 December 2020 relating to the draft resolution under the agenda item entitled
“Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, as contained in
document S/2020/1270, I would like to hereby inform you that Viet Nam votes in
favour of said draft resolution.
(Signed) Pham Hai Anh
Ambassador
Chargé d'affaires a.i. of Viet Nam to the United Nations

20-1770121/27

S/2020/1280

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations
In 2007, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), the first joint African Union and United Nations peacekeeping mission,
was deployed in order to protect civilians and humanitarian operations and help
bring stability to the war-torn Darfur region of the Sudan. Today, more than 13 years
later, the Security Council will close the chapter of peacekeeping in Darfur, as the
Sudan continues to make progress in its democratic transition.
The draft resolution presented to the Security Council by the penholders, the
United Kingdom and Germany, and just adopted as resolution 2559 (2020), lays out
the modalities of UNAMID’s drawdown for a period of six months, followed by a
subsequent liquidation period. It will provide a legal basis for a safe and orderly
withdrawal and help ensure a smooth transition as the Government of the Sudan
assumes full responsibility for the protection of civilians in Darfur.
The penholders have engaged extensively with the Government of the
Sudan before and during the negotiations. We are convinced that resolution 2559
(2020) is fully in line with the requests of the Government of the Sudan, as well
as the recommendations of the African Union-United Nations joint special report
on terminating UNAMID’s mandate as of 31 December 2020 and subsequently
commencing the mission’s drawdown and liquidation. We welcome the Government
of the Sudan’s commitment to fully cooperating with the United Nations during
this period.
However, we regret that the mission will not be able to continue to complete
the remainder of its tasks, as is — and should remain — established practice during
the drawdown of peacekeeping missions. With the end of UNAMID’s mandate, the
Government of the Sudan must be ready to fill the gap left by the departure of the
mission. While the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan will assist the authorities, it is not designed to replace UNAMID in terms of
providing physical protection. Germany therefore urges the Sudanese Government
to expedite its preparations for protecting civilians in line with its own national plan
for civilian protection (see S/2020/429).
We would like to thank all Council members for their constructive engagement
on the text of the draft resolution. We also thank the United Kingdom for its excellent
cooperation as fellow penholder on the Sudan file during Germany’s tenure as a nonpermanent member of the Security Council over the past two years. Most of all, our
gratitude goes to the brave mission staff of UNAMID, who have done their utmost
to assist the people of the Sudan in their quest for durable peace.

22/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
Indonesia welcomes the adoption of the resolution 2559 (2020) on
the withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
We commend the penholders, Germany and the United Kingdom, for their
efforts aimed at reaching consensus. We also commend the Council’s unity in
supporting the Sudan in this transition.
Indonesia voted in favour of resolution 2559 (2020), as we are confident that
the Sudan is ready to embark on a new chapter in which the country will move
towards peace, stability and prosperity. In this regard, we welcome the fact that
the Security Council, through resolution 2559 (2020), emphasizes the importance of
the Sudan’s national ownership of its transition while fully respecting the country’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Resolution 2559 (2020) leaves no room for misinterpretation on the logistics
of the drawdown or on the Sudan’s leading role in this transition. As one of the
largest troop- and police-contributing countries in UNAMID and a current member
of the Security Council, Indonesia is honoured to have served in UNAMID along
with other United Nations members and the States members of the African Union.
We welcome the responsible withdrawal of UNAMID on 31 December 2020,
followed by a six-month cleaning-up period. This withdrawal should be conducted
while ensuring the safety, security and well-being of all peacekeepers and staff
serving in UNAMID.
The challenges in the Sudan’s transition call for all parties to ensure that all
of the progress made in the country be sustained and further enhanced. We are
confident that with support from the international community and countries of the
region, the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
will be able to fulfil its role in advising, assisting and supporting the Government of
the Sudan, including in the implementation of its national plan for civilian protection
(see S/2020/429).
Finally, allow me to close my statement by once again congratulating the
Sudan as it embarks on a new chapter of its journey. Rest assured that Indonesia
remains committed to supporting the Sudan on the road towards everlasting peace
and prosperity.

20-1770123/27

S/2020/1280

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2559 (2020), which
outlines the modalities of an orderly and safe withdrawal of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). With the adoption of this
resolution, the Security Council has reaffirmed the importance of the safety and
security of peacekeepers and further advanced the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding in Darfur. However, we regret that it was not possible to adopt a
more prudent resolution — one that would have enabled UNAMID to continue to
provide support to the Government of the Sudan and the people of Darfur during
its drawdown, in line with recent Security Council precedent on the closure of
United Nations peacekeeping missions.
United Nations peacekeeping missions in Haiti, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Timor-Leste all had mandates until the end of their drawdowns. The
position of the Government of the Sudan, the recommendation of the United Nations
and the African Union and subsequently the position adopted by some members of the
Security Council prevented the Council from following this precedent. UNAMID’s
mandate will therefore end on 31 December, despite the fact that approximately
7,000 uniformed personnel and 900 civilian staff remain on the ground in Darfur.
All they will be able to do is pack their bags and wait to leave the region.
Given the size and location of UNAMID within the Sudan, the mission’s
withdrawal will be unlike any recent United Nations peacekeeping closure. This
enormous logistical challenge is likely to be further complicated by the ongoing
coronavirus disease pandemic. Furthermore, there is a troubling precedent of the
looting of handed-over UNAMID team sites and assets, which rendered them useless
to the local authorities and the people of Darfur.
The Government of the Sudan requested the termination of UNAMID’s
mandate. It now has a responsibility at both the national and local levels to cooperate
fully with the United Nations and the African Union during UNAMID’s drawdown
and liquidation. The United Kingdom urges the Government to take all steps necessary
to ensure that UNAMID, its personnel and their contingent-owned equipment can
depart from Darfur in an orderly and safe manner. We also call upon the Government
of the Sudan to ensure the security of handed-over UNAMID team sites that will not
be used by the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) or its integrated country team and, in line with existing agreements,
ensure their utilization exclusively for civilian end-user purposes to benefit the
people of Darfur.
In the light of the termination of UNAMID’s mandate, the responsibility
for security — and specifically for protecting civilians in Darfur — now rests
solely with the Government of the Sudan. As recent spikes of violence in Darfur
highlight, this will not be an easy undertaking. The United Kingdom welcomes the
Government of the Sudan’s strong commitment to fully assuming its responsibilities
and urges them to swiftly implement their national plan for civilian protection (see
S/2020/429). In addition, we urge all parties to uphold all their commitments in
the recently agreed Juba peace agreement and ensure its full implementation. Once
fully operational, UNITAMS will be able to play an important role in supporting
the Sudanese authorities to build their civilian-protection capacities. In this regard,
we call on the Government of the Sudan to cooperate fully with the United Nations

24/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

as it seeks to swiftly operationalize UNITAMS and ensure that its transition from
UNAMID is sustainable.
While resolution 2559 (2020) sets a clear path for the orderly and safe
withdrawal of UNAMID and the transition to UNITAMS, we do not believe that it
should set a precedent for future peacekeeping withdrawals. The United Kingdom
hopes, where possible, the Council — and the United Nations — can return to
the former best practice of providing peacekeeping missions with mandates until
the completion of their withdrawals as a means to ensuring safe and sustainable
transitions from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.

20-1770125/27

S/2020/1280

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United States of America
to the United Nations
When the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) was established in 2007, it was the largest peacekeeping operation of its
kind. It was also the only peacekeeping operation led jointly by the African Union
and United Nations.
Over 10 years later, today we mark the end of UNAMID as well as the end
of an era. The United States recognizes the contributions and leadership of the
United Nations and the African Union, as well as of the many troop- and policecontributing countries that helped protect civilians and advance peace in Darfur.
We also recognize the 288 UNAMID personnel who have paid the ultimate price in
advancing peace and security for the region and the world. We will always honour
their sacrifices and those of their families.
While UNAMID experienced many challenges, we have no doubt it is leaving
behind a safer and more peaceful Darfur. UNAMID’s contributions to strengthening
the Sudanese police and providing a voice for Darfuris in peace negotiations will
continue to yield benefits over the long term. UNAMID’s State liaison functions,
which worked to transfer rule-of-law and peacebuilding activities from the mission
to the United Nations country team, now serve as a model for peace and conflict
transitions around the world. We look forward to the United Nations Secretariat’s
assessment of the lessons learned from UNAMID to further guide United Nations
peacekeeping mission transitions moving forward.
Despite UNAMID’s achievements, the United States recognizes that the
conflict in Darfur is not over. The Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan is a key
pillar in building a more inclusive governance structure in the Sudan, yet it does not
include the Sudanese Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction, which continues to
hold territory in Darfur. Fighting also continues in the Jebel Marra region, and over
1.8 million people remain displaced across Darfur. Many of these displaced persons
live in camps where Sudanese authorities provide little or no security or support
services. A generation has been born and raised in these camps, and these people
deserve a better future.
We strongly urge the Government of the Sudan to cooperate with UNAMID as
the mission draws down. Even though UNAMID will cease all operations effective 31
December, the mission needs time and the continued ability to move freely throughout
its current operational area in Darfur in order to remove its equipment and personnel
from the 18 remaining team sites. UNAMID and the Sudanese authorities must also
take the time needed to ensure that UNAMID team sites are handed over responsibly
and that proper precautions are in place to avoid the problems with looting seen
previously. Once they are handed over, the sites should be used for civilian purposes
only, such as universities or training centres. All efforts should be made to ensure
the security of these sites and their associated property and equipment.
As conflicts continue in Darfur, the Sudanese authorities are now fully
responsible for protecting civilians and preventing violent incidents from beginning
in the first place. While we welcome the Government of the Sudan’s national plan
for civilian protection (see S/2020/429), we strongly urge the Sudanese authorities to
step up the Plan’s implementation, particularly with regard to developing community
policing initiatives for displaced persons in Darfur.
We also call on the Sudanese leaders to be fully transparent about the proposed
members of the new joint security force to enable vetting and ensure exclusion
26/27

20-17701

S/2020/1280

of individuals responsible for human rights violations or abuses, or violations of
international humanitarian law. The Sudanese leaders must also ensure that all such
abuses or violations are investigated whether they date back to the early days of the
conflict or are more recent, and that those responsible are brought to justice. For true
lasting peace, there must be accountability.
We look forward to learning how the United Nations Interim Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan — the new special political mission — can and will
support the Sudan in protecting civilians and building trust between Darfuris and
the new joint force.
Since 2007, our Governments and many others contributed significantly to
UNAMID. Our combined contributions require continued vigilance and monitoring
to ensure that the Sudan upholds its responsibilities as UNAMID draws down, most
notably in terms of its responsibility to protect civilians.
The United States stands with the people of Darfur and the Sudan at this
momentous time. We remain a steadfast partner in support of peace and security in
the region.

20-1770127/27
