UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/71
26 November 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3466th meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 November 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council reiterates its deep concern over the
deteriorating situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
particularly the Bihac region, and especially in the safe area of Bihac.
It condemns in the strongest possible terms all the violations of the safe
area of Bihac by whomsoever committed, and in particular, the flagrant and
blatant entry into the safe area by the Bosnian Serb forces. It also notes
with concern the hostilities around Velika Kladusa. It demands that all
parties and others concerned agree to and implement an immediate and
unconditional cease-fire in the Bihac region, and in particular in and
around the safe area of Bihac. It calls on all parties to intensify
negotiations for a cease-fire and a cessation of hostilities throughout the
territory of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina in pursuit of the
territorial settlement for the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina proposed
by the Contact Group as part of an overall peace settlement.
"The Security Council expresses its full support for the continued
efforts by United Nations personnel to achieve a cease-fire in the Bihac
area, as well as for UNPROFOR’s efforts to implement its mandate to deter
attacks against the safe areas. The Council insists on the withdrawal of
all Bosnian Serb military forces from the Bihac safe area and on the need
to ensure full respect by all parties of the safe areas, particularly for
the benefit of the civilian population. The Council calls on all parties
and others concerned fully to cooperate with these efforts. The Council
underlines the terms of resolution 836 (1993), which enable UNPROFOR to
carry out its mandate in relation to safe areas.
"The Security Council commends UNPROFOR, including those of its
personnel serving in the Bihac region, and in particular the Bangladeshi
troops, for the important contributions they are making under the most
difficult conditions. It calls on the parties and all others concerned to

94-46881 (E)

261194

/...

S/PRST/1994/71
English
Page 2

ensure freedom of movement for UNPROFOR and UNHCR personnel and access to
necessary supplies for UNPROFOR and the civilian population throughout the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of Croatia.
"The Security Council condemns violations of the international border
between the Republic of Croatia and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
by the so-called Krajina Serb forces and others concerned in the Bihac
region. It demands that all hostile acts across that international border
cease immediately and also demands that all so-called Krajina Serb forces
withdraw immediately from the territory of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
"The Security Council reiterates its full support for the proposed
territorial settlement for the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina which has
been put by the Contact Group to the parties as part of an overall peace
settlement. The Council reiterates its condemnation of the Bosnian Serb
party’s refusal to accept the proposed territorial settlement and demands
that that party accept it unconditionally and in full.
"The Security Council will monitor compliance with the terms of this
statement and react appropriately."

-----
