Re10Jutiou1 adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

( b) The need for additional humanitarian international conventions or for other appropriate legal instruments to ensure the better protection of civilians, prisoners and combatants in all armed conflicts and the
prohibition and limitation of the use of certain methods
and means of warfare ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take all other
necessary steps to give effect to the provisions of the
present resolution and to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session on the steps he has
taken;
4. Further requests ::\Iember States to extend all
possible assistance to the Secretary-General in the preparation of the study requested in paragraph 2 above;
5. Calls upon all States which have not yet done so
to become parties to the Hague Conventions of 1899
and 1907,30 the Geneva Protocal of 1925 37 and the
Geneva Conventions of 1949. 38
1748th plenary 111ecting,
19 December 1968.

2445 (XXIII). Teaching in schools of the
purposes and principles of tile Charter of
the United Nations and the structure and
activities of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies, with particular reference to human rights
The General Assembly,
Considering that the International Year for Human
Rights should be.the occasion for new efforts to improve
the standard of knowledge about the United Nations
and, in particular, about its efforts in the field of human
rights,
Recalling its resolutions 137 (II) of 17 November
1947 and 1511 (XV) of 12 December 1960 concerning
the teaching in schools of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the structure
and activities of the Organization and the specialized
agencies,
Considering that such teaching is not yet sufficiently
widespread, in particular in primary and secondary
schools, despite the efforts of 1Iember States and of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
Convinced that in order to achieve the desired results
such teaching must start at an early stage of education,
Conscious of the fact that young people cannot receive training which meets the requirements of a world
increasingly characterized by the interdependence of
peoples if educators do not themselves receive special
instruction in international organization,
1. Requests States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies and of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to take steps,
as appropriate and according to the scholastic system
of each State, to introduce or encourage:
(a) The regular study of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies and of the principles proclaimed
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in
other declarations on human rights, in the training of
teaching staff for primary and secondary schools;

SI

~ b) Progressive instruction on the subject in question in the curricula of primary and secondary schools,
inviting teachers to seize the opportunities, provided by
teaching, of drawing the attention of their pupils to the
increasing role of the United Nations system in peaceful co-operation among nations and in joint efforts
to promote social justice and economic and social progress in the world ;
2. Fti, ther requests States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies and of
the International Atomic Energy Agency to draw the
attention of the competent authorities in private scholastic institutions to the present resolution and to invite
them to make the necessary efforts for the achievement
of the aims envisaged in paragraph 1 above ;
3. Requests the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization to continue and to encourage the study of appropriate ways and means
of promoting the achievement of the .aims envisaged
in the present resolution ;
4. Further requests the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and the other
specialized agencies concerned and th,: United Nations
Development Programme to provide assistance to Member States, particularly those which are developing
countries, with a view to enabling them to achieve the
objectives envisaged in paragraph 1 above.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

Co1wffltions 011d Declaratioiis 1899-1907 (New York, Oxford

2446 (XXIII). Meaaures to achieve the rapid and
total elimination of all forms of racial
discrimination in general and of the policy
of apartheid in particular
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned that during the International Year
for Human Rights large-scale violations of human rights
and fundamental freedoms continue to take place,
Gra1:'ely ~once:ned about the continuing eviction and
detent10n, 1mpnsonment and murder of nationalists
and freedom fighters in southern Africa and in colonial
Territories,
Noting resolutions III, IV and VIII of 11 May 1968
of th~ International Conference on Human Rights811
pledgmi ~up~ort for mea~u~es to achieve the rapid and
total ehmmat1on of coloma!tsm and all forms of racial
discrimination in general and of apartheid in particular
and for the treatment as prisoners of war of captured
freedom fighters opposed to the policies of apartheid
and colonialism,
1. Condemns the Governments of South Africa and
Portugal for their persistent defiant stand towards the
United Nations and world opinion in respect of their
policies of apartheid and colonialism, respectively;
2. Further condemns the. policy of racial discrimination of the illegal minority regime in Southern Rhodesia
and deplores the refusal of the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Nor.them
Ireland, as the administering Power, to take effective
measures to suppress this illegal regime and to ensure
human rights and fundamental freedoms to the people
of Zimbabwe ;
3. Censures the Governments of South Africa and
P<?rtu~al f?r. assi_sting and collaborat_ing with the illegal
minority regime m Southern Rhodesia;

8T League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929),
No. 2138.
as United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos. 970-973.

89 See Final Act of lht Intematiot1al Co11ferenct on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2~,
pp. 6, 7 and 9.

-

88 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace,

The Hague

University Press, 1918).

52

General AHembly-Twenty-tbird Seuion

4. Confirms the views of the International Conference
on Human Rights, held at Teheran, which recognized
and vigoro~sly supported the legitimacy of the struggle
of the peoples and patriotic liberation movements in
southern Africa and in colonial Territories, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions;
5. Further confirms the decision taken by the International Conference on Human Rights to recognize the
right of freedom fighters in southern Africa and in
colonial Territories to be treated, when captured, as
prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions of
1949 ;40
6. Appeals to all Stcrt:es and organizations dedicated
to the ideals of freedom, independence and peace to
continue to give political, moral and material assistance
to peoples struggling against all forms of racial discrimination and colonialism;
7. Calls 1ipon all States to sever all relations with
South Africa, Portugal and the illegal minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia and to refrain scrupulously from
giving any military or economic assistance to these
regimes;
8. Requests the United Nations organs and the
specialized agencies concerned to continue to give all
appropriate assistance to the patriotic freedom movements in colonial Territories and in southern Africa
am! to keep this matter under constant review;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member States, to prepare a programme
for the celebration in 1971 of the International Year for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2447 (XXIII). Education of youth in the respect
for human rights and fundamental
freedoms
The General Assembly,
Noting resolution XX on education of youth in the
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
adopted on 12 May 1968 by the International Conference on Human Rights, 41 as well as paragraph 17
of the Proclamation of Teheran, 42
Noting also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1353 (XLV) and 1354 (XLV) of 2 August 1968 on
youth participation in international co-operation and
on programmes of international action relating to
youth,
Recalling the Declaration on the Promotion among
Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and
Understanding between Peoples proclaimed by the
General Assembly on 7 December 1965,
Aware of the aspirations expressed by large sectors
of the young generation for a more effective protection of human dignity in this age of great scientific,
technological and cultural achievements and of the desire
of youth to have its full share in the accomplishment of
the major humanitarian demands of this century,
C onscio11s of the importance of extending to young
people an education in the spirit of the most noble
humanitarian ideals of mankind and therefore convinced
40 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos. 970-973.
41 See Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),

p. 15.
42 Ibid., p. 3.

that States, the United Nations and other international
organizations, youth organizations and society in general
should undertake continuous and permanent efforts to
that effect,
Convinced that the enthusiasm, energy and creative
ability of the young could be a major factor in the
spiritual and material advancement of all peoples,
the universal promotion of human rights and worldwide economic and social development,
Considering that the United Nations and the specialized agencies, in particular the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, within their
spheres of competence, could provide useful channels
through which the deeply felt concerns of youth could
be better understood and studied and constructive
confrontations between spokesmen of the various generations could be harmoniously conducted,
Taking note of the appeal made by the International
Conference on Human Rights to States to take all
appropriate measures to prepare youth for, and stimulate
its interest in, the creation of a better society,
1. Endorses the appeal made by the International
Conference on Human Rights to States to ensure that
all means of e.ducation should be employed so that youth
may grow up and develop in a spirit of respect for
human dignity and equal rights of man without discrimination as to race, colour, language, sex or faith;
2. Further endorses the recommendations made by
the International Conference on Human Rights, in its
resolution XX, to States, international organizations
and youth organizations ;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
invite the Commission on Human Rights, in co-operation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, to study the question of
the education of youth all over the world with a view
to the development of its personality and the strengthening of its respect for the rights of man and fundamental
freedoms;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange from
time to time for an exchange of information on action
taken by States in their efforts to ensure that young
people are educated and brought up in a spirit of
respect for human rights everywhere and given the
opportunity of playing their part in the implementation
and protection of human rights ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to organize,
within the framework of the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights and in co-operation
with interested Governments, seminars with the participation of persons specially qualified in subjects of
particular concern to youth, including youth leaders;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to .the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session on action
taken in implementation of the present resolution.
1748th plenary meeting,
19 December 1968.

2448 (XXIII). Freedom of information
The General Assembly.

H a'l!iny rcqard to article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which ensures to everyone
the right to freedom of opinion and expression, including freedom to hold opinions without interference and
to seek, receive and impart information and ideas
through any media and regardless of frontiers,
