UNITE.DNATIONS

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1566) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . ,

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . ‘. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
(a) Letter dated 10 December 1970 from the King of Bhutan addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/ 10050);
(b) Report of the Security Council Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Bhutan for membership in the United
Nations (S/10109) . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . .

1

SjPV.1566

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council(symbo1 S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-SIXTH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. Charles W. YOST

(United States of America).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 566)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Admission of new Members:
(a) Letter dated 10 December 1970 from the Ring of
Bhutan addressed to the Secretary-General
(s/10050);
(b) Report of the Security Council Committee on the
Admission of New Members concerning the application of Bhutan for membership in the United
Nations (S/10109).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Admission of new Members:
(a) Letter dated 10 December 1970 from the King of
Bhutan addressed to the Secretary-General (S/10050);
(6) Report of the Security Council Committee on the
Admission of New Members concerning the application
of Bhutan for membership in the United Nations
(S/10109)

1. The PRESIDENT: In a letter dated 9 February 1971
the representative of India has requested to be
allowed to participate in the Council’s discussion of the
application of Bhutan, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to extend an invitation to the representative of
India, in accordance with the practice that has been
followed on previous occasions, to take a place at the
Council table in order to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
[S/10110]

At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. Sen (India) took
a place at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT: I have just been handed a letter from
the representative of Pakistan [S/10112] in which he also
requests permission to participate in the discussion of the
application before the Council this afternoon. Therefore, if
there is no objection, I propose to invite the representative

10 February

MEETING
1971, at 3 p.m.

of Pakistan, on the usual understanding, to take a place at
the Council table in order to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the FYesident, Mr. A. Shahi (Pakistan)
took a place at the Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken yesterday at our 1565th meeting the Security
Council Committee on the Admission of New Members has
submitted a report to the Council, which is before us in
document S/10109, concerning its examination of the
application of Bhutan for membership in the United
Nations. There are no names inscribed on the list to speak
at this time; therefore it is my understanding that the
Council is prepared to act on the draft resolution contained
in paragraph 3 of the Committee’s report. If there is no
request to speak at this stage, we shall consider the draft
resolution.
4. I now put the draft resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted ununimously.1

5. The PRESIDENT: Several representatives have asked to
speak following the adoption of the resolution. The first is
the representative of India, on whom I now call.
6. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, we are indeed grateful
to you and to the Council for having permitted us to
participate in this meeting of the Council.
7. Apart from congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month, we should
like to extend our welcome to those new Members that
were elected to the Council during the last General
Assembly and also to record our appreciation for those who
have retired. As it happens, yesterday’s meeting of the
Council was not only its first meeting in 197 1, and the first
meeting after the conclusion of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations, but also the first meeting since the
application of Bhutan was circulated on 22 December
1970. We .are particularly gratified that such a meeting
should have dealt with the proposed membership of
Bhutan. The Council has just adopted the report of the
Admissions Committee set up under rule 59 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council. We
are pleased that this Committee reported, unanimously and
1 See resolution 292

(1971).

for full economic and social developmentin co-operation
with the rest of the world. Weon our part have done and
will continue to do whatever we can to help these
developmentsin Bhutan.

within a short period, its recommendation that the Security
Council should accept Bhutan’s application for membership. Even though we ourselves would have preferred the
Council to follow the practice of many past years in dealing
with applications for membership of the United Nations,
we are happy that because of the intensive negotiations
conducted infQrmally it was possible to come to this agreed
and welcome decision in a very short period. For these
negotiations I know that you, Mr. President, and your
predecessor in office, Sir Colin Crowe, were working in a
sustained &d determined manner. We are grateful to YOU
both, as indeed to all the members of the Council, for the
decision which has just been arrived at.

11, While my delegationwould like to reiterate on this
occasionthe Governmentof India’s unqualified confidence
in Bhutan’s ability to fulfil the obligationsof the Charter as
a Member of the United Nations, we are at the sametime
confident that Bhutan’smembershipwill be a welcome
asset to this Organizationboth in its political and in its
development activities. I woLld therefore conclude by
welcoming the decision of the Security Council, by
thanking once againthe membersof the Council for their
speed,unity and goodwill and by expressingthe hope that
Bhutan will be a full and active Member of the United
Nations before long. Meanwhile,we pledgeour full suppoti
to work in co-operationwith Bhutan. Wehave consistently
tried to work in harmony with all Asian countries,
particularly with our neighbours,and we look forward to
the closest bonds of friendship, Go-operationand understanding with this new colleagueof ours in the United
Nations.

8. In view of the close ties of friendship and cordiality
between Bhutan and India, the Government of India was
very pleased and privileged to assure the Government of
Bhutan that it would assist Bhutan in every possible way to
ensure that Bhutan became a Member of the United
Nations in the exercise of its full sovereign rights. It may be
recalled that in 1962 India successfully sponsored Bhutan
for membership of the Colombo Plan. In 1969, with our
assistance, Bhutan joined one of the specialized agencies of
the United Nations, the Universal Postal Union. Against
that background, when Bhutan wished to apply for
membership during the twenty-fifth
session of the General
Assembly and after a special delegation led by His Royal
Highness Prince Wangchuk had come and discussed this
question with as many delegations as possible in New York,
we were glad to give such help as was required of us by and
to Bhutan, I am sure that the decision the Security Council
has taken today will bring great satisfaction to the
Government and people of Bhutan, and we in India would
like to join them in sharing this satisfaction.

12. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representativeof India
for his kind remarks.
13. Sir Colin CROWE(United Kingdom): Mr. President,
during my time asPresidentof the Council for January my
delegationtook part in the preliminary consultationson the
question we are consideringtoday. I am sorry that I was
obliged by circumstances
beyond my control to passon the
task uncompleted but I knew that I could not leave it in
more competent handsthan your own. In view of your wise
suggestionat our last meeting,with which I entirely agree,
that in the interestsof efficiency we should dispensewith
formal congratulationsto incomingand outgoing Presidents
I shall say no more on this point; but I must take this
opportunity to thank my colleagues
for the nice things they
said yesterday evenif I cannot approve of their disobeying
your request.

9. The Council’s decision to support Bhutan’s candidature
for admission to the United Nations is but a final
manifestation of Bhutan’s independent stature and nationhood. As one of India’s closest neighbours, Bhutan has
intimate relations with my country in many fields. We have
historical, cultural, econpmic and political links going back
many centuries. Naturally, through the ages we both have
had our ups and downs and we both hope that the lessons
learnt from the past will help us contribute our utmost to
the achievement of the objectives of the Charter. We are
therefore both proud and gratified that Bhutan is about to
enter this great Organization to participate, with the other
Members of the United Nations, in the endeavours to
promote peaceand prosperity all over the world.

14. As the representativeof the United Kingdom, I should
like to expressthe particularpleasureof my Government at
the unanimous adoption by the Security Council of the
resolution recommendingto the General Assembly that
Bhutan should be admitted to membershipof the United
Nations.

10. In the December 1952 issueof 77~ National Geographic Magazine, there is ‘an interesting article by Burt
Kerr Todd entitled “Bhutan, land of the thunder dragon”.
This and many other books written on Bhutan on the one
hand bring out the rich, varied and beautiful nature of the
country and the charm and great gentlenessof its people,
and on the other hand show how Bhutan tried, on the
whole, to keep away from -the daily toil and turmoil of the
rest of the world. I amsure that other speakerswill refer to
these aspectsof Bhutan and I shalltherefore not elaborate
on them. It is gratifying and wholly commendable that
under the able, active and imaginative guidance of its
present monarch, His Majesty King Jigme Dorji Wangchuk,
Bhutan is determined to introduce andpursueprogrammes
2

15. In the year 1774 a British diplomatic agent, George
Bogle, was one of the first Europeansever to visit Bhutan.
The more he sawof the Bhutanesethe more he liked them.
Writing about the people,he said:
“The simplicity of their manners,their slight intercourse with strangersand a strong senseof religion,
preserve the Bhutanesefrom many vices to which more
polished nations are addicted. They are strangers to
falsehoodandingratitude.“2
2 Cl&lent R. Markham, Narratives of the mission of George Bogie
to Tibet, and of the journey of Thomas Manning to Lhasa (London,
Triibner and Co., 1876), p. 37.

16. For centuries the people of Bhutan lived in what can
fairly be called a splendid isolation. “Splendid” is the least
of the praises that one could bestow on the beauty of a
country whose daily horizons are the snow-capped peaks of
the Himalayas and the valleys that plunge down to the
plains of the Brahmaputra. The exact location of Shangri-la,
like that of the Garden of Eden, is often disputed; but few
lovers of nature-whe-ther botanists, horticulturists, mountaineers or simply travellers-would be inclined .to disagree
that the valleys of Bhutan are exceptionally strong candidates for the site.

evidence of that past can be traced back ‘to the ninth
century. True to the most noble of Buddhist traditions, it
has preserved its cultural and religious development from
foreign influence and thus consolidated its political independence. Its spiritual teachings have constantly inspired
and oriented the beneficent action of the sovereign a.nd of
the Government, particularly in the humanitarian field, in
the emancipation of women and in agrarien reform.
22. My Government is very gratified at the relations of
confidence which exist between the Indian ‘Union and
Bhutan. Thanks to the generous and substantial assistance
given by the Government of New Delhi, the fivqear
development plans for 1961.1966 and 1967*.1972 have
adeyuate financial and human resources. My delegation
expressesthe hope that this harmonious co-operation will
continue and will increase in th.e future, particularly by the
utilization of the natural resourcesof the country.

17. The other outstanding influence on the life of the
people of Bhutan has been the Buddhist religion. Today, no
less than in the past, it directs their lives as obviously as it
inspires their beautiful architecture.
18, For the nearly 200 years since the visit of Mr. George
Bogle niy Government has enjoyed close relations with the
Government of Bhutan and my countrymen have formed
valued and lasting friendships with its people. We are thus
especially glad that the Government of India has been the
first to lend its support to the application which Bhutan has
made for membership of the United Nations.

23. Now that Bhutan is broadening its horizons to the
entire world, new prospects of development are opened up
in the specialized a.genciesof our Organization. Its Government can rest assuredof the best understanding and of the
effective assistanceof Belgium when questions which are of
particular interest to Bhutan are examined in the various
organizations which are members of the United Nations
family.

19. Today Bhutan no longer avoids “intercourse with
strangers”. Under a democratic Monarch and his accomplished Queen the Bhutanese have already taken several
important steps forward on the world’s stage. In 1962
Bhutan joined the Colombo Plan. In 1969 the Bhutanese
Government joined the Universal Postal Union. In 1969 and
1970 representatives of the Government of Bhutan, including the King’s half-brother, Prince Namgyal Wangchuk,
whom many of us here had the honour of meeting,
attended sessions of the General Assembly. It is always
pleasing to find that someone who has attended our
gatherings wishes to become even more closely associated
with us. We for our part are very glad to join in recommending the admission of Bhutan to the United Nations
and look forward to extending a warm welcome to its
representatives when they are seated among us.

24. My delegation is very happy at the idea that we shall
be seated next to the delegation of Bhutan in all the
assemblies and organs of the IJnited Nations family.
Fruitful trade relations already exist between our two
countries. In the General Assembly, my delegation will
attach great value to the words of wisdom and moderation
inspired by Buddhjst precepts and vision of human relations. We are convinced that that country of Upper Asia
will make an original contribution to the solution of the
many problems with which our Organisation is confronted.
25. ,Mr. KUT,GA (Poland) [inte~pr&tioYz &vn &?encdz):
With .the conclusive consideration of the request of Bhutan
for admission to the United Nations, the Security Council
has begun a new year of activity; a new year marked by
continued tensions, by new escalations; a year, too, in
which urgent measuresmust be taken in order to solve the
conflicts on the Council’s agenda. As in the past, and in
conformity with the constant policy of its Government, my
delegation is ready to back any efforts in this direction, to
help the Security Council discharge its fundamental task:
the maintenance and strengthening of international peace
and security.

20. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation fbonz
My delegation has examined with interest the
specific merits of the candidacy of the State of Bhutan to
become a member of our Organization. We have also taken
note of the report which the Committee on the Admission
of New Members approved at its meeting yesterday. My
delegation feels that Bhutan fulfds the conditions set forth
in the first paragraph of article 4 of the Charter, and we
have therefore supported the recommendation for its
admission which the Security Council will make to the
General Assembly.

French):

26. In response to your appeal yesterday, Mr. President, I
shall refrain from extending the congratulations and good
wishes 1 would have wished to extend to you as the
President 0’ the Security Council for Ihe month of
February. Neither shall I do more than mention the
congratulations that my delegation wished to extend to
your distinguished predecessors,Sir Colin Crowe of the
United Kingdom and Comrade Ya.kov Aleksandrovich Mdik
of the Soviet Uniorl .

21. My Government is very pleased at the decision of the
sovereign of Bhutan, His Majesty Sigrne Dorji Wangchuk, to
ask for the admission of his country to the United Nations.
In fact, that independent State has already affirmed its
international personality since it already takes an active
part in certain activities of the community of nations,
particularly by its adherence to the Universal Postal Union
and by its participation in the work of the organization
charged with the implementation of the Colombo Plan.
Bhutan can be proud of a long historic past and some of the

27. Recalling the dislirrguisheil and fruitful presidency of
Comrade Almbassador Malik takes me back to December,
3

,

r

:
L

35. We have decided to support Bhutan’s request for
admission to the United Nations, taking note of the reasons
and objectives presented to us in Bhutan’s request, contained in document S/10050. We did so on the basis of
considerations we set forth yesterday in the Committee on
the Admission of New Members. Accordingly, we supported the resolution proposed in the Committee’s
unanimous report recommending to the General Assembly
the admission of Bhutan as a Member of the United
Nations.

the month when Colombia, Finland, Nepal, Spain and
Zambia left the Security Council. I hope you will allow me
to state, albeit briefly, how greatly we appreciated the role
played by the delegations of those countries and their
representatives, Ambassadors Espinosa, Jakobson, Khatri,
de Pin& and Mwaanga, more particularly in the consideration of important questions such as the problems of Africa
and the Middle East and the activization of the Security
Council.
28. As a member of the Security Council Special Mission
to the Republic of Guinea established under resolution
289 (1970), I should like once again to extend to the
Chairman of that Mission, Ambassador Kbatri, and to its
members, Ambassador Mwaanga of Zambia, Ambassador
Jakobson of Finland and Ambassador Espinosa of Colombia, my most sincere thanks for the spirit of co-operation and comradeship that they showed towards me,

36. Pending the General Assembly’s decision, it only
remains for us to congratulate Bhutan and its people and to
wish them every success in the political, social and
economic fields. We also hope that Bhutan will occupy a
worthy place in the United Nations and that it will join
forces with those Members of our Organization that are
working for the complete liberation of peoples from all
imperialist dependence, for peace and international security, for justice and progress.

29. This year their place is taken by the representatives of
Argentina, Belgium, Italy, Japan and Somalia. It is. a
particularly pleasant duty on behalf of the Polish delegation
to welcome their representatives and to assure them of our
wish to co-operate with them with a view to the attainment
of the Council’s objectives, namely, the maintenance of
peace and the strengthening of international security.

37. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
ffom l+ench): On 24 October 1970, when we adopted a
Declaration on the Occasion of the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations [resolution 2627 (XXV]], the
General Assembly thereby expressed the hope that in the
near future all peace-loving and freedom-loving countries
able and willing to carry out the obligations of the Charter
would become Members of the United Nations.

30. Belgium and Italy are on the same contiinent as us.
Accordingly, we maintain with them traditional relations of
economic, cultural and other co-operation. We participate
in a widening dialogue concerning the creation and
strengthening of conditions of security and co-operation in
Europe, a question of the utmost importance, both on the
European scale and on the world scale. Having the honour
to know Ambassadors Longerstaey and Vinci personally, I
venture to express the very sincere hope that I shall be able
to continue our relations of friendship and co-operation in
the Council.

38. It is true that the objective of universality that we
must seek is still far from being attained. But, during the
last few months, that objective appears nearer. The great
family of the United Nations has welcomed, with the
admission of Fiji a short time ago, its 127th Member, and
the Council has today pronounced itself unanimously in
favour of the admission of Bhutan.
39. Thus, after the islanders of the sunny shores of the
Pacific, we trust that the highlanders of the country of
snow-capped mountains will, from the very next session of
the General Assembly, join us in our common efforts to
achieve a better and peaceful world. Coming from widely
differing regions, imbued with diverse cultures and traditions, both groups thus attest to the prodigious diversity of
the world. But they also attest, without any doubt, to the
vitality of our Organization and to the scope of the message
inscribed in the Charter.

31. The continent of Africa is represented by a new
member, Somalia, a country whose fight for the cause of
progress, decolonization and the elimination of apartheid is
too we11known for me to need to expatiate on it here.
32. Ambassador Farah has personified that policy for
many years. His long experience, his qualities as diplomat
and negotiator and his dedication to the cause he represents
are sure guarantees that he will play in the Security Council
the brilliant role he has played in so many other bodies of
the United Nations.

40. My delegation had no doubt that Bhutan wasready to
assume the obligations of our Charter. It is therefore
without any surprise that it welcomed the conclusions of
the Committee on the Admission of New Members, and we
wish here to hall that Committee’s revival. Indeed, a local
proverb says that “When a Bhutanese draws his sword, the
entire valley trembles”. We are nevertheless convinced that
Bhutan is a peaceful country. It is true that this “land of
dragons” carries on its flag the image of that redoubtable
beast. But wo know that that image is white, the colour of
purity. Bhutan has enjoyed the sponsorship of India, a
nation with which France is happy to maintain friendly and
confident relations. In accordance with the Treaty of 1949
between India and Bhutan, that country agreed to be
“guided by the advice of the Indian Government” concern-

33, Japan is an Asian Power with which Poland maintains
growing relations particularly in the economic and cultural
fields. I am happy to welcome its representative, Ambassador Tsuruoka, whose diplomatic experience I have had
the opportunity to appreciate personally.
34. The continent geographically furthest from ours, Latin
America, is now getting a new representative, Argentina.
Geographical distance in our day is no obstacle to relations
and co-operation among States. Argentina-and Latin
America In general-are no exception to this rule. I
therefore most cordially welcome Ambassador Carlos Ortiz
de Rozas, who in his short stay in New York has already
shown his eminent qualities.
4

ing foreign affairs. We are gratified that the Indian guide has
led his companion to the very gates of the United Nations.

48. I am very pleased to take part in this meeting of the
Council and to see its members offering blessings to the
Kingdom of Bhutan, which has applied for membership to
the United Nations as its 128th Member. To the delegation
of Japan it is a source of great joy that the first work
assigned to us in the Security Council this year should be
such a felicitous item, the admission of a new Member to
the United Nations. The pleasure of my delegation is all the
greater because the application in question comes from an
eminent State of Asia, to which my country belongs.
Although Bhutan and Japan are not geographical neighbours, our two countries have much in common in many
respects. The two nations are closely connected by ties of
eastern Asian civilization. It might be recalled in particular
that the ancestors of our two peoples were already linked as
early as in the sixth century. This link was made possible
through the religion and civilization of Mahayana Buddhism
which started in that part of the world. Based upon these
relations between the two peoples, there has developed a
particular sense of friendship and mutual respect
between us.

41. Like its majestic summits shrouded in mist, Bhutan
itself for centuries has exercised a mysterious fascination on
the foreigner. Have not some sought to see in this snowy
kingdom the legendary Shangri-la, “that mountain paradise
where innocence, peace and beauty preserve the secret of
eternal youth”? Until very recently few travellers, or at
least, few Westerners, have had the rare privilege of
admiring these grandiose landscapes and these well-known
monastery-fortresses-the
Dzongs whose formidable
silhouettes dominate the important strategic mountain
passes.
42. But during the last few years the misty veils have been
dissipated. Under the impulse of an enlightened monarch,
Bhutan, while remaining faithful to its age-old traditions,
has opened its doors to the world beyond and resolutely
undertaken the road to progress. In 1960 it took six days
travelling on a mule to reach the then capital, Paro, from
the Indian frontier. According to the press, the same
destination may now be reached in five hours by car. Jeeps,
buses and trucks are rapidly replacing horses, mules and
yaks as a means of transport. No doubt the lovers of the
picturesque will deplore it. But none will regret that in the
last few years Bhutan has made a spectacular step forward
toward democracy and economic and social progress, and
that since 19.52, when the present sovereign took the
throne, these steps have been taken with seven-league
boots.

49. In recent years the relationship between the two
countries has also been friendly and cordial. In 1969 we
had the honour of welcoming to my country Her Majesty
Queen Kesang Wangchuk. On the occasion of Expo ‘70, we
had the pleasure of receiving the Deputy Minister for Home
Affairs of Bhutan, Mr. Dhenduk Phuntsho, as a special
guest of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan.
50. In the field of economic and technical co-operation,
the relations between the two countries were placed on a
secure basis in 1962, when the Government of Japan
supported Bhutan’s application for membership of the
Colombo Plan for Co-operative Development. Since then,
there has been an increasing number of programmes of
economic and technical co-operation. In 1967 my country
also supported the application of Bhutan for membership
of the Universal Postal Union, and in September 1969 we
welcomed the Minister of Development, Mr. Dawa
Phuntsok, when he attended the sixteenth Congress of the
Universal Postal Union, held in Tokyo.

43. Desirous of improving its independence, and at the
same time wishing to preserve its originality, thanks to the
assistance of the international community, and to speed up
its evolution so boldly outlined by its sovereign, Bhutan has
today obtained our support without difficulty. We have no
doubt that the next General Assembly, in accordance with
our recommendation, will admit Bhutan to membership of
the Organization and that, in the future, the United Nations
will be able effectively to assist it to achieve its legitimate
aspirations.
44. For its part the United Nations can only benefit from
a closer co-operation with a country that is imbued with
the Bhuddist spirit of tolerance and respect for life.

51. The Kingdom of Bhutan, one of the oldest nations in
Asia, has a population estimated at nearly 1 million and a
territory of more than 18,000 squaremiles. I should like to
refer to the letter of the King of Bhutan, His Majesty Jigme
Dorji Wangchuk, reproduced in document S/10050, in
which he stated that his Government “endorses the
purposes and principles stated in the Charter of the United
Nations and declares that it accepts the obligations incumbent upon Members of the Organization and solemnly
undertakes to fulfd them .”

45. Some contend that our Organization has aged prematurely . How should it then fail to hasten to welcome a State
possessing the secret of eternal youth? May its vigour be
strengthened by the revivifying air from the Himalayan
heights,
46. Mr. TSURUOKA (Japan): Before speaking on the
agenda items this afternoon I should like to express the
high sense of gratitude of my delegation for the kind words
and thoughtful remarks which you, Mr. President, and a
number of delegations addressed to us yesterday and today
in the course of the meetings of the Council.

52. In the light of those and other pertinent facts, there is
no doubt that the Kingdom of Bhutan, as a sovereign State,
is able and willing to carry out the obligations of Member
States under the Charter.
53. My delegation is very happy that the draft resolution
contained in the report of the Admissions Committee has
been unanimously adopted by this Council.

47. My delegation is particularly encouraged by the kind
words of welcome voiced by many old members of the
Council, including those which referred to the efforts that
we made in 1967 when Japan wasPresident of the Security
Council.
5

54. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translatedfrom

Russian): At its meeting on 9 February the

United Nations, since it represents, in our view, a fUl~hX
step towards the universality of our membership, towards
an objective which we consider of the greatest importance
for the Organization. This world Orgnnization, being c&d
upon by its Charter as well as by the rising eXpeCtatiOrls of
ma&nd to seek solutions to the world’s prObkJnS On i.i
55. The delegation of the Soviet Union supported
Bhutan’s application for membership in the United Nations. global scale, has in fact a vital interest in widening its
mat position of the Soviet delegation reflected the basic authority over all continents. We were therefore dad to
associate ourselves with the unanimous recommendation
principles of the Soviet Union’s foreign policy.
adopted today, the more so since my delegation had no
doubt whatsoever, from the very moment the aPplicitiOr1
56. It is well hewn
that from the first days of the Soviet
was
introduced, tllat Druk Yul, the “Land of Dmgons”,
socialist State, when our country was led by the great
known as Bhutan, met all the requirements indicated in
Lenin, to the present time, our country has consistently
AlTicle 4, paragraph 1, of the Charter. We concurred,
supported and continues to support the inalienable right of
however, with the view of t’he other members of the
peoples to self-determination and a free and independent
Council that, while fully acknowledging the mritS
of the
existence.
case in front of us, it was high Lime to reactivate, in
57. The great October Socialist Revolution in Russia accordance with rule 59 of the provisional rules of
ushered in a new historical era marked by the formation of procedure, the Committee on the Admission of New
sovereign independent States in the countries of the Members, which had been too long dormant.
East-as all countries not situated on the European and
62. Bhutan is a relatively small country of 18,000 stluarc
American continents were, for well-known reasons, called
miles, but with a population of nearly 1 million proud
at that time-and by their national liberation and rebirth.
inhabitants who have strongly asserted their independence
58. The history of the Soviet Union’s relations with the throughout the centuries-a country respectful of its
ancient religious, cultural and national heritage and solidly
countries of the East is a vivid example of how practical
attached to a tradition of internal stability, and at the Sdlne
effect is given to the lofty Leninist principles of foreign
policy, which ensure the defence of the national interests of time responsive to man’s everlasting search for political,
both the Soviet peoples and the peoples of other countries.
social and cultural advancement and economic progress, aS
These principles serve the cause of universal peace and testified by the development of democratic institutions, the
progresson earth. It is a well-known fact of history that, as implementation of far-reaching reforms, and the achieveearly as the beginning of the twenties, the Soviet Govern- ment of two five-year plans for socio-economic development was the first in the world to take the initiative in
merit .
raising the question of active participation in international
conferences and meetings by representatives of the coun63. Lofty mountains of majestic beauty s~rro~md
Druk
tries of the East-the countries of Asia and Africa-which,
Yul, but since it is land-locked its people have never been
as a result of the imperialist policy of the colonial Powers, spurred to turn down peaceful contacts with the external
had been forcibly prevented from participating in internaworld. 1 should like to recall that the Western world owes
tional life. As a matter of principle the Soviet Union has the first testimony on the “land of dragons” to two priests
always been and is today in favour of enlisting the active who were sent to Bhutan by their superiors of the Jesuit
participation in world politics and international life of the order, the same religious order which in the early sevenpeoples and countries of Asia and Africa and of the peoples teenth century, for the sake of studying the Bhudclist and
of all other countries which for one reason or another are other oriental civilizations, established, in my home town,
denied such an opportunity.
Naples, an institution whose main aim was to assist visitors
from the Far East in their approach to the Western,
59. On the basis of this position of principle taken by the Christian world. The legend says that Bhutan was also
Soviet State, the Soviet delegation welcomes in Bhutan the
called “the country of hidden treasures”, since Guru
emergence of yet another-the 128th, if I am not mis- Kampoche had buried there invaluable spiritual and cultural
taken-Member of the United Nations.
treasures to preservethem for future generatjons. We think
that world civilization can only gain from the riches of
60. Mr. VINCI (Italy): My delegation draws some satis- Bhutan’s culture and tradition.
faction and encouragement from the fact that, at the very
moment that Italy took a seat at this table for the second 64. A few months ago I had the pleasure of telling the
time since it joined the United Nations, the Security
Minister for Communication of Bhutan, Mr. Stengdr, that
Council was convened to consider the application for
my Government was looking forward to welcoming his
admission to our Organization of its 128th Member, the
Country to this Organization. I am deeply pleased that my
Kingdom of Bhutan, an emerging country which, after
country was able to confirm that in a tangible form by
hating taken the gradual steps indicated by the represen- associating itself with the first step towards full membertatives of India, the United Kingdom and Japan, is ship of Bhutan in the United Nations.
completing the Process of strengthening its international
relations by joining the world community of nations,
65. Since I have the floor, allow me to thank the
representative of Poland for the kind words he has
61. The unanimous decision the Security Council has addressed to my country and to me personally, and to
taken today is significant not only for Bhutan but for the
assure Mr. Kulaga, on behalf of my delegation, that we
Security Council Committee on the Admission of New
Members considered the application of Bhutan and unanimously recommended that the Council should admit
Bhutan to membership in the United Nations.

sincerely reciprocate his sentiments and his desire for
ftiendly co-operation between us and between our delegations.
66. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, the delegation of Burundi wishes to
express to you our warmest congratulations on your
assuming the presidency of this important body, the
Security Council, and, through you, Sir, we would address
our compliments and congratulations to your country,
reiterating those sent to President Nixon and SecretaryofState Rogers on the outstanding feat of Apollo 14.
67. We also extend congratulations to your immediate
predecessor, Sir Colin Crowe, for the impressive wisdom
with which he presided over negotiations, the effectiveness
of which was proved by not calling for a meeting of the
Council. We wish also to thank him for the information he
has made available to the members of the Council, which
has kept us up-to-date regarding conversations among the
four great Powers on the Middle East.
68. Before the representative of the United Kingdom
assumed the presidency we worked under the outstanding
guidance of Mr. Malik, who seemed to have been destined
to preside over the Security Council when Africa was
confronted by most disagreeable events, Within the framework of the decolonization of our continent none can
doubt the helpful role played by the representative of the
Soviet Union.
69. My delegation owes a debt of gratitude to the
outgoing members-Colombia,
Finland, Nepal, Spain and
Zambia-for
their extremely effective co-operation. Their
contributions
to peace during their tenure were most
valuable.
70. I cannot disguise my happiness nor refrain from
expressing, on behalf of the Burundi delegation, a warm
welcome to the new members of the Council. I particularly
wish to congratulate Mr. Longerstaey, the representative of
Belgium, a country whose friendship and co-operation go
back more than fifty years. That friendship and that
co-operation are based on solid foundations, aswas so well
demonstrated by the visit of His Majesty King Baudouin,
King of the Belgians, to Burundi a few months ago. The
welcome that President Micombero and the Burundian
people gave His Majesty sufficed to confirm for the Belgian
Head of State the indestructible friendship that exists
between our two countries and thus established for all time
close feelings of mutual understanding and co-operation
between our nations.
71. That gave us an opportunity to observe that relations
between the former metropolitan country and the former
colonies should be placed in the historical context. Surely
that should serve as a lesson to some Powers that have not
yet leanred that they must abandon colonial domination,
for once that domination has been ended there will be
normal relations between the expupil and the ex-tutor and
theirs will be a partnership closer than others can enjoy. We
therefore appeal to those Powers that have not yet
understood the effectiveness and mutual benefits of the
decolonization of peoples.

72. I should now like to express my appreciation to the
representative of Somalia fir the very kind words he
addressed to my delegation. May I say that it is obvious
that the very close ties between the Republic of Burundi
and the Republic of Somalia are almost innate and natural.
As in the past, our two delegations will continue to enjoy
the co-operation dictated by circumstances and history.
The fact that the representative of Somalia is Chairman of
the Special Committee on the Policies of Apartheid and
that, in addition, there is the ad hoc committee of the
Council for Namibia,3 is one of the main reasons why our
co-operation, understanding and mutual assistance must be
the order of the day.
73. The entry of Belgium and Italy in the Council is also
extremely important to this body. These two members are
also members of the Common Market, created after the
Treaty of Rome; they now join another Power, France,
whose role in the Common Market, a regional organization,
as well as on the international level is, we all know, a major
one. All this augurs well for the contribution that these
three founding members of the European Economic Community can make to the strengthening of international
peace and security.
74. Surely we have the right to believe, unlike Caesar,
who, in his De hello Gallico, speaking of his warlike
exploits in Gaul, stressed that the Belgians were the most
valiant of the Gauls, that this disparity has disappeared and
that the three Latin-if I may so refer to them-members of
the Council, Italy, France and Belgium, will prove it by
co-operating successfullyon the international chessboard in
restoring, not to say creating, economic, military and
political peace.
75. It is a pleasure for me now likewise to express to the
representatives of Argentina and Japan the admiration that
the delegation of Burundi feels towards those countries for
the international role that they have increasingly played in
their respective regions aswell asin the United Nations.
76. Finally, the delegation of the Republic of Burundi
would wish to express itself on the matter before us,
namely, the admission of the Kingdom of Bhutan to the
United Nations, an admission which fills us with joy. By
doing this, the delegation of Burundi remains true to the
idea that it laid down for itself on the universality of our
institution. It subscribesthen, by this act, to the desire of
the people of Bhutan to increase the United Nations family.
77. Along the same order of ideas, my delegation believes
that the peace of the world cannot be achieved until all
nations, great and small, have joined the United Nations,
and in this connexion we could not silence our welldeserved congratulations to the new Member of the United
Nations, namely, the Kingdom of Bhutan. We would also
presume that this new Member is aware of the fact that
joining the United Nations is not all-but that it wili have
an important role to play in the international arena, the
role which all nations, great and small, are called upon to
play in order to round out the roles already played and the
3 Ad hoc Sub-Committee estaldished in pursuanceof Security
Council resolution 276 (1970).

t

/
I
/

86. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
@orn Spanish):, I should like to endorse what previous

contributions already made by prior Members of the United
Nations.

speakers have said and to express the gratification of my
delegation at the decision that the Security Council hasjust
adopted unanimously to recommend to the General Assembly its approval of the application for admission of
Bhutan to membership in the United Nations. We are
deeply convinced that the participation of that Asian
country in the work of the Organization, based upon its
tradition and culture, will spell a valuable contribution to
the cause of peace in the world. It is for this reason that we
wish to extend a welcome to that country even befoFe it
joins us.

78, It goes without saying that that universality to which
we attach such importance will not be fully achieved as
long as a Power as important as China is kept out of the
United Nations and we trust that that gap in our Organization will be correcte,d in the not too distant future SO that
the United Nations may be able fully to play its role and to
respond in a more concrete manner to its mission, namely,
achieving international peace and security among the
nations of the wbrld.
79: Since I did not have the opportunity to speak
yesterday, I believe that I can count on your indulgence,
Mr. President, to excuse me for the relative length of my
statement.

87. At this moment I also wish to express our satisfaction
at the reactivation of the Security Council Committee on
the Admission of New Members, thus complying with the
terms of rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council. In the past the Security Council has not followed a
uniform practice in the matter and some positions adopted
were at times even contradictory. Personally, we consider
that the terms of the provisional rules of procedure should
be complied with at alI times and not reIegated to oblivion.
We are therefore gratified that the Security Council has this
time agreed to put this provision into practice.

80. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Burundi for his kind remarks addressed to me and
particularly his congratulations addressed to our astronauts.
81. Mr. LIU (China): Mr: President, at the last meeting, in
deference to your wise injunctions, I found myself somewhat conspicuous in my omission of congratulatory remarks. I hope you will not now take it as mere formality
when I say that your many and intialuable contributions to
the functioning of the Council and its peace efforts,
including your parting advice of yesterday, will long be
remembered in the annals of the United Nations.

88. In conclusion, may I express my deepest appreciation
for the generous, cordial and most encouraging words of
welcome addressed to us by the delegations sitting around
the table on our joining the Security Council. In the active
defence of the principles of the Charter we trust that our
conduct will live up to the confidence that has been placed
in us.

82. I feel that a word of tribute is likewise due to the
outgoing President, Sir Colin Crowe, who like yourself has
had a distinguished record of service in this Council. Permit
me also to take this opportunity of associating myself with
the expressions of appreciation which you have extended to
our former colleagues as well as to the new members of the
Council,

89. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My Government welcomes the
application of the Kingdom of Bhutan to join the United
Nations. The application is distinguished by the fact that it
comes from a country whosepeople have enjoyed centuries
of continuous national independence and have in the
process successfully shaped their affairs so that they have
been able to devel’op close and friendly relations with their
neighbours, as is evidenced by the traditional ties that bind
Bhutan and India.

83. The Council has just voted unanimously for the
admission of another new Member and my delegation was
happy to have joined it in the vote, I do not wish to strike
any discordant note or touch upon any issue that is
extraneous to this occasion.
84. As we know, Bhutan has had a long history of
independent existence, although in external relations it has
agreed by treaty to be guided by the Government of India.
As a Member of the United Nations it is expected that
Bhutan will play a full and increasingly active role in the
community of nations. It is gratifying to note that the King
of Bhutan in his letter to the Secretary-General dated 10
December 1970 /S/100.50] laid emphasis on the value of
the United Nations to the develrjping countries, Economically, we understand, Bhutan is largely self-sustaining, with
most of its population engaged in a combination of
small-scale farming and animal husbandry. It is hoped that
after its admission the United Nations will be able to render
such assistance as may be needed to further Bhutan’s
economic development. On behalf of my delegation I take
this opportunity of extending to the Kingdom of Bhutan
our best wishes for a prosperous and successfulfuture,

90. My Government believes that all States, large or small,
can make important contributions to the solution of the
political, social and economic problems that are of worldwide concern. My Government has also found by experience that in this interdependent world it is becoming
increasingly difficult for any State to solve its own
problems in isolation from the international community.
Therefore we believe that Bhutan’s membership of the
United Nations would be of mutual benefit to that State
and to our Organization.

85. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of China
for his generous remarks.

92. Mr. SAVAGE (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, permit
me to offer the compliments of my delegation to your

91. For these reasonsit wasboth a pleasure and a privilege
for the Somali Democratic Republic to have been able to
participate today in the unanimous decision of the Security
Council to recommend to the General Assembly that
Bhutan should be admitted to membership of the United
Nations.

8.

Government and to the three astronauts who ventured in
Apollo 14 to the distant moon. We are happy that their
mission was a successand that they have returned to earth.

Nations will mark a significant step forward in the historic
Process whereby the independence of the different peoples
of the south Asian region is affirmed and recognized by the
international community.

93. My delegation joins the other delegations that have
spoken here this afternoon in welcoming to this Council the
delegations of Somalia-a brother African country-Japan,
Italy, Belgium and Argentina. We know that all these
delegations are ably led by experienced representatives of
their countries and we therefore look forward to a close
association with them during the year we shall share with
them and to their significant contributions to the work of
the Council during their term of office.

102. Though it is smaller in size than India, Pakistan or
Nepal-the other three Members from our region-Bhutan is
no less unique in its individuality. In tradition and ethnic
composition it has affinities with the People’s Republic of
China. In commerce and communications it has developed
relations with its southern neighbour, India. We have no
doubt that, animated by its sturdy sentiments of independence, Bhutan will maintain the most harmonious relations
with both its great neighbours to the north and to the south
in the interests of peace and stability in the continent of
Asia.

94. We wish also to take advantage of this opportunity to
express our sincere thanks to the delegations that left the
Council in December. The five outgoing delegations of
Zambia, Nepal, Finland, Spain and Colombia contributed
much dynamism and keen interest in the various areas of
the Council’s work. From our year in the Council with
them we can attest to their understanding and cooperative
disposition as well as to the dignity and high level of debate
which they helped foster.

103. The delegation of Pakistan looks forward to the
occasion when it can work together with the delegation of
Bhutan in the endeavour towards peace which joins all the
members of the United Nations family. We are happy that
the United Nations will provide Bhutan with the means of
broadening its contacts, obtaining assistance for its economic development and ending its isolation. We shall
welcome the delegation of Bhutan in the General Assembly,
but here in the Security Council we extend to His Majesty
the King of Bhutan and to his Government and people our
felicitations on their entry into the mainstream of international life,

95. My Government is very happy to see the Kingdom of
3hutan admitted to membership of the United Nations. My
delegation, deeply entrenched in its belief in universality,
has always stressed the significance this concept has for
international peace and security, for the continued vitality
of this world Organization and therefore for mankind.

104. Mr. LANG (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): My Government is very pleased at the decision to

96. A small, peace-loving country opening its frontiers to
the outside world and stretching out its hands for acceptance by all and admission to the family of nations should,
in our opinion, be received with warmth and enthusiasm.

admit Bhutan to our great international Organization,
particularly since we note that in Bhutan’s application for
admission it accepts the obligations of the Charter. We
therefore wish it well and welcome it in joining our
continuous struggle to ensure peace and security in the
world.

97. These are some of the reasons why we have voted here
this afternoon in favour of admitting a fellow developing
n&Ion that wants to become the 128th Member of our
world body, We look forward eagerly to the day when the
Kingdom of Bhutan will be seated in the various organs of
the United Nations.

105. Mr. President, with regard to your presidency, there
is very little we can add about your work in the United
Nations and in the Security Council, since it is far too well
known and highly respected by all to need our comments.

98. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Sierra
Leone for his congratulations to our astronauts.

106. We respectfully welcome the new members and we
wish to assure all members of the Council that they can
count on the sincere and ful1 co-operation of Latin
America. We now have with us one of the most brilliant and
capable internationalists in the person of the new representative of Argentina, our esteemed colleague, Mr. Ortfz de
Rozas.

99. I now call on the representative of Pakistan,
100. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, the Pakistan
delegation is grateful to you and to the other members of
the Council for permitting it to make a statement on this
happy occasion when the Council has unanimously recommended to the General Assembly the admission of Bhutan
to membership in the United Nations.

107. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I should like to take this
opportunity to thank the representatives of the Soviet

Union, Syria, Poland, Burundi and Sierra Leone for the
generousremarks they made regarding my Government and

my delegation during the course of their interventions in
the Council yesterday and today.

101. The fact that the independence of Bhutan, cherished
and sustained by its people through many struggles over the
centuries, should now find an authentic international
expression brings happiness to Pakistan for two reasons.
The first, of course, is rooted in our sentiments of
friendship and goodwill towards the people of Bhutan.
These are the natural products of our geographical proximity and our shared experience of a common past. The
second reason is that Bhutan’s admission to the United

log. The PRESIDENT: As no other member wishes to
address the Council I shall make a brief statement in my
capacity as the representative of the UNITED STATES.
log. It was with distinct pleasure that I concurred in the
recommendation of the Security Council’s Committee on
9

112. When Bhutan joins the United Nations later this year,.
will undoubtedly contribute from its own experience to
United Nations efforts to promote development and to
improve international co-operation, while continuing to
participate in the programmes of the United Nations system
designed to assist countries to develop and perfect their
economies. We are also certain that Bhutan will be able to
contribute to other aspectsof the Organization’s work in a
wide variety of fields of importance to the international
community.

the Admission of New Members, ‘and ‘that I consequently
supported the application of the Royal Government of
Bhutan for membership in the United Nations. The United
States looks forward to welcoming a Bhutanese delegation
to the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly next
fall, and to working with it thereafter.

it

110. The United Nations has drawn strength from the
diversity of its membership. Significant contributions to its
fundamental objectives of peace, justice and progress have
been made by Members which are as different in size,
wealth and experience as members of the international
community
as they are distinct in their geographical
location, form of political organization and cultural and
historical traditions.

113. As PRESIDENT of the Security Council and in
accordance with rule 60 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I shall immediately request the SecretaryGeneral to transmit to the General Assembly the text of the
resolution we have just adopted, together with the verbatim
records of the meetings at which it wasdiscussed.

111. Although Bhutan is a relatively small country, it has
long prided itself on its cultural traditions and its strong
sense of national identity. In recent years not less than
three different United States ambassadors have visited
Bhutan. They have all been impressed by the beauty of the
country and by the determination which it is demonstrating
in its efforts to achieve economic development while
simultaneously preserving Bhutan’s rich traditions and
ancient culture,

114. On that auspicious note, and there being no other
business before the Council, I now declare this second
meeting on our first agenda item for the year 1971
adjourned.
The meeting rose at 4.55 pm.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

820054uly

1973-2,050
