38

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

1199 (XII). Annual report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board
The General Assembly
Takes notq of the annual report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board. 19
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.
1200 (XII). Report of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Board on the fourth actuarial
valuation of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund as of 30 September 1956 and
second review of the basic tables of the Fund
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board on the fourth actuarial valuation of the Fund as of 30 September 1956 and the
second review of the basic tables of the Fund ;20
2. Takes note of the observations thereon of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions as set forth in its twenty-third report to
the twelfth session of the General Assembly. 21
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.
1201 (XII). Amendments to the Regulations o:f
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
The General Assembly
Adopts the texts annexed to the present resolution as
amendments to the Regulations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund. These amendments shall
come into force on 1 January 1958.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.
ANNEX

Article I, paragraph 4 (amended text)
"Final average remuneration" means the average annual
pensionable remuneration of the participant during the last
five years of his contributory service, on the understanding
that, in the case of participants who have entered the Fund
prior to 3 November 1955, it means the average pensionable
remuneration of the participant during the last ten years of
his contributory service whenever this average is higher. When
the participant has less than five years of contributory service,
the final average remuneration shall mean the average annual
pensioooble remuneration during the actual period of contributory service.

Article II, Paragraph 1 (amended text)
Every full-time member of the staff of each member organization shall become a participant in the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund:
(a) If he enters employment under a contract without a
time-limit;
(b) If he enters employment under a fixed-term contract for
five years or more ;
(c) If he has completed five years of employment and remains on a contract providing for further service of at
least one year, ,or remains in employment for more than
one year thereafter;
19
Ibid., Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/3611 and
Corr.I and 2).
""Ibid., Supplement No. 8A (A/3642).
111
Ibid., Twelfth Session, Annexes, agenda item 45, document
A/3749.

(d) If the member organization certifies that the particular
fixed-term contract is considered to cover a probationary
period and is designed to lead to employment for an
indefinite period,
provided that he is under sixty years of age at the time of
entry into the Fund and that his participation is not excluded
by his contract of employment.

Article IV, paragraph 1 (amended text)
A participant who reaches the age of sixty shall, upon retirement, be entitled during the remainder of his life to an
annual retirement benefit, payable monthly, equal to one-fiftyfifth of his final average remuneration multiplied by the number of years of his contributory service not exceeding thirty
years.
Article V (amended text)
Subject to the provisions of articles X.1 ( b) and XVI, a
participant who, before reaching the age of sixty, has, in the
opinion of the Joint Staff Pension Board, become unable to
perform his duties owing to serious physical or mental impairment, shall be entitled, subject to article IX, while such
disability continues, to a disability benefit payable in the same
manner as a retirement benefit and equal to nine-tenths of
one-fifty-fifth of his final average remuneration multiplied by
the number of years of his contributory service not exceeding
thirty years. This disability benefit shall not be less than the
smaller of:
(a) One-third of the final average remuneration;
( b) Nine-tenths of the retirement benefit to which he would
have been entitled if he had remained in service until he had
reached the age of sixty and his final average remuneration
had remained unchanged.

Article VII, paragraph 1 (amended text)
Subject to the provisions of article XVI, if a married male
participant dies, his widow shall be entitled, subject to article
IX, to a widow's benefit amounting, except as provided in
paragraph 3 below, to half of the benefit which would have
been paid to the participant had he qualified for a disability
benefit at the time of his death or, if such deceased participant
had attained the age of sixty, to one-half of the benefit which
would have been paid to the participant had he retired under
the provisions of article IV at the time of his death. Whenever
the amount of the widow's benefit so determined shall be less
than $750 per annum, it shall be increased to the smaller of:
(a) $750 per annum, or (b) twice the original amount determined. This benefit shall cease on the widow's remarriage.

Article XXIX (amended text)
The Joint Staff Pension Board, upon the advice of a
qualified actuary or actuaries, shall adopt from time to time
service and mortality tables and the rate of regular interest
which shall be used in all actuarial calculations required in
connexion with the Pension Fund. The rate of regular interest
applicable shall be 2½ per cent per annum through 31 December 1957 and 3 per cent per annum thereafter unless and until
changed by the Joint Staff Pension Board. At least once in
each six years following the establishment of the Pension Fund,
the Board shall have an actuarial investigation made into the
mortality, service and compensation experience of the participants and beneficiaries of the Pension Fund; and taking into
account the results of such investigation, the Board shall adopt
such mortality, service and other tables as it shall deem appropriate.
(The change in the rate of regular interest specified in article XXIX entails consequential changes in articles III.1, VII.5,
X.1 and 3, XI, XII.1 and 2, and XVI.6. In each case the phrase
"at the rate of 2½ per cent per annum" is replaced by the
phrase "at the rate designated in article XXIX".)

Supplementary article B (new text)
1. Every full~time member of the staff of each member
organization shall become an associate participant in the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund:
