S/2017/840

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 October 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2350
(2017), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for a final p eriod of six months, until
15 October 2017 and established the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) for an initial period of six months, from 16 October 2017 to
15 April 2018. It covers major developments that have occurred since the issuance
of my previous report, of 12 July 2017 (S/2017/604), and progress made on the
closure of MINUSTAH and the establishment of MINUJUSTH. As this is my final
report on MINUSTAH, it also presents an overview of the Mission’s achievements,
including good practices and lessons learned.

II. Developments on the ground
A.

Political situation
2.
Eight months after the President of Haiti, Jovenel Moïse, assumed office, the
country continues to take steps to further consolidate its democracy and stability.
Nonetheless, indirect elections to establish the councils and assemblies at the
municipal, departmental and interdepartmental levels, as envisaged in the
Constitution, remain stalled. On 14 July, the Provisional Electoral Council
completed the first of four steps, namely, the designation of members for
140 municipal assemblies. It then submitted the results on 21 July to the
Government for publication in the official gazette. Religious and civil soci ety
leaders called for the publication of the results in order to allow the process to
continue, while at the same time moving forward with a national dialogue on the
electoral system. On 25 August, however, in an effort to reduce the potential for
institutional conflict between the bodies to be elected and other existing
decentralized structures, the executive branch recommended the suspension of the
process, pending the revision by Parliament of relevant laws regulating local
governance. On 1 September, the Senate confirmed receipt of three presidential
decrees from 2006 that had been amended by the Government in order to clarify the
functions of the various bodies constituting the local governance structure.

17-17104 (E)

101017

*1717104*

S/2017/840

3.
During the reporting period, the Government of Haiti took decisive steps
towards the remobilization of the Haitian Armed Forces, with a view to creating a
force of 3,000 soldiers over the course of President Moïse’s five-year term. On
25 July, the Ministry of Defence confirmed receipt of applications from
2,350 candidates, including 350 women, for the first class of 500 military cadet
recruits. The process was carried out against a backdrop of caution and concern,
voiced by parliamentarians, party leaders, human rights advocates and security
experts. The lack of an agreed framework for the process and the potential for
politicization, given the direct recruitment by the Government in the absence of an
army Chief and general staff, were the main causes for concern. Concerns were also
raised that such efforts would redirect the limited resources available for the
country’s development priorities, including the Haitian National Police.
4.
On 27 July, President Moïse raised the daily minimum wage for assembly
factory workers to 350 Haitian gourdes, slightly higher than the 335 recommended
by the Superior Council of Salaries and considerably less than the 800 gourdes
demanded by the trade unions. The Government also sought to address a number of
major issues facing the country through the establishment of eight presidential
commissions, comprising representatives from national sectors, including two new
commissions, on health reform and on innovation and the socioprofessional
integration of youth. It furthermore intensified its flagship programme, the “Caravan
of Change”, designed to enhance the State’s delivery of service and to improve
living conditions, particularly in rural areas. The programme has been expanded to
half of the country’s 10 Departments and is considered the backbone of the
Government’s strategy for achieving economic growth and development through the
revitalization of agricultural production and investment in public infrastructure to
improve market access and basic social services. The President also announced
plans to implement a nationwide solution to the energy shortages facing the country.
5.
In Parliament, progress on the joint legislative agenda remained slow, and an
increased rate of absenteeism during the months of July and August resulted in the
suspension of some sessions. As at 11 September, when the 2017 legislative year
was formally closed, only three draft laws had been adopted by both Chambers of
Parliament and submitted to the executive branch, bringing the total voted upon and
adopted as at the time of reporting to 4 of 51 draft proposals on the joint legislative
agenda. Those included laws on working hours, on the national education fund and
on civil aviation. In addition, on 12 September, Parliament submitted to the
executive branch the draft national budget for the fiscal year 2017/18, as adopted by
the two Chambers. The budget drew criticism because of an alleged imbalance in
funding among State institutions and new additional direct taxes that stood to affect
low-income earners. Moreover, civil society and the private sector complained that
they had not been consulted, which had been the practice of previous
administrations.
6.
On 11 September, initiating steps to constitute the Permanent Electoral
Council, the Upper and Lower Chambers established a bicameral commission t o
select the three representatives of Parliament to be appointed to the nine -member
Council. During the reporting period, the Superior Council of the Judiciary also
launched a call for candidates to select its three representatives. Similar action by
the executive branch is expected in the coming period.
7.
During the reporting period, opposition political parties and civil society
representatives strengthened calls for a national dialogue to address ongoing
socioeconomic grievances on the part of factory workers, teachers, the judiciary and
health-care staff. Five centre-left parties, grouped under the umbrella Political
Coalition of Active Forces of the Nation, initiated steps to bridge communication
between the Government, opposition parties and civil society and to determine the
2/19

17-17104

S/2017/840

way forward on such a dialogue encompassing, inter alia, constitutional reform,
indirect elections and the calendar for the next electoral cycle, due in 2019. On
14 September, at the invitation of President Moïse, a dozen allied and moderate
opposition parties met with the executive branch to discuss ways to improve the
functioning of political parties. Discussions, however, focused primarily on the
contested national budget, to which party leaders requested revisions prior to
publication. Six other opposition parties, who declined t he President’s invitation,
also requested further revisions to the budget prior to meeting with the President.
On 18 September, public transport unions launched a nationwide strike, protesting
the national budget, which was scheduled to go into effect on 1 October.

B.

Security situation
8.
The overall security situation remained relatively stable and was not affected
by the ongoing withdrawal of MINUSTAH troops and the reductions in the United
Nations police presence. No major incidents took place, notwithstanding some
continued tensions linked to socioeconomic and political grievances.
9.
Statistics collected by the national police and MINUSTAH for the period from
1 July to 30 September 2017 indicated a decrease in homicides, with 181 victims
(including 17 women), down from 259 during the previous quarter; 71 per cent of
the homicides occurred in the metropolitan area of Port -au-Prince, in line with
historical trends. Reported rapes also fell from 139 to 89; 99 per cent of the victims
were women. Kidnappings, however, increased from 8 during the previous quarter
to 12 during the reporting period; the victims included 7 women. Underreporting
and a culture of impunity remain pervasive.
10. A total of 162 public protests were reported, of which 39 (24 per cent) saw
some level of violence, ranging from erected barricades and stone -throwing to
assaults and shootings. This represents a decrease compared with the 264 incidents
reported during the previous quarter, of which 73 (28 per cent) had been violent.
The Port-au-Prince metropolitan area witnessed 53 per cent of those events,
followed by the Centre Department, at 7 per cent. Protests were generally small in
size, with each of those 162 events involving fewer than 1,000 par ticipants. The vast
majority of protests, including most recently after the adoption of the budget, were
triggered by socioeconomic grievances, related to labour, education, infrastructure,
the cost of living and border management.
11. The Mission’s police component continued to provide operational support to
the national police, conducting 1,587 joint temporary checkpoints, 2,032 foot
patrols, 12,468 vehicle patrols and 192 joint operations, including 127 in the
metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince. Military troops carried out 576 operations, 3 of
which were joint patrols with national and MINUSTAH police officers.

C.

Haitian National Police
12. The Haitian National Police continued to increase its capacities to ensure
public order and provide security for the country’s citizens. The twenty-eighth
promotion, comprising 1,029 cadets, including 127 women, continued its seven month basic training initiated in May. Upon graduation in December, the size of the
national police force will grow to approximatel y 15,000 officers, representing a
police-to-population ratio of 1.36 police officers per 1,000 inhabitants, with 9.5 per
cent of the officers being women. The goal of the Haitian National Police strategic
development plan for the period 2017-2021 is 18,000 officers, a ratio of 1.51 to
1,000, and 12 per cent women. Recruitment of a targeted 1,000 cadets for the

17-17104

3/19

S/2017/840

twenty-ninth promotion has continued with physical and medical tests. The
construction, rehabilitation and improvement of the national police infrast ructure
are ongoing, with 74 construction projects and 38 projects aimed at providing
logistics equipment and furniture, including the construction of four police stations
in the Artibonite Department and one in the Grand’Anse Department. During the
reporting period, the procurement of crowd control and crime scene management
kits was completed, with the required training delivered.
13. MINUSTAH continued to assist the national police in the consultation,
adoption and implementation of its five-year strategic development plan, including
through the application of a revised mentoring and advising approach devised as
part of the Mission’s strategy for its transition to MINUJUSTH. United Nations
police also continued to work with the national police force to st rengthen its
capacity to address sexual and gender-based violence cases through advocacy and
technical and financial support. That support included training on the investigation
of sex crimes, conducted jointly with the coordination office for women ’s affairs
and the gender-based violence teams of the national police. The Mission also
provided technical and financial support to the Ministry of Women ’s Affairs and
Rights for the organization of a workshop on women and the rule of law.

D.

Rule of law and human rights
14. Progress in the performance of the judiciary continued to be limited during the
reporting period, owing primarily to pending appointments to the Supreme Court
and a general strike called in July by court workers, which paralyzed the oper ation
of courts of first instance nationwide until 2 August. In the absence of a government
response to their demands for better wages, training and health insurance, workers
resumed the strike on 22 August. After a meeting with workers, the Senate began
negotiations with the Government to broker an agreement, and on 24 August,
workers resumed their functions and criminal hearings recommenced.
15. On 3 August, the Senate proposed 11 candidates out of the 18 who had been
shortlisted to fill six vacant seats on the Supreme Court (3 per seat, as
constitutionally required). A further call for candidates to complete the list has yet
to be issued. On 14 August, the Senate’s Commission on Justice, Security and
National Defence ended a series of public forums on the draft criminal code and the
draft criminal procedure code. The Senate began reviewing the draft law on legal
aid in early August; once adopted, it will move to the Lower Chamber for review.
Parliament, however, has yet to announce a calendar or procedures for the adoption
of the drafts.
16. Through real-time case file management, the Office of the Public Prosecutor
of Port-au-Prince closed 100 of the 281 cases examined. Meanwhile, legal aid
offices handled 1,848 cases in Port-au-Prince, resulting in 1,003 releases,
47 convictions and 369 closed cases, and processed 386 pretrial detention cases in
Les Cayes and Cap-Haïtien, closing 147 and leading to the release of 83 individuals.
As at 21 August, under a new programme implemented by the Ministry of Justice
and Public Security to accelerate hearings, the court of first instance in Port -auPrince had heard 44 cases, resulting in 13 convictions, 7 acquittals and 4 referrals.
Also during the reporting period, a special office, established at the Ministry of
Women’s Affairs and Rights to handle sexual and gender-based violence cases in
Les Cayes, began processing 33 cases.
17. The above-mentioned progress notwithstanding, prolonged pretrial detention
and prison overcrowding remain a serious human rights concern. As at
11 September, Haitian prisons held 11,544 detainees, including 394 women, and

4/19

17-17104

S/2017/840

307 male and 20 female juveniles. Of those detainees, 74 per cent were awaiting
trial, reflecting an increase of 3 per cent since the issuance of my previous report.
Deaths in detention increased to 158 as at 25 September, compared with the
113 reported during 2016. The first report of the special presidential commission on
prison conditions has been submitted to the President; the implementation of its
recommendations is still awaited.
18. The joint interim rule of law programme of MINUSTAH and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) continued to support key activities to
reinforce the rule of law in Haiti, which included, inter alia, assistance with the
finalization of the 2017-2019 strategic plan for the Superior Council of the Judiciary
and the elaboration of the organic law on the Superior Court of Auditors and
Administrative Disputes and the draft penitentiary law. In addition, MINUSTAH
funded the holding of 18 nationwide training workshops on security management
for Haitian correctional officers; the design of contingency plans for correctional
officers in the event of major security incidents; the archiving of judicial files of the
court of first instance of Port-au-Prince to safeguard vital legal records in the fight
against corruption; and the training of 200 Haitian National Police officers in crowd
control techniques and the purchase of the relevant equipment.
19. In the field of corrections, MINUSTAH continued to support the
implementation of the strategic development plan of the Directorate of Prison
Administration for the period 2017-2021 through the drafting of related action
plans; the implementation of 15 directives, including on matters such as gender a nd
mental health; the design of a road map to improve health services in prisons; and
an analysis of deaths occurring in detention. In coordination with other
stakeholders, MINUSTAH financed sanitation and hygiene measures to contain
cholera in Haitian prisons and assisted with two rounds of cholera vaccinations for
over 3,314 detainees in the civil prison of Port-au-Prince, while facilitating
consultations to ensure effective procedures to prevent or properly react to similar
health events.
20. Under its community violence reduction programme, MINUSTAH continued
to support young people in vulnerable communities where gang violence had been
prevalent, including by assisting in the social reinsertion of 80 juveniles, including
10 girls; providing sensitization activities on peacebuilding, civic responsibility,
leadership, gender, conflict prevention and mitigation; and funding vocational
training and income-generating activities. During the reporting period, the
programme reached 87,711 beneficiaries through 31 projects totalling $5 million
before its completion on 30 September.
21. MINUSTAH continued to advocate more systematic investigations into the use
of force and firearms by national police officers. Discrimination based on social
class, age, disability, sexual orientation and gender remains widespread, including
during law enforcement operations, resulting in unequal treatment of vulnerable
groups before the law. Haitian civil society organizations, international partners and
MINUSTAH highlighted human rights concerns with respect to draft laws on good
moral conduct and on marriage, adopted by the Senate on 30 June and 1 August, the
provisions of which appeared to target lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex people and other minority communities. The Government has yet to assign
the human rights portfolio to a specific ministry or to appoint a new national
Ombudsperson for human rights, a position for which Parliament has shortlisted
three candidates. Impunity persists, including with regard to the most serious
violations committed in the past, with no progress recorded in the landmark judicial
cases concerning Jean-Claude Duvalier and Jean Léopold Dominique.

17-17104

5/19

S/2017/840

E.

Humanitarian situation and development
22. Haiti continues to face multiple development challenges that require the
implementation of structural reforms to ensure effective delivery by the national
institutions, in order to meet the basic needs of the people and to build up the
resilience needed to cope with recurrent humanitarian c rises.
23. While hurricanes Irma and Maria, which passed over northern Haiti on 7 and
21 September, did not cause major damage, the country remains vulnerable and
exposed to natural hazards. Long-term development challenges arise as a result of
systemic deficiencies, such as persistent vertical and horizontal inequalities, a lack
of access to water and sanitation, insufficient investment in health care and
education and an unreliable power supply. The Government continues to assume
greater leadership over the development agenda, as evidenced by the “Caravan of
Change” programme and by investments designed to strengthen the social and
economic infrastructure.
24. The 2017 portion of the Haiti Humanitarian Response Plan for the biennium
2017-2018 has raised less than 20 per cent ($57 million) of the $291.5 million
necessary to enable the delivery of emergency assistance to 2.4 million vulnerable
people. The vast majority of this assistance has been focused on measures to
alleviate food insecurity and to provide shelter and non-food items.
25. The fight against cholera continues, and the number of suspected cases has
dropped as a result. From 1 January to 2 September, the Ministry of Public Health
and Population reported 9,277 suspected cholera cases, compared with 25,276 for
the corresponding period in 2016, and the death toll fell by 57 per cent (245 deaths
in 2016). Nevertheless, the fact that there were 105 deaths must still be deplored.
On 10 August, the Prime Minister of Haiti, Jack Guy Lafontant, and my Sp ecial
Representative for Haiti co-chaired the eighth meeting of the High-level Committee
for the Elimination of Cholera. The Prime Minister reconfirmed the 10 -year national
plan for the elimination of cholera as the basis of the new Government ’s policy
approach, as well as the renewed engagement of the Government with the United
Nations and other international partners to that end. The Government and its
partners also agreed to an assessment of the implementation of the medium -term
plan for 2016-2018, with a view to prioritizing short- and medium-term
interventions and formulating a realistic funding strategy. The United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti is spearheading efforts to secure the funds necessary to
implement both the national plan and the new United Nations approach to cholera in
Haiti, which will be critical to sustaining progress in ending the transmission of the
disease. Of particular concern is funding for the rapid response teams, which risk
being underfunded by the end of the year.
26. As part of the new United Nations approach, a community-based pilot project
is under way in Mirebalais, which includes, inter alia, the implementation of
community projects identified through a consultative process that involves local
representatives and formal and informal leaders, as well as families affected by
cholera and other vulnerable groups.
27. Building on the reductions attained in the number of new HIV infections and
AIDS-related deaths, the Ministry of Public Health and Population approved the
national multisectoral strategic plan on HIV and AIDS for 2018 -2023, formulated
by the national AIDS programme in conjunction with national and international
partners. The plan is aimed at eliminating HIV in Haiti by 2030.
28. As at 3 August, the International Organization for Migration had registered
215,121 people who had returned from the Dominican Republic since June 2015.

6/19

17-17104

S/2017/840

This group will likely continue to need assistance in determining their legal status.
Since the 2010 earthquake, 37,867 persons have rema ined internally displaced in
27 camps without access to long-term solutions.
29. Real economic growth remained sluggish, and inflation stood at double digits,
peaking at 15.6 per cent in July 2017. Nevertheless, the Haitian gourde has
appreciated for the first time since January 2011, in part owing to political stability.
The increase in capital expenditure though investments related to the “Caravan of
Change” signals a policy shift to make fiscal room for priority spending through the
elimination of fuel subsidies and the rationalization of spending in goods and
services. Despite the obvious financial constraints, development partners have been
advocating strong allocations to social and growth -enhancing sectors. Domestic
borrowing and the recourse to non-concessional borrowing are factors that could
jeopardize macroeconomic stability, which is necessary to continue to reinforce
institutions and promote growth. The restructuring of the unprofitable State -owned
electricity company, aimed at eliminating governme nt transfers so as to cover its
deficit, could create fiscal space to increase investment in infrastructure, health and
education.
30. Consultations between the Government and development partners have begun
on a joint initiative to foster aid effectiveness. On 1 September, the Government
announced a ban prohibiting 257 non-governmental organizations from operating in
Haiti owing to non-compliance with State regulations, including the failure to
provide periodic reports to the Government. The United Nations country team is
formulating the joint workplan with national counterparts, following the signing on
29 June of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for the period
2017-2021. The Framework is aligned with the national development strategy an d
the government programme, and prioritizes poverty reduction and the promotion of
employment; access to and the use of basic, good-quality social services; gender
equality and protection; resilience; and improved governance. The country team is
also providing support for the nationalization of the Sustainable Development
Goals. Although the process needs to gain momentum, it is expected that, by the end
of 2017, an integrated rapid analysis and a multi-agency mission on mainstreaming,
acceleration and policy support should allow for the creation of a government road
map on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
31. As at 22 August, MINUSTAH had disbursed $2,999,394.32 of the $3 million
quick-impact project budget for the fiscal year 2016/17, implementing 58 projects
that benefited 2,150,592 people, including 1,107,908 women. Projects were focused
primarily on the rule of law, good governance, public infrastructure and the
provision of potable water to prevent waterborne diseases, including cholera.

III. Transition to the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti
32. In keeping with resolution 2350 (2017) and with a view to ensuring that
residual stabilization needs in the country are addressed, MINUSTAH continued the
implementation of both its comprehensive withdrawal and the joint MINUSTAH United Nations country team transition plan so as to ensure a smo oth transition of
both assets and tasks to MINUJUSTH, the Haitian authorities, the country team and
other partners, by mission closure on 15 October.
33. The core mandated areas addressed by MINUSTAH, including the good
offices function and focused engagement in the rule of law, justice reforms, police
development and human rights, will be transitioned to MINUJUSTH, while United
Nations support in the area of governance will be delivered through the country
17-17104

7/19

S/2017/840

team, resources permitting. With respect to the rule of law, the joint interim
programme continued to be the cornerstone for the transition process, with several
agencies, funds and programmes taking on activities with a view to paving the way
for long-term institution- and capacity-building. MINUJUSTH will work closely
with the country team to ensure the further transition of tasks necessary to pursue
rule of law reforms. Other activities, such as border management and specialized
policing functions, have been transferred to the national authoritie s.
34. Throughout the reporting period, my Special Representative and other
members of the Mission’s senior leadership team held consultations with the Heads
of State and Government on the transition process and travelled to all the
departmental capitals to inform local authorities, political parties and civil society
on the changes in the United Nations presence in the country. This engagement with
a wide range of actors at the national and local levels was complemented by a public
communication strategy that made extensive use of Radio MINUSTAH FM, as well
as social media, media engagement by senior leadership, the publication of articles
in Haitian media and targeted advocacy events.

A.

Military component
35. MINUSTAH continued the execution of the staggered military withdrawal, in
line with the agreed plan and in close coordination with the Mission ’s police
component, the national police and mission support. The Philippine company ceased
operations on 15 July and was repatriated in the first half o f August. This was
followed by the ceasing of operations of the Argentine military hospital on
15 August and the subsequent repatriation of its staff. The Brazilian infantry
battalion and two engineering companies, from Brazil and Paraguay, ceased
operations on 10 September, following a temporary reactivation of operations owing
to hurricane Irma. The Bangladeshi aviation unit, the last operational military unit,
ceased operations on 20 September. All remaining military elements will be
repatriated by 15 October.
36. By 5 October, MINUSTAH will have withdrawn a total of 2,147 military
personnel since the adoption of resolution 2350 (2017); the remaining 195 troops,
including 26 military staff officers, will cease operations on 7 October and be
repatriated by 15 October. Throughout the drawdown process, the military
component’s engineering units were actively engaged in camp closures and
refurbishment, while troops provided security for the camp closures and handover
processes to the relevant government and private property owners.

B.

Police component
37. MINUSTAH proceeded with the reduction of its police component and
completed the withdrawal of four formed police units on 18 August, following the
ceasing of operations and repatriation of the units of Bangladesh (unit 2), Pakistan,
Jordan (unit 1) and India (unit 3), thereby reaching the authorized strength of seven
formed police units with 980 officers for MINUJUSTH. In preparation for the
establishment of the new mission, three formed police units are currently deployed
in the West Department and one each in the Artibonite, Grand Anse, Nippes and
North Departments, where they continue to provide operational support to the
national police in areas where their presence is still weak.
38. In parallel, the number of individual police officers continues to be reduced.
By the time the Mission closes, 477 officers will have been repatriated in order to
reach the strength of 274 officers deployed in all 10 Departments of the country, in

8/19

17-17104

S/2017/840

implementation of a new mentorship and advisory programme targeting middle and
senior management cadres of the national police rolled out between May and
September, at the central and local levels, in close consultation with the leadership
of the national police. The ongoing review and implementation of the new approach
to police development will be instrumental in strengthening the capacities of senior
police officers and promoting their full professionalization in line with the priorities
of the 2017-2021 strategic plan.

C.

Civilian component
39. MINUSTAH continued to implement its civilian drawdown plan while
focusing on the transition of core mandated areas to MINUJUSTH, including good
offices, the rule of law, human rights and police development, and to ensure
adequate support capacities for mission closure. In keeping with a staggered civilian
drawdown plan, the Mission separated 621 staff between June and September; the
remaining 611 staff will be separated by 15 October.
40. The Mission also proceeded with the reduction of its physical footprint,
closing 27 sites since the issuance of my previous report. Those include 16 police
co-locations that were transferred to the national police and 5 formed police unit
camps that closed following the repatriation of 4 units and the relocation of the
Nepalese unit in the North Department from Cap-Haïtien to Quartier Morin. Six
sites remain to be closed by 15 October, and 29 camps will be transferred to
MINUJUSTH, including 13 police co-locations. Three new police co-locations have
been established, while efforts continue with regard to establishing a fourth. Two
facilities are planned for closure during the period from 16 October to 31 December
2017. In keeping with its asset disposal plan, MINUSTAH identified 7,880 assets
for transfer to MINUJUSTH, as well as gifted assets valued at nearly $70 million.
41. Two commercial helicopters arrived in the Mission area on 11 September,
replacing the military aviation capacity provided by Bangladesh. With the ceasing
of operations of the Argentine military hospital on 15 August, level I and II medical
services are provided by the United Nations clinic and local hospitals, respectively,
while a level III hospital in Santo Domingo stands read y to receive medical
evacuations as performed by an Aeromedical Evacuation Team now in place under a
commercial contract.

IV. Legacy of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
42. Established by Security Council resolution 1542 (2004), with a mandate to
create a secure and stable environment within which the constitutional and political
processes of Haiti could take place, MINUSTAH has engaged in a joint endeavour
with the Haitian authorities to build a foundation for lasting stability and a better
future for the country.
43. At that time, Haiti was in a profound state of instability and widespread
political violence. The executive branch of power was under provisional leadership,
Parliament was non-functional and the Superior Council of the Judiciary had yet to
be established. State authority was limited to parts of the capital, Port -au-Prince,
and a climate of lawlessness and impunity prevailed with respect to human rights
violations, including sexual violence against women and girls. A weak national
police force was unable to effectively address threats from armed gangs in urban
slums, including kidnapping, which peaked at 722 reported cases in 2006.

17-17104

9/19

S/2017/840

44. The many setbacks and challenges notwithstanding, including the disaster
caused by the January 2010 earthquake and at least six major hurricanes, substantial
headway was made, and today the Haitian people enjoy a considerable degree of
security and greater stability. Thirteen years after the arrival of MINUSTAH,
political violence has significantly diminished and immediate threats from armed
gangs, whose origins are rooted in social and political divisions, have been
significantly reduced. Support for elections has contributed to three peace ful
presidential handovers, including from one democratically elected President to
another from the opposition in 2011, and to President Moïse in February 2017. All
three branches of power are now largely functioning. Municipal councils are in
place, and the establishment of democratic structures at the level of the smallest
territorial unit of Haiti, the communal sections, denotes real progress, despite the
currently stalled indirect elections. Constitutional provisions have been adopted to
make governance more inclusive by increasing the participation of women through a
quota system. At the same time, with only three women elected to the Chamber of
Deputies (Lower Chamber) and one to the Senate (Upper Chamber), more binding
measures are needed to guarantee their application.
45. The Haitian National Police has significantly strengthened its leadership cadre.
As of September 2017, the overall strength of the force had reached some
14,000 officers, of whom 9.5 per cent were women, thereby doubling its officer s-topopulation ratio, with 1.3 officers per 1,000 inhabitants; this compares with
6,300 officers in 2004, including 5.6 per cent women and 0.6 officers per
1,000 inhabitants. Further, the force has demonstrated increased capacity in the
planning and execution of complex operations, including the securing of elections
and crowd control, while simultaneously performing routine tasks in combating
crime and more effectively maintaining public order. Most recently, the Mission ’s
police component has worked closely with the national police force to help it to
develop and launch its latest strategic development plan (2017 -2021), focusing in
particular on professional development, including through improved internal
management and oversight, and on the expansion of its geographical coverage.
46. Restoring and maintaining the rule of law, including through the promotion
and protection of human rights, has constituted a key element of the Mission ’s work
over the years. Progress has been made in critical oversight institutions, such as the
General Inspectorate of the Haitian National Police and the Office of the
Ombudsperson, the latter of which was accredited in December 2013 as a national
human rights institution with “A” status by the Global Alliance of National Human
Rights Institutions. Efforts have also been made to advance crucial legislative
reforms, in particular regarding a criminal code, a code of criminal procedure and a
penitentiary law, all awaiting adoption by Parliament. Regarding the independence
of the judiciary, three laws adopted in 2007 have played a key role in the
administration and regulation of the justice system, leading to the opening of the
School of Magistrates and the first, and still only, juvenile tribunal outside the
capital, both in 2009, and to the establishment of the Superior Council of the
Judiciary in 2012, which will require continuing substantial support to allow it to
fully play its role as the guardian of an independent and impartial judicial system.
47. In 2008, MINUSTAH supported the Government in taking the first step in
establishing a legal aid office in Cité Soleil, in order to expand access to justice.
Three years later, 20 legal aid offices supported by MINUSTAH and other partners
were established nationwide to fill major gaps in access to justice by the large
majority of Haitians. Today, a draft law on legal aid is before Parliament; when
adopted, the law will institutionalize such aid within the wider justice reform. Since
2014, through a model jurisdiction approach, MINUSTAH has focused its support
for the justice system in the three largest cities of the country, Port -au-Prince,
10/19

17-17104

S/2017/840

Cap-Haïtien and Les Cayes, supporting the provision of legal assistance to
individuals in prolonged pretrial detention and thereby reducing the number of such
individuals detained for more than two years by 37 per cent.
48. Since 2004, MINUSTAH has supported the Government in the implementation
of human rights mechanisms such as the universal periodic review and in the
establishment of committees overseeing the implementation of specific treaties,
such as the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Mission assisted the
Superior Council of the Judiciary and the Inspectorate General of the Haitian
National Police in strengthening their respective internal mechanisms for
investigations into allegations of violations of human rights committed by police
officers and judges. It also assisted the Office of the Ombudsperson in developing
its capacity to investigate allegations of human rights violations. Finally,
MINUSTAH supported civil society organizations in strengthening their ability to
act as guardians of respect for fundamental rights both under Haitian law and
through regional and international human rights mechanisms.
49. The community violence reduction programme, introduced by the Mission in
2009, represents a landmark approach in United Nations support for Haiti and
serves as a model for future peacekeeping operations. Following the Mission ’s
provision of uniformed personnel support to deter gang violence, the programme
targeted urban slums both within and outside Port-au-Prince, in areas that were
historically politicized or under the influence of organized criminal elements. Aimed
at building the social foundations for peace and countering gang dynamics and
criminality, its grass-roots community projects have reached more than 6 million
Haitians, including 3.8 million women, addressing high youth unemployment, poor
infrastructure, fragile security institutions and limited access to justice .
50. MINUSTAH has implemented 1,788 quick-impact projects over the past
13 years, in line with its mandate and the priorities identified by the authorities and
civil society. The projects have been focused primarily on the rule of law, good
governance, public infrastructure, income-generating activities, environmental
protection and the provision of potable water to prevent waterborne diseases,
including cholera. They have directly benefited some 7 million people, including
3.7 million women, for a total of $49,590,822.
51. Accompanying Haiti and closely supporting its stabilization efforts in the
extension of State authority, not least in gang-controlled urban centres, in
strengthening its institutions and in the development and professionalization of th e
national police, my Special Representatives have consistently sought to promote
dialogue as a peaceful solution to help to defuse tensions between competing
political elements, which have often impeded progress in the country’s political and
democratic development. In reaching out to Haitian authorities, political parties,
parliamentarians, private sector and civil society representatives and women ’s
organizations, they have consistently advocated national consensus in order to
nurture a democratic political culture and build support for a common vision for the
country. During the tenure of my current Special Representative, three dialogue
processes have taken place. They have helped to create conditions for the successful
organization of the electoral cycle, which today has opened a window of
opportunity to address the immense challenges still facing the country.
52. Those many clear accomplishments aside, instances of sexual exploitation and
abuse, which are addressed in paragraph 58 below, and the outbre ak of cholera,
which has taken more than 9,600 lives since 2010, continue to cast a shadow over
the relationship between the United Nations and the Haitian people. I share the deep
regret expressed by my predecessor for the terrible suffering that the peop le of Haiti
have endured as a result of the epidemic. The United Nations has a moral
17-17104

11/19

S/2017/840

responsibility to the victims, as well as to support Haiti in overcoming the epidemic
and in building sound water, sanitation and health -care systems. To that end, I
reaffirm my commitment to addressing the issue through the new United Nations
approach.

V. Planning for the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti
53. Planning for the establishment of MINUJUSTH is well advanced, in line with
the mandated parameters set out in resolution 2350 (2017) and the strategic
objectives and conceptual framework outlined in detail in my previous report. The
advance team, comprising the 15 key substantive and support positions of the future
mission, was established in September, including my Deputy Special
Representative, Mamadou Diallo of Guinea, who will also serve as Resident an d
Humanitarian Coordinator and Resident Representative of UNDP. The team is
working to ensure that MINUJUSTH is operational from the first day of its
mandate, including by collaborating with MINUSTAH on the ground for a smooth
handover. It is also working to prepare, both politically and operationally, for the
further build-up of the Mission.
54. In that regard, I underline the importance of signing a status -of-forces
agreement for MINUJUSTH before 16 October. In accordance with past practice, on
11 August 2017, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations wrote
on my behalf to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti, proposing that the
agreement between the United Nations and the Government of Haiti concerning the
status of MINUSTAH be applied mutatis mutandis to MINUJUSTH.
55. Overall planning is based on a staffing complement of 351 civilian personnel,
including 160 international staff, 185 national staff and 6 United Nations
Volunteers, subject to a legislative review of the new Mission ’s full budget for the
2017/18 period. All civilian components, including substantive, support and
security, will be based at two main locations in Port-au-Prince and equipped with
the mobility necessary to address needs in the country’s 10 Departments. In
accordance with the human resources strategy under which international civilian
staff are to be selected from rosters and a similar competitive process is to be
undertaken for national civilian staff, recruitment has accelerated to ensure that
deployment for MINUJUSTH is being staggered, with the first wave of key
positions to be in place on the ground on 16 October in order to ensure full
continuity of operations. The Mission’s full staffing complement will be reached by
the end of 2017.
56. In September, the police component reached the levels and positioning
envisaged for MINUJUSTH; it will be ready and operational on 16 October.
Individual police officers and some contracted civilian police exp erts will be
co-located at 17 Haitian National Police facilities in the capital and at the
departmental administrative headquarters of the national police. Of the seven
formed police units, including one with an embedded special weapons and tactics
capacity, three will be based in Port-au-Prince (West Department) and the other four
in the North, Artibonite, Nippes and Grand’Anse Departments. In addition, a
complement of 38 Government-provided corrections personnel will be in place in 18
prisons and 4 police detention facilities. Steps have been taken to ensure the air
assets necessary to deploy security forces rapidly throughout Haiti in support of the
national police, and to protect civilians within the Mission’s capabilities and areas
of deployment, including United Nations personnel and assets. While two
commercial helicopters currently provide aviation capacity, the Department of
12/19

17-17104

S/2017/840

Peacekeeping Operations has also approached Member States with a request for
police helicopters that are more effective in the transportation of certain types of
crowd control equipment and armed personnel for deployment in emergency
situations.
57. The Department of Safety and Security has worked with the designated
MINUSTAH official and the United Nations country team to reduce the
geographical security areas from five to two, to reflect the revised MINUJUSTH
and country team footprint. This allows for a more centralized approach to
responding to United Nations security management system requirements
countrywide. In that regard, the use of mobile security teams with a focus on
enabling MINUJUSTH activities will be embedded into the new Mission’s security
structure; enhanced coordination mechanisms with Haitian security entities are also
being developed.

VI. Conduct and discipline
58. In line with recommendations made in my report entitled “Special measures
for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse: a new approach ” (A/71/818 and
Corr.1 and Add.1), the Mission appointed a Victims’ Rights Advocate, a function
that will be transferred to MINUJUSTH. It also further strengthened its support for
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse in collaboration with the country team. The
needs of such victims are of primary concern to the Organization, which is
strengthening its efforts to ensure that necessary support is provided to them,
including through the Trust Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse, established by my predecessor in 2016, and through my appointment of J ane
Connors of Australia as the first Victims’ Rights Advocate for the United Nations.
The Mission has worked towards full compliance with the zero -tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse and other misconduct, and the number of cases has
significantly decreased over the past seven years. The United Nations deeply regrets
instances of sexual exploitation and abuse that have occurred during the deployment
of MINUSTAH and is strongly committed to supporting victims of such exploitation
and abuse.

VII. Financial aspects
59. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/302, authorized the SecretaryGeneral to enter into commitments for the maintenance of MINUSTAH in a total
amount not exceeding $90.0 million for the period from 1 July 2017 to 31 December
2017.
60. As at 20 September 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special
Account for MINUSTAH amounted to $119.6 million. The total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$4,095.5 million.
61. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 30 June 2017, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 31 March 2017, in accordance with
the quarterly payment schedule.

17-17104

13/19

S/2017/840

VIII. Observations and recommendations
62. The support provided by MINUSTAH to the Government and people of Haiti
has resulted in the strengthening and, in some instances, the establishment of State
institutions, which are key to ensuring the conduct of the country ’s political and
constitutional processes. It is critical that the country make full use of the current
window of opportunity created by its relative stability to advance dialogue on
additional measures required to consolidate the gains made in security and
stabilization over the past few years, create greater social and political cohesion and
truly reinforce State institutions so that they can meet the needs of the Haitian
people.
63. In that regard, the steps taken by Parliament and the Superior Council of the
Judiciary towards the establishment of the Permanent Electoral Council are
encouraging. Similar steps are now needed for the establishment of the
Constitutional Council. It is important that, while maintaining their independence,
all three branches of power work together, in a transp arent and inclusive manner and
within the shortest time frame possible, to put those institutions in place.
MINUJUSTH stands ready to play an effective role in supporting the consolidation
of the country’s stability. Similarly, I call on the Haitian authorities to swiftly
complete the indirect elections process to broaden citizen participation in important
decision-making, particularly regarding the rule of law, and thus in the sustainable
stability and development of the country.
64. I take note of President Moïse’s continued calls for national unity and
promises of an institutional reform process, as well as his initiative to address a
number of major issues facing the country through the establishment of various
presidential commissions, comprising representatives from different national
sectors. I hope that these commissions can meaningfully contribute to a long awaited national dialogue. I also take note of calls from a broad cross section of
Haitian society for reforms to simplify the electoral cycle, establish a Permanent
Electoral Council and strengthen legal oversight bodies, among other things, with a
view to stabilizing the country’s democratic institutions and reforming its
governance. With this in mind, I encourage the President and Parliament to examine
the most effective and speedy way forward in starting an inclusive national
dialogue. Such a process would require comprehensive action by all actors,
including State institutions, political parties, the private sector and civil society, to
establish a forward-looking agenda capable of delivering tangible results for
sustainable stability and development.
65. I welcome the outreach initiative by the Senate to consult with civil society
and judicial experts on the draft criminal code and the draft c ode of criminal
procedure, pending their adoption by Parliament. I cannot overemphasize the
importance of the adoption of this long overdue legislation to advancing crucial
legislative reforms. I encourage the parliamentary Chambers to agree upon an
efficient strategy and realistic calendar for the review and adoption of the drafts as a
matter of urgency. I look forward to the vote by the Lower Chamber on the draft law
on legal aid already adopted by the Senate, which will provide a framework for the
establishment of a coordination mechanism, so critical in effectively reducing
instances of prolonged pretrial detention. Together, all of these efforts will have the
positive impact on the justice system so long desired.
66. Following the non-extension of the mandate of the Independent Expert on the
situation of human rights in Haiti, I note that a replacement for the national
Ombudsperson for human rights is still outstanding, and I encourage the Haitian
authorities to expeditiously complete the ongoing process to fill this important

14/19

17-17104

S/2017/840

independent position. While I welcome the continued engagement by Haiti with
international mechanisms, such as treaty bodies and thematic special procedures of
the Human Rights Council, I encourage State institutions, the national h uman rights
institution and civil society to meaningfully engage with the human rights
component of MINUJUSTH to strengthen the promotion and protection of human
rights in Haiti, including through the fight against impunity.
67. Further action is required to protect and promote women’s rights. The lack of
formal socioeconomic opportunities, institutional deficiencies, recurring incidents
of sexual and gender-based violence and the absence of political will remain
constraints on the empowerment of women and their full participation in decisionmaking for the future of the country. While women constitute 52 per cent of the
population, their participation in all three branches of power falls below
constitutional requirements. It is essential that the Haitian au thorities put in place
binding measures for the application of the constitutional minimum quota of 30 per
cent women in public office. The election of women to municipal and local councils
and assemblies in sufficient numbers to meet that requirement will create a solid
foundation on which to build future participation of women at the national level.
The adoption and promulgation of a gender equality bill, as well as the
implementation of the national policy on gender equality (2014 -2034) and the
national action plan on gender equality (2014-2020), should also be pursued to
further advance women’s empowerment and address gender inequality.
68. The continued prioritization, by the Government, of the institutional
development and professionalization of the national police and the protection of the
apolitical nature of that institution is critical. The provision of adequate financial
resources for the police and the prisons administration will serve as one indicator of
the Government’s commitment. I welcome the adoption of the new strategic
development plan of the national police covering the period 2017 -2021. As
MINUJUSTH starts implementing its mandate, I look forward to working with the
Government and the national police, including the corrections system, as well as the
international partners of Haiti, in supporting the Mission ’s focused implementation.
In keeping with the request of the Security Council for a successful and responsible
transition to MINUJUSTH, and to facilitate the timely deployment of the new
Mission and its personnel, I encourage the Government of Haiti to respond
positively, and before 16 October, to my proposal that the agreement on the status of
MINUSTAH be applied mutatis mutandis to MINUJUSTH.
69. Mindful of both the capacity-development needs of the national police,
including the prisons administration, and the need to overcome the structural
deficiencies in the rule of law, human rights and the justice sector in order for police
work to be effective, I call on the international partners of Haiti to step up their
bilateral and multilateral support to foster the Government ’s efforts in these areas,
including through the strengthening of the justice system, of independent
accountability institutions and of the national police, in order to finally put an end to
all forms of impunity and ensure the delivery of justice and public safety for all.
70. I take note of the steps undertaken by the Government of Haiti to re -establish
the Armed Forces, just as I have heard the voices of caution and c oncern raised by
Haitian stakeholders over the conduct of the process. It is important that the process
become a unifying national project, disassociated from personal or party politics, in
order to meet the challenge of creating an apolitical body, as env isaged in the
Constitution, that hold the confidence of the population. Such an initiative should
not harm efforts, or redirect resources otherwise available, to strengthen the national
police or to pursue broader development priorities.

17-17104

15/19

S/2017/840

71. The security, political and development agenda of Haiti can be shaped only by
the national authorities and the Haitian people themselves. MINUJUSTH and the
United Nations country team will need to build on Haitian leadership in
consolidating the stabilization gains achieved since the establishment of
MINUSTAH and in reinforcing the relevant national institutions. The partnership of
the international community and the continued and coordinated support of Member
States will be critical. I therefore call on the internationa l partners of Haiti to
continue to optimize their support in helping the country to fully seize this
opportunity to place its reconstituted institutions at the service of its development
and the aspirations of its people.
72. Since her appointment in July, the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti,
Josette Sheeran, has mapped a clear, three-part strategy with regard to the cholera
epidemic: (a) to ensure that the disease remains contained and that transmission is
on a path to elimination; (b) to raise funds and conduct consultations with
communities and victims to allow for the implementation of track 2 of the new
United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti; and (c) to develop a lessons -learned
exercise that will lead to tangible improvements in the way in which the United
Nations operates around the world. In that regard, I encourage the Government to
review the midterm strategy of its national cholera elimination plan to help align
donor and United Nations support behind a prioritized and costed strategy.
73. As the Mission’s mandate approaches its end, I would like to express my
gratitude to my Special Representative for Haiti, Sandra Honoré, for her invaluable
contributions to the stability of the country. I also wish to express my gratitude to
all former Special Representatives for their contributions to the stabilization of
Haiti, as well as to the civilian and uniformed personnel who have served with
MINUSTAH since 2004 for their unwavering commitment to achieving the
Mission’s mandate over the past 13 years. They have worked closely with the
United Nations country team and other partners, to whom I am equally grateful. In
closing, I would like to pay special tribute to our beloved colleague and friend, the
former Special Representative for Haiti, Hédi Annabi, who gave his life in the
service of peacekeeping in the 2010 earthquake, and to all our fallen colleagues who
were lost while serving the United Nations system in Haiti. I know that their efforts
and ultimate sacrifice will not have been in vain and that the country’s full return to
peace and prosperity will be their lasting legacy.

16/19

17-17104

S/2017/840

Annex
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti as at
20 September 2017
United Nations police officers
Country

Bangladesh

Formed police units

Women

Men

1

16

Benin
1

12

Cameroon

2

4

Canada

6

34

Chad

2
4

Djibouti

21
2

1

6

Ethiopia

6

France

2

Germany

2

1

Ghana

1

Guinea

4

India
Indonesia

6
1

Jordan

27
1

9

Mali

2

36

Nepal

17

Niger

8

33

Nigeria

1

1

Norway

3

3

Pakistan
1

13

1

Romania

6
1

7

Serbia

1

Slovakia

2
5

Togo

7

22

6

Senegal

Sweden

127

11

Rwanda

17-17104

153

1

Portugal
Russian Federation

293

4

Madagascar

Philippines

140

2

Burkina Faso

El Salvador

Men

16

Brazil

Colombia

Women

21

119

14

143

5
3

Tunisia

10

Turkey

8

17/19

S/2017/840
United Nations police officers
Country

Men

United States of America

6

Uruguay

2

Subtotal
Total
Grand total

18/19

Women

Formed police units

47

334

381

Women

Men

48

997

1 045
1 426

17-17104

S/2017/840

17-17104

19/19
