United Nations

S/PV.5806

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5806th meeting
Monday, 17 December 2007, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Spatafora . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Li Kexin
Mr. Biabaroh-Iboro
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Christian
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Arias
Mr. Voto-Bernales
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Burian
Ms. Qwabe
Mr. Johnston
Ms. Wolcott

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-64646 (E)

*0764646*

S/PV.5806

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, we will hear briefings by
Mr. Justin Biabaroh-Iboro, who will speak on behalf of
Mr. Luc Joseph Okio, Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa; Ambassador Leslie Christian, Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1518 (2003); Ambassador Jorge
Voto-Bernales, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and of the Security Council Working Group
established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004);
Ambassador Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser, Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone and
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1521 (2003) concerning Liberia; and Ambassador Peter
Burian, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and of
the Security Council Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, and
Co-Chairman of the Security Council Ad Hoc
Committee on Mandate Review.
I now give the floor to Mr. Justin Biabaroh-Iboro,
who will speak on behalf of Mr. Luc Okio, Chairman
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa.
Mr. Biabaroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
At this meeting devoted to the activities of subsidiary
bodies, I should like, before the end of my delegation’s
chairmanship, to give Council members an overview of
the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which Congo had
the honour to chair in 2006 and 2007.
I should like to recall that an interim report was
submitted last September, and thus I will be very brief,

2

mainly stressing the latest activities of the Ad Hoc
Group, in particular the seminar on the theme of an
effective global conflict prevention strategy in Africa,
the role of the Security Council.
After a slow start-up due to familiarization with
the issues, the Ad Hoc Working Group adopted, under
the chairmanship of Congo, a programme of work
structured around a simple approach: the organization
of interactive presentations with various actors
involved in conflict management, with a view to
convening a seminar on a global conflict resolution
strategy in Africa.
Over the past two years, a total of 17 meetings
were held by the Ad Hoc Working Group including
initial contacts and the preparations for and holding of
the seminar. As regards the presentations, the Group
heard five communications, on which we reported
during our presentation of the interim report on
27 August.
The seminar, which was held in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 1625 (2005) and the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2007/31) adopted on
28 August 2007 at the public debate held under the
presidency of the Congo on the item entitled
“Maintenance of international peace and security: the
role of the Security Council in conflict prevention and
resolution, in particular in Africa”, followed up on the
first policy forum, organized under the chairmanship of
Benin, in June 2005, on the theme “Enhancing the
United Nations capacity for conflict prevention: the
role of the Security Council” (see S/2005/833). The
goal of the seminar was strengthening Security Council
action in conflict prevention in an approach stressing
the culture of prevention.
Throughout the process of preparing for the
seminar, the Ad Hoc Group benefited from the
assistance of the Office of the Special Adviser for
Africa and from the Department of Political Affairs,
whom I should like to thank.
The following themes were dealt with:
cooperation between the Security Council and the
United Nations system; opportunities for cooperation
among the Security Council, the African Union and
other partners; and cooperation with United Nations
intergovernmental bodies.
While the Working Group is still considering the
recommendations of the seminar, I should like to note

07-64646

S/PV.5806

that, on the basis of a set of questions adopted by the
Ad Hoc Working Group and following intensive
interactive discussions, the participants formulated the
following recommendations, among others: institute an
early warning mechanism enabling United Nations
bodies to act upstream rather than downstream and
strengthen those that exist at the regional and/or
subregional level; establish mechanisms allowing the
Security Council to react promptly to crisis situations;
give the Secretary-General a clearer mandate in terms
of preventive diplomacy; support coherently the role
played by the Secretary-General or his representatives
in preventive diplomacy through Security Council
decisions, resolutions and statements that are firm and
unanimous; give particular attention to disputes or
situations that could pose a threat to international
peace and security; send fact-finding missions to areas
at risk likely to pose a threat to international peace and
security, ensuring the involvement of the agencies of
the United Nations system working on the ground;
strengthen and improve existing partnerships between
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter;
and act on the root causes of conflicts in coordination
with other United Nations bodies.
In conclusion, I should just like to say that the
results achieved over the past two years by the Working
Group under the Congolese chairmanship, modest though
they may be, made it possible to refocus the debate on
the problems of conflict prevention, particularly in
Africa. On behalf of the members of the Ad Hoc
Working Group, the Congo expresses the hope that the
Council will pay close attention to the conclusions and
recommendations made at the seminar — which will be
annexed to the Group’s report for 2006-2007 — with a
view to the appropriate decisions.
The President: I thank Mr. Biabaroh-Iboro for
his briefing on behalf of Mr. Okio. I want to assure him
that the members of the Council will take note of the
recommendations made with a view to taking the
appropriate decisions.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Leslie
Christian, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1518
(2003).
Mr. Christian (Ghana): Since the completion of
my predecessor’s tour of duty in April this year, I have
had the honour to chair the Security Council

07-64646

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1518
(2003), as I shall continue to do until the end of this
month, when Ghana’s two-year tenure on the Council
will draw to an end. Drawing on my personal
experiences in the Committee, I would like to take this
opportunity to give a brief account of the Committee’s
work during my chairmanship.
Pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 1518 (2003)
the Committee is mandated to identify individuals and
entities referred to in paragraph 19 of resolution 1483
(2003) whose funds, assets or economic resources
should be frozen and transferred to the Development
Fund for Iraq. This applies to individuals and entities
associated with the former Iraqi regime, as specified in
paragraph 23 of resolution 1483 (2003).
The names of 89 individuals and 208 entities are
currently inscribed on the Committee’s list. Although
during my chairmanship the Committee has continued
to consider various requests for the addition and
removal of names, no changes have been made to the
list, and the Committee’s work has been focused
mainly on assisting the authorities of Iraq in seeking
information and clarification relating to assets frozen
outside Iraq. Since the Security Council remains seized
of the situation in Iraq, the Council’s relevant
subsidiary organs may continue their assistance to the
Government and the people of Iraq, while keeping the
future work of the Committee under review, as may be
deemed appropriate.
In accordance with past practice, the views
expressed here reflect my personal perspective as Chair
and do not necessarily represent the views of the
Committee or its members.
I wish to conclude by thanking all members of
the Committee and all other relevant parties for their
support and cooperation during my chairmanship.
Finally, I wish to assure the incoming Chairman of the
Committee of my availability to assist in any way
possible with the transition of the chairmanship.
The President: I thank Ambassador Christian for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Nassir
Abdulaziz Al-Nasser, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone and of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia.

3

S/PV.5806

Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to
speak today in my capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone and of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia. I have
had the privilege of chairing those Committees since
the beginning of this year. In my statement, I should
like to give the Council an overview of the work
undertaken by these two subsidiary organs under my
chairmanship and to make a few personal observations.
More than a decade has passed since the adoption
of resolution 1132 (1997), which imposed an arms
embargo on Sierra Leone and a travel ban on members
of the military Government of the day. Since that time,
the country has made great progress towards political
stability and security. The Committee’s mandate was
amended by resolution 1172 (1998), and the ban on the
export of diamonds from Sierra Leone was lifted in
2003. The security situation in the country has
improved. Free and fair parliamentary and presidential
elections were held in August. The most recent
milestone was the country’s inclusion on the agenda of
the Peacebuilding Commission. A few days ago, the
Sierra Leone Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework, a
document promoting partnership with the Government
in order to meet the challenges of peacebuilding, was
issued.
The work of the Committee is now limited to
tasks related to the embargo on the export of weapons
to non-State actors in Sierra Leone and the travel ban
imposed on individuals included on the Committee’s
list, who currently number 30. The list has not been
amended over the past year. However, in the context of
the Committee’s consideration of whether the list
should be updated, I wrote a letter on 25 July 2007 to
the Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone
requesting his Government’s views concerning the
individuals included on the list and whether the list
should be updated to better reflect the current situation
in Sierra Leone. The Committee is still awaiting that
information from the Sierra Leone Government.

concerning travel to The Hague by certain individuals
included on the list, for purposes related to the trial of
former Liberian President Charles Taylor. I sent a reply
to the Registry explaining the established procedure for
granting exemptions from the travel ban. I believe that,
in order to facilitate the work of the Court and the
procedures for travel ban exemptions, the Security
Council should adopt a resolution granting a
comprehensive travel ban exemption to persons
required to testify before the Court, similar to
resolution 1688 (2006) on Liberia. This morning, the
Council discussed a draft resolution in that regard at
the expert level.
I now turn to the Committee on Liberia, which
has been more active in terms of the number of
meetings held. This year, the Committee has held nine
informal meetings. At its two most recent meetings,
held on 5 and 12 December 2007, the Committee heard
a presentation of the final report of the Panel of Experts,
which is doing a professional and useful job. The report
included specific technical recommendations aimed at
improving the arms embargo regime. I believe that
those recommendations deserve to be considered by the
Committee. I believe also that the Committee must
examine and update the sanctions list so that it reflects
developments on the ground, serves the broader goal of
the sanctions and takes legal due process into account.
I am pleased to inform the Council that, on
12 June 2007, the Committee succeeded in adopting
revised guidelines that take into account the procedures
for delisting from the lists of the sanctions committees,
as set out in resolution 1730 (2006). Pursuant to the
new procedures, the Commission has already delisted
one individual, in November.

There have been no violations of the arms
embargo or the travel ban during the past year.

Over the past year, the Committee has continued
to receive requests for exemptions from the arms
embargo, in accordance with the provisions of
resolutions 1521 (2003) and 1683 (2006), as well as
requests for exemptions from the travel ban, in
accordance with the provisions of resolutions 1521
(2003) and 1532 (2004). The Committee has continued
its consideration of these requests. It has also received
State notifications on authorizing payments out of
frozen assets, in accordance with the exemption
granted in paragraph 2 (b) of resolution 1532 (2004).

The Committee held an informal meeting on 4
December to consider communications received from
the Registry of the Special Court for Sierra Leone

Like Sierra Leone, Liberia, which is located in
the same subregion, has made great strides towards
achieving security and political stability. A President

4

07-64646

S/PV.5806

was elected in free and fair elections. The Security
Council responded to these developments by amending
the Liberia sanctions regime in order to reflect the
positive developments in that country.
After lifting the ban on the export of timber last
year, the Security Council adopted resolution 1753
(2007) in April of this year, lifting thereby the ban on
the export of diamonds, based on the commendable
progress made in the Government’s control over the
diamond sector and on its effective coordination with
the Kimberley Process. This was affirmed by the
representative of the Kimberley Process before the
Committee in a meeting held on 13 April, shortly
before the adoption of resolution 1753 (2007). The
Committee continues to play a pivotal role in
coordinating with the Kimberley Process in order to
ensure compliance with the terms upon which the
diamond ban was lifted. The Committee has received
two letters, on 7 May and 23 July 2007 respectively,
that, combined, constitute the report of the Kimberley
Process requested by resolution 1753 (2007).
In closing, I would like to thank my fellow
members of both Committees, with whom I have
enjoyed working. I would like to express my gratitude
to the Security Council Subsidiary Organs Branch in
the Department of Political Affairs. I would to like to
make special mention here of Mr. James Sutterlin, who
was Secretary of both of the Committees I chaired and
who showed a high level of professionalism and skill
throughout this period.
The President: I thank Ambassador Al-Nasser
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Peter Burian,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and of
the Security Council Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, as
well as Co-Chairman of the Security Council Ad Hoc
Committee on Mandate Review.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, let me brief
the members of the Security Council on the efforts that
the Committee has made during the past two years
towards full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
I am pleased to note today that considerable progress
has been made in this regard. But more effort is needed
in the next period to achieve full implementation of all
aspects of the resolution.

07-64646

As of today, 140 States have submitted their first
reports and about 90 have submitted additional
information. More reports are expected in the next few
days. The number of non-reporting States is coming
down from the low fifties, as more States in Africa, the
Caribbean and the Pacific Islands region respond to our
intensive outreach activities and to the most recent
round of correspondence.
As will be spelled out later, the efforts of the
Committee and its experts are now making a difference
in coping with the challenges often mentioned by a
number of those States to explain delays in their
reporting, especially the complexity of the provisions
of the resolution and the lack of capacity in many
States to respond to the multiplicity of reporting
requests by United Nations bodies.
The Chairman and Vice-Chairmen of the
Committee have, at regional group meetings in New
York, recently urged all Member States to respond
urgently to the Committee’s request for more
information, and we are hopeful that there will be
positive results by mid-January at the latest, to
facilitate the preparation of the second biennial report
to the Security Council on the implementation of the
resolution, which is due by the end of April 2008.
The Committee has relied heavily on outreach
activities to encourage further reporting and promote
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Through seminars, workshops and tailored dialogue, it
has generated greater awareness about the process and
the necessity of reporting, has fostered the sharing of
relevant national experiences and has created more
understanding of the requirements for assistance. A
thematic discussion on outreach activities held last
October recognized the need for a phased approach and
recommended that future outreach activities focus less
on the issue of reporting and more on assisting States
with issues of implementation.
Based on observations from our outreach
activities and interaction with Member States, the
Committee concluded that for the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), it is important for many
States to receive relevant assistance. For the
Committee to perform its clearing house function
effectively, it is necessary for assistance requests to be
specific. For this purpose, the Committee has prepared
a template, which is currently being sent to all States.
Matching requests for and offers of assistance is

5

S/PV.5806

essential and the Committee will utilize its website as a
tool for that purpose.

proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors.

Finally, I would like to say a few words about
cooperation with other entities. The importance of
cooperation with relevant international organizations
was given special attention when the Security Council
devoted an open meeting last February to the issue of
non-proliferation (see S/PV.5635), at which States, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the World
Customs Organization explored modalities for
cooperation, which resulted in arrangements for
practical cooperation.

The broadest degree of international cooperation
and interaction among States, intergovernmental
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
other entities, including the private sector, is needed to
achieve the goals of resolution 1540 (2004). There is a
need to strengthen the synergy and complementarity of
action of various international bodies in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The United
Nations, and the 1540 Committee, in particular, can
contribute to bringing various players together to
harmonize or coordinate, as appropriate, their activities
to this end.

Under the common strategy arrangement, the
Committee and its experts are broadening their
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, and
their respective experts.
The Committee has also intensified its contacts
with other intergovernmental organizations, regional
organizations and multilateral arrangements with the
potential to contribute to implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) through their programmes and expertise,
in conformity with the mandate of the Committee.
Last but not least, the Committee, in cooperation
with the Office for Disarmament Affairs, organized a
meeting in July 2007, with the participation of several
non-governmental organizations engaged in activities
supporting the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), in order to discuss issues of cooperation,
interaction and possible harmonization of outreach
activities and existing programmes. I believe that these
contacts and this dialogue should be further expanded,
reaching out to parliamentarians and the private sector
as well.
In conclusion, let me share with the Council some
personal observations and suggestions for the way
forward in the Committee’s work.
First of all, it is important to underline that
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a longterm process and requires sustained effort and an
imaginative approach. The positive momentum that has
now been created by the intensified work of the
Committee should be utilized for creating a truly
global and effective system of prevention of the

6

The Council’s open debate with intergovernmental
organizations in February to discuss cooperation in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) was the right
step in this direction. In my view, this practice should
continue
regularly
and
the
participation
of
intergovernmental and international organizations or
multilateral arrangements relevant to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) could be further expanded.
We need to build on what has been achieved so
far and expand the practical cooperation with
intergovernmental organizations such as the IAEA,
OPCW, WCO and others. It will be important to
address some objective and subjective obstacles for
even greater interaction. The role of regional and
subregional organizations like the EU, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
OAS, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), the African Union, the League of Arab
States, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), the
South American Common Market (MERCOSUR) and
others in raising awareness of the importance of and
supporting the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in their respective regions should be further
strengthened.
Regional organizations can facilitate the sharing
of good national practices and lessons learned from
national implementation between the countries of the
regions and can develop frameworks of regional
cooperation between the regional experts and
institutions dealing with different aspects of resolution
1540 (2004).
The proactive engagement of the 1540 Committee
with those organizations should become one of its
outreach priorities in the near future. The Committee

07-64646

S/PV.5806

could also explore the possibilities of furthering
cooperation with non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), using the positive momentum and interest of
NGOs in closer interaction with the Committee that
was expressed during the meeting in July. The NGOs
proved to have valuable expertise and potential in
supporting the work of the 1540 Committee in various
regions through organizing tailored workshops aimed
at facilitating national implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
Last
but
not
least,
engagement
with
parliamentarians and the private sector should also be
intensified to help educate legislators and business
people on the importance of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) for national security and
international trade and to win their interest and support
for these issues.
In the practical work of the Committee, the main
focus should shift away from reporting to
implementation of all aspects of resolution 1540
(2004). In this regard, tailored outreach and assistance
that is responsive to regional and other specific
circumstances could help Member States cope with the
challenges of implementation. As the Committee stated
in its work programme, national plans or road maps for
implementation can serve States as useful planning
tools, and this idea should be promoted further.
Interested countries should receive more assistance in
developing their national action plans.
The Committee’s clearing-house function should
be further developed using the assistance template as a
tool. In this regard, the Committee should finalize the
discussion on how its web site can be better used to
facilitate the initial contacts between assistance
providers and countries requesting assistance and how
it can help the flow of information when assistance is
requested and when assistance is offered. To enable
more active assistance of experts to individual
countries, the possibility of a trust fund for country
visits by experts should be considered.
I believe the mandate of the Committee should be
extended and the continuity of the Expert Group
preserved without preventing gradual rotation.
Finally, let me thank the members of the
Committee and the experts for their outstanding work.
Let me now turn to Slovakia’s experience in
chairing the Security Council Informal Working Group

07-64646

on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions
over the past 12 months.
I took over the chairmanship of the Working Group
from Ambassador Kenzo Oshima of Japan at an important
period — after the Working Group was revitalized in
2006 and after, as part of the revitalization process, the
Council decided that the Working Group should be
chaired by a single Ambassador for a extended period
instead of the previous ineffective system of rotating
chairmanship to coincide with the monthly presidency
of the Council. In January 2007 the Council decided to
continue and standardize that new practice, which has
proven very useful and effective, with my appointment
as Chairman for the whole year.
Under the able Japanese chairmanship last year,
the Working Group’s intensive efforts materialized in a
substantive outcome — that is, a note by the President
of the Security Council, in document S/2006/507. In
this context, our priorities for the year 2007 have been
promoting the full implementation of the note and
tackling a range of other practical issues pertaining to
documentation and procedures that have arisen from
everyday work of the Council or that have been
referred to the Working Group.
All members of the Security Council have been
actively engaged in those efforts and have repeatedly
committed themselves to implementing all agreed
measures contained in the note.
I would like to use this opportunity to express my
sincere gratitude to all members of the Security
Council for their active and constructive approach. As
a result, good progress has been achieved. However, I
see this as work in progress, and I believe that further
progress could and should be achieved in a number of
areas. The Security Council and the Working Group
need to continue exploring ways to facilitate even
better implementation of all agreed measures in the
area of documentation and procedures.
I would like to highlight five of the agreed
measures contained in the note that the Working Group
has been most engaged with in the earlier part of this
year: first, written reports of the Secretary-General
submitted to the Council; second, statements by
Council members and oral briefings provided by
members of the Secretariat; third, preparation of the
so-called areas of focus for informal consultations;
fourth, the planning of subsidiary bodies’ meetings;
and fifth, Arria formula meetings.

7

S/PV.5806

As for practical documentation and procedural
questions, the Working Group has tackled seven in
particular: first, the participation of representatives of
the Secretariat and members of individual Council
delegations in formal closed consultations of the
whole; second, the circulation of documents and
information to Council members; third, the allocation
of conference and translation services needed for
everyday Council work; fourth, the formats of Security
Council meetings; fifth, the Security Council annual
report to the General Assembly; sixth, the Security
Council’s interaction and dialogue with other United
Nations bodies, the Secretariat and other Member
States; and seventh, matters of which the Council is
seized and the so-called rolling agenda of the Council.
An important part of our work this year was close
cooperation and interaction with the Secretariat, whose
role is essential. That is why, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Working Group, I met several times
with the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General and
the Under-Secretaries-General for Political Affairs and
for Peacekeeping Operations. Those meetings were
extremely useful, and I believe they have contributed
positively to the clarification of some open issues and
to ensuring full implementation of all agreed measures
in the area of documentation and procedures on the
part of the Secretariat.
I would like to conclude by providing a few
recommendations for the future work of the Working
Group based on this year’s experience. Slovakia
believes that in the future, primary focus could be on
the following four areas. First, efforts aimed at
enhancing transparency and openness of the work of
the Security Council, including the work of its
subsidiary bodies should continue. Second, interaction
and dialogue between the Security Council and other
Member States, in particular those directly concerned
and affected, should be enhanced and widened. Thirdly,
Security Council private meetings with troopcontributing countries should be revitalized. Fourthly,
efforts aimed at ensuring maximum relevance of the
Security Council’s annual report to the General
Assembly should be continued.
Finally, let me turn to the work of the Security
Council Ad Hoc Committee on Mandate Review. I
have served as one of its Co-Chairs since May 2006.
That year, my fellow Co-Chair was Ambassador
Bolton, former Permanent Representative of the United
States, and this year my Co-Chair has been

8

Ambassador Kumalo, Permanent Representative of
South Africa. I would like to take this opportunity to
express my most sincere gratitude to both Permanent
Representatives and to their delegations for their
effective cooperation in fulfilling this important task.
The Ad Hoc Committee on Mandate Review was
established in May 2006 with the aim of conducting
the review of Security Council mandates called for by
the heads of State and Government in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document (A/60/1) and to continue
consideration of the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report of March 2006 entitled
“Mandating
and
delivering:
analysis
and
recommendations to facilitate the review of mandates”
(A/60/733).
In its work, the Ad Hoc Committee has been
guided by the overall purpose of streamlining and
strengthening the Security Council’s efforts in
promoting international peace and security, and thereby
contributing to the effectiveness of the United Nations
as a whole. The Committee has facilitated a practical,
real-world review of the Security Council’s existing
mandates. It has been proceeding in close cooperation
and coordination with the United Nations Secretariat,
which has been providing invaluable assistance to the
Committee. In this regard, I would especially like to
express our appreciation to representatives of the
Department of Political Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
The main objective of the mandate review
exercise in the Security Council has been to assess and
streamline its work in the areas that have, for various
reasons, not been regularly on the Council’s agenda or
at the centre of its attention. The mandate review
process has provided the Council with a truly unique
and worthwhile opportunity to look at its own work
and mandates from a different — meaning wider, more
systematic and more holistic — perspective as opposed
to the traditional approach of dealing with individual
situations or mandates with a fairly narrow or limited
view.
The mandate review process in the Security
Council has been complementary to the Council’s
existing periodic review of activities and individual
mandates. It has been comprehensive, placing
mandates in their broader context, including, if
appropriate, on a regional or functional basis, so as to
better ascertain how individual mandates contribute to

07-64646

S/PV.5806

the Council’s overall objectives. The Committee’s main
role has been to facilitate the decision-making
processes of the Security Council on individual
mandates and to provide recommendations and
guidance, but not to make any decisions on individual
mandates.
Initially, the process was shaped in two phases. In
the first phase, from May to December 2006, we
looked mostly at mandates older than five years that
were not periodically renewed and a few other issues.
In the second phase, that of this year, we have also
addressed issues that required longer, in-depth
consideration, such as reporting cycles for individual
situations and mandates, wider regional or subregional
approaches, thematic mandates and a mandate registry
prepared by the Secretariat in 2005.
In the course of its approximately 20 months of
work so far, the Committee has utilized a range of
useful tools and mechanisms, including informal
meetings of territorial expert groups, Committee
meetings held at the ambassadorial level, update
briefings provided to the Committee by members of the
Secretariat on mandates older than five years and not
periodically renewed and an open meeting of the
Committee on the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region of Africa. These tools and mechanisms
have facilitated meaningful and effective work of the
Committee.
In order to exchange views and compare notes
about the mandate review processes in the Security
Council and the General Assembly, the Co-Chairs of
the Committee met several times with the Co-Chairs of
the mandate review process in the General Assembly.
While agreeing that each organ should concentrate on
reviewing its own mandates, these meetings proved to
be very useful. Our latest such meeting was held on
10 December with the new Co-Chairs for mandate
review in the General Assembly, the representatives of
Namibia and New Zealand.
I believe the outcomes and conclusions of the
mandate review process of the Security Council could
be very briefly characterized as follows: first, the
Council, in an appropriate format, should continue
receiving update briefings from the Secretariat on
mandates older than five years and not periodically
renewed. Secondly, the Council should continue
considering, on a regular basis, appropriate reporting

07-64646

cycles for individual situations on its agenda. Thirdly,
the mandate registry prepared by the Secretariat in
2005 is a very useful tool which should be updated and
maintained in a joint effort of all relevant branches of
the United Nations Secretariat. Fourthly, when
appropriate, the Council should continue examining
ways and means of streamlining and systematizing its
mandating work, including through taking wider
regional or subregional approaches to mandates. Lastly,
when appropriate, the Council should continue its
interaction and dialogue with other relevant United
Nations organs on the issue of mandate review,
including in addressing potential areas of overlap or
duplication.
I would like to conclude by saying that it is our
belief that the Security Council Ad Hoc Committee on
Mandate Review has reached the main goals for which
it was established. However, the issue of mandate
review remains very valid and relevant for the Council,
even though it reviews and renews most of its
mandates periodically. The added value of mandate
review and of the Council’s recent positive experience
with it lies mainly in the area of streamlining and
systematizing the Council’s work, taking wider
regional or subregional approaches and addressing
potential overlap or duplication. In this context, I
would like to recommend that the Council, in its new
composition next year, find an adequate mechanism to
make best use of the lessons learned so far and to keep
this important instrument in its tool box.
Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the close of Peru’s mandate in the Security Council
during this biennium, I have also come to the end of
my functions as the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
of the Working Group established pursuant to
resolution 1566 (2004) on two initiatives in the fight
against terrorism. The comments I am about to make, I
make under my sole responsibility, and are not
attributable to any other delegation, nor should those
be seen in any way as a record of the work of these
subsidiary organs.
The measures established and progressively
adapted by the Security Council in resolutions 1493
(2003), 1596 (2005), 1698 (2006) and 1771 (2007), in
general terms aim at preventing all Congolese or
foreign armed militias or groups operating in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly in the

9

S/PV.5806

east, from being supplied with arms and/or
participating in military activities. To that end, the
Committee established a list of persons and entities
which have infringed on these measures, including
individuals involved in the financing of these illicit
acts, in particular in the trafficking of natural
resources. As of July 2006, that list should include
those individuals who recruit children or commit grave
offences against children in conflict situations.
Peru feels that those measures have been
established in order to support the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; to halt the spiral of
violence; to ensure the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of these groups and militias; to
encourage the process of the integration of the armed
forces and police of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as reform of the Security sector; and to
contribute towards the protection of children victims of
conflict.
We must acknowledge that it was not possible to
make substantive progress in the monitoring of the
arms embargo, nor in controlling the financing of the
illicit trafficking in arms through the exploitation, trade
and illegal transfer of natural resources, nor in the
monitoring of the travel ban of the individuals on the
list.
As reflected in the report submitted by the Group
of Experts that assisted the Committee in its tasks, the
measures appear to be of limited effectiveness in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in neighbouring
countries. One must bear in mind that it is all the more
difficult to distinguish between legal and illegal flows
of arms or natural resources when the principal
protagonists are non-State actors, when conflict is rife
in border areas and when monitoring efforts must cover
a territory as vast and porous as that of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The ability to monitor those
measures is increased when there is cooperation with
States that have the ability to control the movements of
individuals and the circulation of valuable primary
materials or with States that are able to monitor
consignments to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with all the necessary details.
In view of this situation, the chairmanship of the
Committee focused its work on two aspects – as a
facilitator seeking to promote cooperation between
those States directly concerned in implementing the
measures and in their support of the Group of Experts,

10

and as a catalyst seeking to forge the consensus that is
crucial for the work of the Committee.
This was a period during which the Security
Council and the principal national, regional and
international actors joined efforts to help establish an
elective and effective Government within the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This convergence
of aims has been the greatest strength of the Committee
in its dialogue with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and also in its dialogue with Rwanda, Uganda
and Burundi and also with States outside of the region.
Thus, the Committee has witnessed the improved
cooperation of border countries with the Group of
Experts over the two-year period.
In turn, this convergence enabled the Committee
to include a number of individuals and entities subject
to the Council’s measures, which has meant that the
number of tasks linked to the list has increased. On this
point I wish to note that we welcome the agreement
reached within the Committee to facilitate the transfer
of listed and charged individuals to the International
Criminal Court in The Hague. This may have been the
Committee’s greatest contribution to the fight against
impunity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
towards strengthening international criminal justice, in
cooperation with the Congolese authorities.
With regard to the activities of the Committee,
the key concern of the chairmanship has been to
provide follow-up to the reports and recommendations
issued by the Group of Experts and my delegation has
encouraged ongoing contacts and exchanges of ideas with
the Group of Experts. We hope that the new Group of
Experts — which is to submit its report on 15 January
2008 — will continue to effectively contribute towards
the work of the Committee. In turn and in line with the
decision taken by the Security Council, the Committee
discussed how to make use of cooperation with the
International Criminal Police Organization, including
through the participation of its representative to the
United Nations. Consideration of measures in that
regard remains pending.
In addition, we address the recommendations of
the informal Working Group on General Issues of
Sanctions contained in resolution 1732 (2006), in
particular those sanctions that could be immediately
implemented. I also wish to recommend the ongoing
consideration of this issue.

07-64646

S/PV.5806

One year following the elections and a number of
months after the establishment of the Government of
the third republic in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, two processes must find an appropriate and
convergent solution. On the one hand, there is the need
to support the elected authorities in exercising their
functions in terms of internal order, the protection of
their people and State security and exercising control
over their natural wealth. On the other hand, there is
the persistence of national and foreign illegal armed
groups who receive arms supplies and financing for
their activities, attack civilian populations, disregard
State authority — as is unfortunately the case in the
Kivus — and cause regional destabilization.
Security Council resolution 1771 (2007) contains
the first expansion of the exemptions to the measures
adopted by the Council between 2003 and 2006; it is
likely that this adaptation will continue. My delegation
is of the view that this post-transition process should
continue; it is crucial for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region and for the stability of the
continent. It should also continue to be guided by the
shared and unanimous vision of the Council, of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the countries
concerned.
To conclude, I would like to thank the Security
Council Subsidiary Organs Branch, led by
Mr. Aleksandar Martinovic. In particular, I would like
to thank Loraine Rickard-Martin, David Biggs and
Francesca Jannotti-Pecci for their invaluable and
unwavering support over these past two years. I also
wish to convey my gratitude to delegations for their
constructive cooperation with the chairmanship and to
Counsellor Vitaliano Gallardo of the Peruvian Mission
for his daily participation and involvement in the work
of the Committee.
Allow me now to turn to the work of the Working
Group established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004)
to consider and submit recommendations to the
Council on practical measures to be imposed upon
individuals, groups or entities involved in or associated
with terrorist activities, other than those designated by
the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions Committee, and to
consider the possibility of establishing an international
fund to compensate victims of terrorist acts and their
families through voluntary contributions. At the
Working Group meeting held in April 2006, it was

ascertained that the conclusions contained in the report
under the previous chairmanship — held by the
Permanent Representative of the Philippines — had not
changed and that therefore the circumstances did not
allow for substantive progress in those two areas.
In keeping with the general views of the Group,
the Chair decided to continue to address these issues
through bilateral contacts and in particular to continue
the process which had led to the adoption of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General
Assembly resolution 60/288) to the extent that this
framework could contribute elements relevant to the
goals of the Working Group mandate. As we know, the
rights of victims and possible compensatory
mechanisms are elements contained in the Strategy,
and the Counter-Terrorism Task Force is working in
this area. We believe that the Security Council should
take these elements into account when it continues to
addresses this issue.
With regard to the adoption, by the United
Nations of a list of terrorist entities and individuals in
addition to the existing list on Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, this would require reconciling the differing
viewpoints held by Member States.
I would like to conclude by thanking delegations
for their contributions and the Security Council
Subsidiary Organs Branch for its assistance. I wish also
to take this opportunity to thank the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate for its support for
our work as Chair of Subcommittee A of the CounterTerrorism Committee. Finally I would like to thank
First Secretary Yella Zanelli, protocol of the Peruvian
Mission, who was intensely involved in both areas.
The President: I thank Ambassador VotoBernales for his briefing.
On behalf of the Security Council, I would like to
take this opportunity to express appreciation to the five
outgoing Chairmen — Mr. Okio, Ambassador
Christian, Ambassador Voto-Bernales, Ambassador AlNasser and Ambassador Burian — for the manner in
which they have discharged their important
responsibilities on behalf of the Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

07-64646

11
