General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

154

Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme, the International Labour
Organisation, the United Nations Trust Fund for S<;mth
Africa and the World Food Programme, to contmue
assisting the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in carrying out the humanitarian function
entrusted to him;
6. Urges all States, United Nations agencies and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to contribute generously to the assistance programmes
for these students, both through financial support and
by offering further opportunities for their educational
and vocational training, as well as by financial and
material contributions for their care and maintenance;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to continue
all efforts necessary for an effective programme of
educational and other appropriate assistance for the
South African student refugees in Botswana, Lesotho,
Swaziland and Zambia;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep the matter under review and to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session,
through the Economic and Social Council at its second
regular session of 1979, on the progress made in these
programmes.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/165.

Status of persons refusing service in
military or police forces used to enforce

apartheid
The General Assembly,
Mindful that the Charter of the United Nations
sets forth, as one of the purposes of the Organization,
the achievement of international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Recalling article 18 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 75 which states that everyone has the
right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
Conscious that the Proclamation of Teheran,76 the
Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid77 and
other United Nations declarations, conventions and
resolutions have condemned apartheid as a crime
against the conscience and dignity of mankind,
Having regard to section II, paragraph 11, of the
Lagos Declaration, which proclaims that the United
Nations and the international community have a special responsibility towards those imprisoned, restricted
or exiled for their struggle against apartheid,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid,78
75 Resolution
7 6 Final Act

217 A (III).
of the International Conference on Human
Rights, Teheran, 22 April-13 May 1968 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.68.XIV.2), chap. II.
77 Report of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, Lagos, 22-26 August 1977 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.77.XlV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
78 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/33/22 and Corr.I).

l. Recognizes the right of all persons to refuse
service in military or police forces which are used to
enforce apartheid;
2. Calls upon Member States to grant asylum or
safe transit to another State, in the spirit of the Declaration on Territorial Asylum, 79 to persons compelled
to leave their country of nationality solely because of
a conscientious objection to assisting in the enforcement of apartheid through service in military or police
forces;
3. Urges Member States to consider favourably
the granting to such persons of all the rights and
benefits accorded to refugees under existing legal instruments;
4. Calls upon appropriate United Nations bodies,
including the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations, to provide all necessary assistance to such persons.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/166.

Question of a convention on the rights
of the child

The General Assembly,
Having in mind its resolution 31 / 169 of 21 December 1976, in which it proclaimed the year 1979
International Year of the Child,
Recalling its resolution 32/109 of 15 December
1977, in which it, inter alia, reaffirmed that the major
focus of the International Year of the Child should
be at the national level, but that this should be supported by regional and international co-operation,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 20 (XXXIV) of 8 March 197880 and Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1978/ 18 of 5 May 1978
and 1978/40 of 1 August 1978,
Bearing in mind that, since the adoption of the
Declaration of the Rights of the Child, 81 nineteen
years have already elapsed, and that during this time
the principles of the Declaration have played a significant part in the promotion of the rights of children
in the entire world as well as in shaping various forms
of international co-operation in this sphere,
Considering that during these nineteen years the
conditions to take further steps by adopting a convention on the rights of the child have been created,
Conscious of the need to strengthen further the
comprehensive care and the well-being of children all
over the world,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the decision of
the Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-fourth
session, in its resolution 20 (XXXIV), to continue
at its thirty-fifth session, as one of its priorities, its
consideration of a draft convention on the rights of
the child;
7 9 Resolution

2112 (XXII), annex.
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
8 1 Resolution B86 (XIV).
80 See
