S/2006/962

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 December 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 12 December 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the sixth report of the International
Independent Investigation Commission, which was prepared pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1595 (2005), 1636 (2005), 1644 (2005) and 1686 (2006).
The report describes progress made by the Commission since its previous
report of 25 September 2006 (S/2006/760) in investigating the assassination of
former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 other victims, and in providing
technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities in their investigation of certain other
attacks perpetrated in Lebanon since 1 October 2004.
During this period, the Commission returned from Cyprus, where it had been
temporarily relocated from 22 July to 13 October 2006, to its main operating base in
Lebanon and resumed full operations. The report provides information on the
Commission’s continued priority work in the forensic investigation of the Hariri
case, focusing on the identification of the perpetrators as well as the advancement of
its technical assistance on the 14 cases, including the establishment of linkages.
Furthermore, the Commission, as mandated by the Security Council, started to
provide technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities in their investigation of the
tragic assassination on 21 November 2006 of Pierre Gemayel, the Minister of
Industry of Lebanon.
I wish to thank the staff of the Commission for their extraordinary dedication
in carrying forward their work in difficult circumstances, in particular in view of the
volatile security situation in Lebanon during the reporting period. I also wish to
thank Serge Brammertz for his continued leadership in advancing the investigation
of the attack and the Government of Lebanon for its continued support for and
cooperation with the Commission.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council. Meanwhile, I am transmitting the report to the
Government of Lebanon.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-65433 (E) 151206

*0665433*

S/2006/962

Annex
Sixth report of the International Independent Investigation
Commission established pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1595 (2005), 1636 (2005) and 1644 (2005)
Serge Brammertz
Commissioner

Beirut
12 December 2006

Summary
In its resolution 1644 (2005) of 15 December 2005, the Security Council
requested the International Independent Investigation Commission to report to it on
its progress, including on the cooperation received from the Syrian authorities, every
three months.
The present report summarizes the progress made by the Commission in its
investigative activities between 25 September and 10 December 2006. During this
period, the Commission returned to Lebanon from Cyprus, where it had temporarily
relocated from 22 July to 13 October 2006.
Since the Commission’s return to Lebanon, it has operated in a volatile political
environment, reflected in the assassination on 21 November 2006 of the Minister of
Industry, Pierre Gemayel, and the national and international attention surrounding
the establishment of a special tribunal for Lebanon.
The Commission’s investigative direction in the Hariri case has remained
focused on three areas: developing crime scene evidence from investigation and
forensic analysis, investigating potential perpetrators and collecting evidence relating
to the linkage and contextual aspects of the case. The Commission, in close
cooperation with the Lebanese judiciary, has also continued to take a proactive role
in the 14 other cases.
The assassination of Pierre Gemayel led to the request by the Security Council
in a letter dated 22 November 2006 for the Commission to extend technical
assistance in the Gemayel case to the Lebanese authorities. This constituted an
expansion of the mandate contained in Council resolution 1644 (2005) and extended
in its resolution 1686 (2006) in relation to the investigation of other terrorist attacks
perpetrated in Lebanon since 1 October 2004. The Commission has responded by
providing technical assistance, including forensic support, witness interviews and
evidence collection and analysis, as requested.
The Commission’s close interaction with the Lebanese authorities on all
matters relevant to its mandate has been ongoing. The Commission continues to
receive support from the Syrian Arab Republic in providing information and
facilitating interviews with individuals located on Syrian territory. In addition, the
Commission notes the assistance received from other Member States in response to
its requests and highlights the need for such assistance to be provided in a timely
manner as this is critical to the progress of the investigation.

2

06-65433

S/2006/962

Contents
Page

I.

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1–10

4

II.

Progress in the investigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11–92

5

A.

Hariri investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17–60

6

B.

Technical assistance in other cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

61–92

12

External cooperation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

93–104

17

A.

Interaction with the Lebanese authorities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

93–96

17

B.

International cooperation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

97–104

18

Organizational support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

105–113

19

III.

IV.

V.

06-65433

Paragraphs

A.

Internal procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

105

19

B.

Administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

106–113

19

Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

114–119

20

3

S/2006/962

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1644
(2005) of 15 December 2005, in which the Council requested the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission to report every three months to
the Council on the progress of its inquiry and on cooperation matters, including the
cooperation received from the Syrian authorities. This report, the fourth submitted
in 2006, provides an overview of issues described in the previous reports and notes
substantial progress in the work of the Commission, as well as new elements that
have come to light since its last report of 25 September 2006 (S/2006/760).
2.
During the reporting period, the Commission returned from Cyprus, where it
had been temporarily relocated for a two-and-a-half-month period for security
reasons, to continue its operations in Lebanon. As work continued in the temporary
environment, the dislocation had minimal impact upon the momentum of the
Commission’s investigation.
3.
The broader political climate in Lebanon has been volatile. Two major events
have had an impact on the Commission’s investigative activities and security
requirements, namely the assassination of the Minister for Industry, Pierre Gemayel,
in Beirut on 21 November and the national and international discourse surrounding
the establishment of a special tribunal for Lebanon.
4.
The Commission’s investigative direction in the Hariri case has remained
focused on three areas: developing crime scene evidence from investigation and
forensic analysis, investigating potential perpetrators and collecting evidence
relating to the linkage and contextual aspects of the case. Over the past three
months, the Commission has continued with all the investigative projects identified
in its previous reports, placing emphasis on the motives to assassinate Rafik Hariri,
issues associated with Ahmed Abu Adass, linkage among the 14 other cases and on
forensic analysis. In support of these objectives, the Commission has conducted 60
interviews during the reporting period.
5.
With regard to the 14 cases in which the Commission is providing technical
assistance to the Lebanese authorities in line with the revised mandate given by the
Security Council in its resolution 1686 (2006), the Commission has focused on the
six targeted attacks during this reporting period.
6.
Following the request from the Security Council on 22 November 2006 (see
S/2006/915), the Commission immediately committed managerial and operational
staff from its existing resources to provide technical assistance to the Lebanese
authorities concerning the assassination of Minister Pierre Gemayel.
7.
The Commission continues to maintain its close working relationship with the
Lebanese authorities on all matters relevant to its mandate. The assistance of other
States is also necessary to the success of its work and, in general, the Commission
has received assistance from a number of States in a wide range of investigative and
analytical areas. However, it has also experienced delays and a lack of response
from some States. The Commission continues to receive assistance from the Syrian
Arab Republic in providing information and facilitating interviews with individuals
located on Syrian territory. This cooperation remains an important component of the
Commission’s ongoing work.

4

06-65433

S/2006/962

8.
The Commission is evaluating its work in the light of the creation of a special
tribunal for Lebanon and is envisaging future planning activities to facilitate the
transition to such a tribunal. The Commission is organizing its investigative outputs,
evidence, data and files in such a manner as to ensure continuity and enable the
tribunal to draw upon these resources and begin its work in as smooth a manner as
possible, if and when it comes into being.
9.
Renewed efforts during the reporting period to increase the capacity and
resources of the Commission to enable it to meet the significant investigative,
analytical, security, translation/interpretation and other challenges associated with
its expanding mandate have so far yielded positive results. For example, the
Commission has made considerable efforts to recruit new staff to fill international
positions, resulting in a decrease in the vacancy rate from 29 per cent in August to
19 per cent in December.
10. The Commission has reached a critical stage in its investigations and, with this
in mind, the Commission and the Prosecutor General of Lebanon believe that
placing information concerning witnesses and suspects in the public domain would
be contrary to the principles of fairness and justice and would defeat the purpose of,
and be prejudicial to, any case presented before a tribunal. The Commission
believes that this position is a standard investigative approach that also creates
beneficial conditions under which witnesses, especially those considered sensitive
owing to their placement and/or knowledge, can step forward to engage with the
Commission in confidential circumstances.

II. Progress in the investigations
11. During this reporting period, the Commission’s investigative direction in the
case of the murder of Rafik Hariri and 22 others has continued to be focused on
three main objectives: firstly, the development of crime scene evidence from
investigation and forensic analysis; secondly, the investigation of potential
perpetrators; and, thirdly, the collection of evidence relating to the linkage and
contextual aspects of the case. In support of these objectives, and among other
operational work it has undertaken, the Commission has conducted 46 interviews
during the reporting period.
12. As regards the 14 cases in which technical assistance is being provided to the
Lebanese authorities, the Commission has conducted 14 additional interviews
relating to the six targeted attacks, focusing on two main objectives: to investigate
each case individually and concurrently to establish links between each and any of
the cases and the Hariri case. The remaining eight cases are gradually being
integrated into the investigative activity, with the focus on modus operandi and
perpetrator linkages between the cases.
13. During the reporting period, the Commission continued with the 20 projects
that form the framework of its investigations. In particular, the Commission has
focused upon and expanded its work on the motives for the Hariri assassination, the
linkage between 6 of the 14 cases, the investigation relating to Ahmed Abu Adass
and associated individuals, and forensic analysis to assist in identifying the
perpetrators.

06-65433

5

S/2006/962

14. Such prioritization allows a logical development of the cases and enables
management of the increasing workload. In this reporting period, for example,
electronic data holdings doubled, thereby creating additional management and
analytical tasks that accompany such a vast amount of newly acquired information.
15. Similarly, the workload for the 60 interviews undertaken for both the Hariri
case and the other cases during this reporting period has been considerable. Each
interview has taken on average one and a half days to complete, with sometimes
over 50 pages of text per interview. The preparation time for the interviews is
considerable and the time needed to analyse the content and integrate the
information into the broader case after its collection is also significant. In this
context, the Commission has continued to benefit from having multidisciplinary
teams working on all its investigative projects. This approach has ensured flexibility
to respond to the priorities without delay or reduction in quality of output.
16. Following the request from the Security Council of 22 November 2006, the
Commission also began the provision of technical assistance to the Lebanese
authorities concerning the assassination of Pierre Gemayel on 21 November 2006.
Work undertaken to date includes extensive forensic assistance and the conduct of
13 identification interviews.

A.

Hariri investigation

1.

Crime scene and associated topics
Forensic exploitation of the crime scene
17. Following the completion of the collection of forensic evidence at the crime
scene in June 2006, the Commission has received the final report from the forensic
experts who participated in that project. The detailed report provides many findings
that are consistent with previous forensic work, confirms the main hypotheses of the
modus operandi of the perpetrators and provides new information previously
unknown to the Commission.
18. Among the findings from the report, it was confirmed that there was only one
blast, that the Mitsubishi van was the carrier of the improvised explosive device
(IED) and that the blast originated from inside the loading platform of the vehicle.
19. Investigations inside the crater showed that a rectangular depression of a
further 40 centimetres in depth was present in a specific area. The rocky soil in that
area was micronized and blackened, consistent with having been subjected to high
pressure and high temperatures. This observation indicated that the van itself was
finally situated slightly obliquely to the other parked vehicles. The report also
provides new information relating to other aspects of the explosives and the van,
which the Commission will continue to investigate over the next reporting period.
Findings to date regarding the explosives
20. In March 2005, many samples that originated from the crater wall indicated
the presence of the explosive TNT. In November 2005, the swabs from the rear axle,
wheel rim and crankshaft of the Mitsubishi Canter van showed significant amounts
of the explosive RDX. In the last forensic analysis, in addition to RDX on the rear

6

06-65433

S/2006/962

wheel flange, the explosives PETN, TNT and DNT were detected in lower
concentrations, along with an indication of TNP (picric acid).
21. An estimate of the concentration ratios between the explosives has now been
made, where the ratio between both RDX and PETN, and RDX and TNT/DNT have
been calculated at approximately 10:1. The presence of such large amounts of RDX
and the consideration of these ratios strongly supports the hypothesis that an RDXbased high explosive was used in the attack. RDX is a powerful high explosive that
may be used either by itself or in combination with other materials, making it
particularly useful in, for example, military applications.
22. According to the analysis conducted on behalf of the Commission to date, two
hypotheses concerning the explosives have emerged: firstly, that the main charge
was composed of RDX and TNT, with the detonating cord (PETN) linking together
the explosive charges; secondly, the explosive charge was composed of TNT and
Semtex (RDX and PETN), an explosive that has been widely used previously in
terrorist bombings within and outside the region.
Findings to date regarding the initiating system
23. The Commission’s view concerning the initiating system is that triggering an
explosion in order to deliver an impact upon a moving vehicle requires a high
degree of precision in the timing. This precludes the possibility that a time-delay
mechanism was used. Time-delay mechanisms incorporate mechanical, electrical or
chemical timing devices that only function after a specified time period has elapsed.
In this case, given the need for precision timing, the use of a remote-control
mechanism or direct trigger (possibly a “suicide bomber”) mechanism is more
likely. However, the Commission considers that the use of a remote-control
mechanism is highly improbable in this case for a number of reasons.
24. Firstly, all the electronic parts that were recovered at the crime scene have
been subjected to expert analysis and the Commission has found that no parts
originated from a remote-control activation mechanism of an IED.
25. Secondly, of the three electronic countermeasure devices in the convoy of
Rafik Hariri, two were found to have most probably been operating at the time of
the explosion. These devices were designed to disturb the signals from a remotecontrolled mechanism intended to detonate an IED. The countermeasure device in
the last Mercedes 500, the vehicle closest to the explosion, was completely
destroyed. The device in the Mercedes 600 driven by Hariri was severely burned,
but an expert examination revealed that it is likely that the device was operating
properly when the explosion occurred. Finally, the device in the first Mercedes 500
was largely intact and was operating properly.
26. Thirdly, the 33 pieces of human remains of the unidentified male that were
recovered at the crime scene are very small. The physical state and size of these
human parts, and the fact that they were all found in the same area west of the
crater, indicate that this male was very close to the IED. Also, a small number of the
parts show the presence of plastic material that possibly comes from electric wires
associated with the device.
27. In view of the above factors, the Commission considers that the most likely
scenario for the activation of the IED is that a person directly triggered the IED
from within or immediately in front of the Mitsubishi van.

06-65433

7

S/2006/962

Geographical origin of the bomber
28. The complete tooth and other biological parts belonging to the same male
found on the crime scene during the investigations carried out in June 2006 and
earlier are being analysed in order to establish, if possible, the geographical origin
of the person. It is this individual who the Commission believes most probably
detonated the IED.
29. The general methodology is to examine the ratio between isotopes in elements
found in different parts of the person’s body. The ratios are not constant, but vary
depending on the geographical location of the individual and in other ways through
physical, chemical and biological processes within the person’s body. Different parts
of the human body reflect different time windows relative to when body organs or
tissues were formed, with which isotopic composition and in which geographical
environment. Time windows for analysis range from childhood for dense bones and
tooth enamel to as recently as two weeks before the person’s demise for the part of
hair closest to the skin.
30. A number of samples have been analysed for their isotopic compositions in
this project. These include hair, sternum and tooth samples of the unidentified man;
samples of reference hair; samples of reference teeth of the approximate age of the
man; and samples of soils, street dust and water.
31. The results of the expert report in this first phase of analysis show that the
individual did not spend his youth in Lebanon, but was situated there in the last two
to three months before his death. The report discusses the type of area in which the
individual lived during the last 10 years or so of his life, although at this stage no
specific region can as yet be derived from the analysis. The Commission has also
received other information concerning geographical origin, which it is unable to
disclose at this time. This forensic process will continue into the next reporting
period.
32. A second phase of analysis will be undertaken during the next reporting
period, with a wider analysis of hair, geochemical and other samples from relevant
countries and other areas. As a result, the isotope analysis results may point towards
the identification of a specific geographical origin of the man likely to have
detonated the device.
Ethnic origin and description of the bomber
33. In a similar context, the Commission is undertaking forensic analysis to try to
establish the ethnic origin of the man likely to have detonated the device. This is
being done by analysing the alleles in the DNA profile of the 33 human parts and
comparing them for similarities or variations in other allele frequency distributions
from other States and regions. The findings of comparative frequencies enable a
statistical probability analysis of the person’s origin.
34. The upper right central incisor found at the crime scene in February 2005 and
belonging to the unidentified male shows a distinguishing mark related to the
lingual surface shape of the crown, which has the form of a spade. This feature is
rarely seen among people from Lebanon. The tooth found on the crime scene during
the investigations carried out in June 2006 is a lower right central incisor. Because
of the time elapsed since the assassination, no DNA profile could be drawn from
this tooth. Nevertheless, the odontological examination shows that this lower right

8

06-65433

S/2006/962

incisor belongs to a male, and the X-rays indicate that this man had a similar age to
the unidentified man. Considering that this tooth was found in the same vicinity as
the 33 human parts, the Commission believes that this lower right incisor most
likely belongs to the same individual.
35. In addition, the Commission is conducting an anthropological analysis of some
of the 33 individual biological remains of the individual in order to develop a partial
description of the man that will assist in future investigative steps.
36. The methodologies involved in identifying the geographical and ethnic origin
of an individual are complex and time-consuming, as is the reconstruction of the
bomber’s physiognomy. Also, the specificity of the results may not be guaranteed.
The Commission is mindful that results must therefore be interpreted carefully and
the limitations clearly understood. The Commission will treat future results as
forensic information to be used for lead purposes in the investigation.
Mitsubishi van identification
37. Documentation and technical information received by the Commission from
Japan, together with its own sourcing of key manuals and documents, have enabled
it to make a preliminary association of some of the vehicle parts found in the crater
at the crime scene with those of a Mitsubishi van. An external expert will be brought
in to confirm identification of those parts and will assist in other technical aspects of
vehicle identification, using an exhibits inventory process to support the work.
Resolution of issues from crime scene investigations
38. The Commission has resolved certain aspects of its crime scene investigations
to its satisfaction at present. These include the issue of the alleged missing closedcircuit television footage from the Phoenicia Hotel, which has been identified and is
being analysed; establishing the reason for the last-minute arrival of a person in a
rented van close to the scene of the crime some seconds before the explosion;
investigating the reduction in government security for Hariri once he had ceased to
be the Prime Minister; and issues concerning the position of Hariri in his vehicle
and the position of his vehicle in the convoy.
Ongoing investigations
39. There are a number of leads that continue to be investigated, such as the
allegations of tampering with the crime scene and obstruction of the investigation,
and developing the information concerning alleged earlier operational activity
against Hariri by the apparent bombing team and other individuals.
40. The Commission is also continuing to investigate the discovery at the crime
scene in June 2006 of certain personal effects of a victim of the explosion and
matters arising from a victim at the crime scene who had been discovered in a
situation protected from the blast but who was killed by falling masonry. In
addition, the Commission continues its work relating to seismological analysis,
trajectory analysis and three-dimensional reconstruction of the crime scene, and the
sounds of the blast phenomenon.
41. Similarly, with regard to the Mitsubishi van, investigations are ongoing
concerning the acquisition of the van and its preparation with explosives. The
Commission has received new information specifying details of the preparation of

06-65433

9

S/2006/962

the van and establishment of the route of the van as it was brought to the St. George
Hotel area prior to the attack. The Commission has developed working hypotheses
based upon the recently acquired information.
42. Further interviews are required of crime scene witnesses and, upon receipt of
the final forensic biological report, further DNA research and comparative analysis
on profiles acquired from the June 2006 crime scene exploitation will lead to
additional investigative work being undertaken.
2.

Individuals involved in the commission of the crime
Communications
43. The Commission has conducted seven interviews in connection with the
alleged bombing team and their use of six telephones to communicate on the day of
the attack and in the days leading up to it. These interviews have provided new leads
that are currently being pursued and will lead to more interviews in the next
reporting period. Analysis of the use of other associated subscriber identity module
(SIM) cards is also ongoing.
44. The location of the telephones when used and the purposes for which some of
the linking numbers were used have revealed the high degree of security-aware
behaviour exhibited by the individuals under investigation. Some persons used
multiple mobile cellular telephones during a short period of time or registered
telephones using aliases. While such compartmentalization of telephone usage
makes analysis more complex, it helps to provide an understanding of the modus
operandi of the perpetrators.
45. During the reporting period, communications traffic analysis has continued in
support of the other investigative projects. This work consists of preparation for
interviews of key persons and preparing specific reports on communications
between selected individuals. For the purpose of preparation of interviews, data
relating to the different telephones used by the interviewee during a certain period
of interest are gathered and organized into an exploitable electronic format. The
analysis then focuses on the personal contacts and communications links of the
interviewee, the use of intermediaries and the frequency, timing, type, duration and
location of the calls, as well as international call activity.
Ahmed Abu Adass and associated individuals
46. The investigations into Ahmed Abu Adass have continued in this reporting
period, focusing on a number of areas, including on the selection of Abu Adass for
the role he played, as understood by the Commission at present. The Commission is
working to establish how Abu Adass was identified, where and when this occurred,
who involved him in the operation and what happened to him afterwards.
47. To further its investigation in this regard, the Commission has deconstructed
the known time period from the time of Ahmed Abu Adass’ alleged involvement
with certain individuals in late 2004 through the period of his disappearance in
January 2005 to the time of the video being recovered on 14 February 2005.
48. There are significant information gaps between known events on this timeline
and the Commission is working to fill those gaps in order to establish the facts of
Ahmed Abu Adass’ involvement in the crime. The Commission has conducted

10

06-65433

S/2006/962

interviews and forensic research, including DNA and fingerprint analysis, and
computer forensic analysis. It has also examined numerous types of documentation,
including notebooks, manuals, diaries, books and individual documents, and it has
visited locations in Lebanon and elsewhere. This work will continue into the next
reporting period.
49. The Commission has also undertaken investigations with regard to individuals
associated with Ahmed Abu Adass in Lebanon and abroad. This aspect of the case
has elicited some useful information and the Commission remains fully engaged in
pursuing any new leads.
50. In this regard, the Commission has conducted 17 interviews to date in the
Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon and has held a number of meetings with relevant
Syrian and Lebanese officials. It has collected substantial quantities of computer and
electronic information and documentation and visited a number of locations in the
Syrian Arab Republic.
51. In support of this work, the Commission has researched over 200 gigabytes of
electronic data, examined hundreds of pages of documents, diaries and notebooks,
analysed a number of mobile telephones and the records contained therein and
examined large volumes of communications traffic.
52. Over 100 artefacts, some of potentially key relevance, have been sent to a
forensic laboratory for fingerprint and DNA research, imagery analysis and for
comparative analysis with previously acquired items. The Commission awaits the
results of the current forensic analysis to determine the artefacts’ relevance or
otherwise to the Ahmed Abu Adass aspects of the case.
53. Researching and analysing the huge amounts of data collected to date on this
single project absorbs considerable human resources and requires significant storage
capacity and electronic-processing capability. To add to the complexity of this
painstaking analytical work, some of the electronic data received by the
Commission are written in code, some are encrypted and some had already been
deleted. It has also been necessary to synthesize data where appropriate with
communications traffic on mobile cellular telephones.
54. The process of analysis of communications traffic in preparation for interviews
is rigorous and time-consuming. However, it represents an important corroborative
tool to confirm or disprove information concerning the interviewee, as well as
uncovering new information and providing investigative direction.
Other hypotheses
55. The Commission believes its role is to investigate all possible hypotheses that
arise from the investigation and analysis of the Hariri assassination. To this end, it is
investigating groups and individuals who are situated in Lebanon and beyond,
including the group claiming responsibility for the attack in the Abu Adass video.
56. The Commission is examining allegations of the attack on Rafik Hariri being
delivered via aerial means. Further collection work is being undertaken, including
forensically and through the acquisition of technical data. This is done to clarify the
likelihood of such a means being a viable attack option, prior to further investigative
steps being taken. It is anticipated that the Commission will have established this
understanding during the next reporting period.

06-65433

11

S/2006/962

3.

Motives to assassinate Rafik Hariri
Rafik Hariri timeline
57. The Commission is expanding its investigations not only into the last days of
Rafik Hariri’s life, but also into the last 15 months of his life in considerable detail.
The Commission has undertaken 17 more interviews during the reporting period,
including with individuals in the international political arena. These interviews are
lengthy, sensitive and drawn from individuals across the spectrum of persons with
whom Hariri met and interacted.
58. The Commission has collected information concerning the increasing threat
level and pressure exerted on Rafik Hariri over the last 15 months of his life. It has
also established indications that he received assurances from his supporters,
political allies and associates that he would not be the focus of attack. It is alleged
that even up to his last few days, he remained confident that he would not be the
subject of an attack. This area of the Commission’s work, which is highly sensitive
and ongoing, focuses not just on establishing the contextual aspects of Hariri’s life
and working environment, but also on evidential leads in the investigation of
criminal intent and capability.
Motives
59. The Commission continues to work on numerous alternative hypotheses in
examining the motives to kill Rafik Hariri. Included among these are the following:
that Hariri was the victim of an extremist group that assassinated him because of his
links to other States in the region and in the West; Hariri’s position regarding
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004); that the extension of the term of the
Lebanese President may have been a factor; that Hariri had to be killed before his
possible success in the May 2005 elections; Hariri’s involvement with the
newspaper An-Nahar; or that Hariri was likely to expose publicly an alleged grandscale financial misappropriation of funds from the Bank Al-Madina. Another
hypothesis under consideration is that apparently obvious motives were used by the
perpetrators as a convenient cover, with the real intent being to propel other
individuals into the frontline of accusation.
60. The list outlined above is non-exhaustive and is indicative of the complexities
in collecting evidence for each hypothesis, noting that combinations of the above
are also feasible. At this stage in the Commission’s investigations, a smaller number
of motives to assassinate Rafik Hariri emerge as the most plausible. While the
Commission will work on all hypotheses until they are no longer viable, during the
next reporting period it will focus on collecting further evidence to clarify the more
likely motives for his assassination.

B.

Technical assistance in the other cases

1.

The 14 other cases
61. During the reporting period, the Commission has extended further its technical
assistance to the Lebanese authorities in the 14 cases and continues to work closely
with the Prosecutor General of Lebanon and the investigative judges in support of
each one. To date, the Commission has also translated over 2,500 pages of

12

06-65433

S/2006/962

documents relevant to the cases and has received electronic data, which are under
review.
62. In previous reporting periods, the Commission has provided technical
assistance in forensic analysis, communications analysis and the conduct of
interviews. In this reporting phase, the Commission has focused in particular upon
interviewing witnesses associated in some respect with the victims of the six
targeted attacks. It has conducted 14 interviews to date and has a number of
interviews scheduled to be completed in the next reporting period.
63. The objective of the Commission in these interviews is to develop knowledge
about each attack individually and also to develop linkages between the attacks. The
Commission has collected evidence from its interviews to date of a considerable
number of links between the six cases, and between these cases and the Rafik Hariri
case, from a number of different perspectives. This evidence supports the analytical
hypotheses discussed in the Commission’s report of 10 June 2006 (S/2006/375).
(a)

The nature of the attacks
64. The Commission believes that the six targeted attacks were deliberate attempts
to assassinate the intended victims. Each attack was designed to kill the individual
and the fact that three of the victims survived was by chance, not by design.
65. The eight other attacks were of an equally serious specific nature, although
they differed in their execution. They were probably more indiscriminate in their
nature in that a specific individual was not the target per se. However, the possibility
that individuals would be killed as a result of the attacks was extremely high. In fact
4 people were killed and approximately 60 persons were wounded.

(b)

The motives behind the attacks
66. In the six cases, there are factual links between a number of the victims,
aligning them into a group with common objectives and interests. The Commission
believes it is possible that the motive to kill at least some of the victims was
associated with these common objectives and interests and that the attacks may fit
into a broader scheme of intent.
67. In the eight attacks, a possible intent was to kill or wound individuals in order
to spread fear among the population, to destabilize the security situation and to
cause damage to infrastructure. The fact that no advance notice was given of any of
the attacks supports this hypothesis.

(c)

The nature of the victims targeted
68. In the six cases, Samir Kassir and May Chidiac were prominent media figures.
Gebran Tueni was both a prominent media figure and a parliamentarian. Marwan
Hamadeh and Elias El-Murr were then, and remain, government ministers; and
George Hawi was the former Secretary-General of the Communist Party of
Lebanon. Each victim was publicly known in his or her professional life, and each
had a publicly known political orientation.
69. Some of the victims of the targeted attacks were directly or indirectly linked to
the political coalition known as the March 14 Movement. Samir Kassir, Gebran
Tueni and George Hawi were associated with it in one context or another. George

06-65433

13

S/2006/962

Hawi and Samir Kassir supported the Democratic Left Movement, one of the
political parties that fall under the umbrella of the March 14 Movement. Marwan
Hamadeh was involved in the precursor to the March 14 Movement, a group known
as the Bristol Group or Gathering, and remains closely associated with the March 14
Movement today.
70. Another link between Marwan Hamadeh, Rafik Hariri, Samir Kassir and
Gebran Tueni was their association with An-Nahar newspaper. Some of the victims
were also connected to each other or to Rafik Hariri through family ties, friendship
or other personal associations.
71. In the eight attacks, the victims were not publicly known figures with political
views that were broadly known to the Lebanese population. They could be best
characterized as members of the general public.
(d)

The pattern of the attacks, modus operandi and the perpetrators
72. As discussed in the Commission’s report of 10 June 2006 (S/2006/375), the
three specifically targeted persons who appeared to have had very limited personal
protection arrangements were Samir Kassir, George Hawi and May Chidiac. The
modus operandi for these attacks appears similar in that all had IEDs placed
underneath their cars.
73. In these cases, the operational capability and capacity to execute such attacks
was high, yet the method chosen was simplified to maximize the chances of success
with a minimum of complications. Each of the three attacks suggests that prior
surveillance was carried out by the perpetrators to establish the level of personal
security arrangements for the intended victims, including routines and protective
measures, and to identify the relevant vehicle and seat for the placement of the
device.
74. In the cases of the other three specifically targeted persons, namely Marwan
Hamadeh, Elias El-Murr and Gebran Tueni, all three had some form of personal
security arrangements. It is therefore possible that the reason for the different nature
of the attacks on these persons, that is, a bomb being placed in a car parked along
their respective routes, was to overcome their personal security arrangements. The
modus operandi for these attacks appears similar, in that there was a high standard
of operational capacity and capability. In particular, the attacks required good
intelligence and more complex reconnaissance and surveillance coverage to
maximize chances of success.
75. A claim of responsibility was made for both the Kassir and Tueni attacks by a
previously unknown organization, the “Fighters for the Unity and Freedom of Bilad
El-Cham”. The Commission is conducting analysis of this group and has requested
information from States to assist it in this matter.
76. In the eight other cases, the comparable modus operandi of each attack could
point to a single group of perpetrators, who aimed to conduct a series of sustainable
repetitive attacks with a minimum of complications. The operational capability to
execute such attacks was high, yet the method chosen was as simple as possible to
achieve the aim.
77. The explosive devices in each case were sufficiently small and light to be
carried by a single person but large enough to ensure a significant impact. The

14

06-65433

S/2006/962

devices were detonated either by using a timing device or by remote control. The
choice of time and location of the eight attacks could be seen as a deliberate choice
by the perpetrators, reflecting a carefully struck balance between the desired impact
and the means of escape in each attack.
(e)

Further assistance
Forensic analysis
78. The Commission continues to review in detail the forensic evidence available
concerning the cases and to evaluate the crime scene management of each case. The
comparative seismological analysis of the records of the signals recorded by the
National Centre for Geophysics of Lebanon is ongoing, with the Commission
expecting results from experts in the next reporting period.
Communications
79. The Commission continues to conduct communications analysis in support of
witness interviews and in order to generate new investigative leads. One individual
using multiple numbers has been preliminarily linked to a number of attacks and the
Commission has conducted a number of interviews related to this issue. The
objectives are to ascertain the geographical location and timings of certain persons
at the crime scenes where either the victims or associated individuals were present.

2.

Pierre Gemayel case
Background
80. On 22 November 2006, the President of the Security Council sent a letter to
the Secretary-General inviting the Commission to extend its technical assistance to
the Lebanese authorities in this investigation (S/2006/915). The Commission
received the letter on 23 November and that same day formal contact was made with
the Prosecutor General of Lebanon to begin assisting in the case.
81. The Commission has met with the Prosecutor General and the Military
Prosecutor in a series of working meetings to discuss the facts of the case in detail
and a number of areas in which the Commission can provide technical assistance.
The assistance is broadly grouped into two areas: helping with specific investigative
aspects of the case and providing forensic expertise. The Lebanese authorities and
the Commission have since continued their excellent relationship in all the working
areas, as outlined below.
The assassination
82. On Tuesday, 21 November 2006, Pierre Gemayel, the Minister for Industry,
left the Ministry at approximately 3 p.m. He was driving himself, with two armed
bodyguards, in a vehicle that had been rented only a few days before. At
approximately 3.30 p.m., while driving, he pulled over to the side of the road to wait
for a person he was to meet with and at the same time he was making a telephone
call.
83. A dark-coloured vehicle, probably a Honda CR-V, pulled up alongside
Gemayel’s vehicle and an individual from the front passenger’s side began to shoot
through Gemayel’s car door window into the front driver’s side. Gemayel’s vehicle

06-65433

15

S/2006/962

moved away and up a slight incline, and was blocked by another vehicle. At some
point during these events, the assailants left their vehicle, moved to Gemayel’s car,
opened the front car doors and from a very close range continued to shoot into the
vehicle. The attackers, who shot over 49 rounds using four different types of
ammunition, then fled the scene.
Preliminary assessment
84. It is probable that Gemayel was the subject of surveillance as part of a planned
assassination operation against him, although it is not yet clear for how long this
plan had been conceived. The exact timing and precise choice of location of the
attack can be characterized as opportunistic, given that Gemayel unexpectedly
halted his vehicle while travelling.
85. It is likely that the plan was to assassinate Pierre Gemayel, not just to mount
an attack against him, given that the assassins left their vehicle in order to keep
firing at him until they completed their mission. In addition, the fact that the
assassins had not made any attempt to disguise themselves or hide their faces may
indicate that they had not intended to leave their vehicles to be seen at that precise
time.
Technical assistance
86. The Commission is providing investigative support to the Gemayel case by
helping to identify the perpetrators and the vehicles that were used in the attack. It is
also working to reconstruct the modus operandi of the assassins before, during and
after the attack.
87. The Commission’s assistance includes an analysis of events in the vicinity of
the crime scene and in locations prior to the actual attack, the actions and
methodology of the perpetrators themselves, and events immediately after the attack
occurred. It also consists of forensic work, including providing portrait artists to
help reconstruct the appearance of the perpetrators, and carrying out investigation
and analysis of the attacked vehicle for DNA, fingerprints and ballistic and transfer
traces. The Commission is also assisting with interviewing eyewitnesses and other
individuals, and it is investigating and analysing communications possibly related to
the assassination.
88. The Commission has commenced a reconstruction of the crime scene so as to
establish from a forensic perspective the modus operandi of the perpetrators. This
reconstruction will include trajectory and ballistic analysis to establish which
weapons were used, when, in what order and from which locations at the crime
scene. The Commission is preparing weapons photo-boards and has acquired
recordings of the sounds of different weaponry to assist in the interview process.
89. During seven days of investigations carried out on the crime scene, the
Commission recovered 175 exhibits and examined the vehicle of Gemayel. In total,
including items collected by the Lebanese authorities, 240 exhibits have been sent to
a laboratory for forensic research and analysis. These include a vehicle bumper,
some glass, car door handles, some of the victim’s clothing and other exhibits. DNA
and fingerprint research will be conducted on relevant exhibits.
90. The Commission will continue to provide technical assistance to the Lebanese
authorities on this case for the foreseeable future and will allocate additional

16

06-65433

S/2006/962

resources as required. It anticipates conducting more interviews of crime scene
witnesses and other individuals, developing the case through further evidence
collection and analysis and continuing to provide ongoing forensic support.
91. The Commission has identified a specific requirement arising from the
provision of technical support to the Pierre Gemayel case. It is evident that the
Lebanese authorities would benefit from immediate forensic capacity-building
initiatives and training. This would be particularly useful for the management of
crime scenes, immediate forensic handling and processing of evidence, and the
necessary forensic coordination.
92. Such capacity-building is not within the Commission’s scope to provide, but it
suggests that States may consider the urgent provision of such assistance to the
Lebanese national authorities. This would ensure that any future crime scenes are
appropriately managed and would help maximize investigative leads for the
Lebanese authorities in the immediacy of an incident, should other attacks occur.

III. External cooperation
A.

Interaction with the Lebanese authorities
93. Throughout the reporting period, and in particular since it returned to
Lebanon, the Commission has maintained close interaction with the Lebanese
authorities on all aspects of its work.
94. The Government of Lebanon has extended its generous support throughout the
reporting period, in particular by implementing extraordinary security measures to
protect the Commission’s personnel and property. The Commission is very grateful
for this support, especially at a time when the security situation in Lebanon remains
volatile.
95. The Commission has made numerous requests to the relevant Lebanese
authorities for assistance with its investigative work during the reporting period,
including by addressing 22 formal written requests to the Prosecutor General.
Members of the Commission have also met regularly with the Minister of Justice
and the Prosecutor General, as well as with senior members of his staff, the
investigative judges assigned to the cases that the Commission is investigating and
the senior representative appointed by the Internal Security Forces.
96. The Commission regularly shares with the appropriate Lebanese authorities
the substance of all relevant information that it obtains in a manner that does not
compromise the interest of the source of this information, be it an individual, an
organization or a State. This includes an analytical report on the credibility of a
witness, recently transmitted to the Prosecutor General and the investigative judge
assigned to the Hariri case. This process is of particular importance where the
information is relevant to individuals who are detained, as it may assist the
Lebanese authorities in taking any steps they deem appropriate or necessary in
relation to detention.

06-65433

17

S/2006/962

B.

International cooperation
97. Security Council resolutions 1636 (2005) and 1644 (2005), adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, impose an obligation on States to
cooperate with the Commission. The Commission continues to rely heavily on
cooperation from States and regularly directs requests for assistance to States on a
range of matters relevant to its investigations, including requests for information
and documents, logistical help in establishing witness interviews and technical
assistance and expertise. The full cooperation of Member States with the
Commission is important as the investigation proceeds, especially as regards the
timeliness and the quality of the information made available to the Commission by
the State authorities.
Cooperation with the Syrian Arab Republic
98. Consistent with the Syrian Arab Republic’s obligations under Security Council
resolutions 1636 (2005) and 1644 (2005), and the common understanding reached
between the Commission and the Syrian Arab Republic earlier in the year, the
cooperation of the Republic with the Commission remains timely and efficient.
99. During the reporting period, the Commission submitted 12 formal requests for
assistance to the Syrian Arab Republic, seeking information, artefacts, electronic
media and documentation about certain individuals and groups, as well as
statements taken from persons in the course of investigations conducted by Syrian
authorities.
100. The Commission undertook a number of investigative activities and interviews
of individuals in the Syrian Arab Republic. This work included conducting six
interviews, holding five meetings with relevant Syrian officials and collecting
considerable computer and electronic information and documentation. The Syrian
Arab Republic provided the Commission with information as requested, notably on
specific individuals and groups. It also forwarded to the Commission statements
obtained in the course of investigations conducted by Syrian authorities.
101. All the Commission’s investigative activities were arranged by the Syrian Arab
Republic in accordance with the requests the Commission referred to the authorities
over the reporting period, and the Commission is satisfied with the timeliness with
which this was done and with the logistical and security arrangements for these
activities. The level of assistance provided by the Syrian Arab Republic during the
reporting period remains generally satisfactory. The Commission will continue to
request the country’s full cooperation, which remains crucial to the swift and
successful completion of its work.
Cooperation with other States
102. The Commission requires the full and expeditious support of States on
technical, legal and judicial matters relevant to the investigation.
103. Although most States have responded positively to the Commission’s requests
and have actively assisted in its work, including by facilitating witness interviews
and providing other support and information, some States have provided late or
incomplete responses, or have not responded at all. At the end of the reporting
period, responses to 22 requests sent to 10 separate Member States are overdue. The

18

06-65433

S/2006/962

lack of responsiveness by certain States has serious consequences in terms of delay
for the work of the Commission and its investigative progress. In view of the crucial
nature of the information that it seeks to obtain from States and the limited time
frame in which it aims to complete its investigative activities, the Commission trusts
that it will enjoy full and prompt cooperation from all States during the next
reporting period.
104. Since 15 September 2006, a total of 10 new formal requests for assistance
have been sent to five different States, in addition to the requests for assistance
addressed to the Syrian Arab Republic and the Lebanese authorities.

IV. Organizational support
A.

Internal procedure
105. The Commission has reviewed the internal procedure that it adopted pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1595 (2005) in the light of the draft statute of the
special tribunal for Lebanon. It remains aware of the responsibility to ensure that
testimonial, forensic or any other evidence that it collects shall be admissible before
this jurisdiction and, to this end, to respect all relevant international standards.

B.

Administration

1.

Recruitment
106. As stated in its last report (S/2006/760), the rapid improvement of the
Commission’s institutional capacity continued to be one of the key tasks in the
reporting period. While timely recruitment of competent personnel is still a
significant challenge and delays in the process have had an impact on the
Commission’s ability to fulfil its mandate, considerable headway has been made in
the selection and recruitment of staff during the reporting period.
107. The vacancy rate had increased in the previous reporting period as a result of
the disruption of the recruitment process caused by the conflict in Lebanon and the
fact that additional posts had been approved in June 2006. However, there has been
an overall steady decline in the vacancy rate between August and December: the
vacancy rate decreased overall for all international staff, from 29 per cent in August
to 19 per cent in December. Most key positions are currently under recruitment. The
investigations division currently has 29 international staff and 3 new staff members
are under advanced recruitment. Twenty-eight additional candidates for
investigations are being reviewed from the significant number of names received
from Member States and international agencies and interviews are under way.
108. The Commission is grateful for the positive responses received so far from
Member States and international institutions with regard to making qualified
candidates available.

2.

Budget
109. In August 2006, the Commission submitted a proposed new budget for the next
12-month period, from January to December 2007. The proposed budget makes

06-65433

19

S/2006/962

provision for 188 international staff, reflecting an increase of 13. The increase
comprises five investigations staff for the 14 cases, one additional security officer
and seven administrative posts. The additional staff are necessary: (a) to meet the
increased demands generated by the additional workload resulting from the
technical assistance cases, where extraordinary amounts of data are expected and
have already been acquired; (b) to address the increased workload generated by the
anticipated growth in staffing levels as recruitment accelerates; and (c) to
compensate for the loss of support from other Lebanon-based agencies (the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the Economic and Social Commission for
Western Asia), which are unable in the present circumstances to provide the same
level of support as in the past.
3.

Security
110. With the generous assistance of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the Cypriot and Lebanese
authorities, in particular the Lebanese Armed Forces and Internal Security Forces,
the Commission’s security operations team coordinated a safe and secure return of
the Commission’s international staff and essential investigation materials from
Cyprus to Beirut, partially by ship and partially by air, over a one-week period, from
9 to 16 October 2006.
111. The security of the Commission’s staff, premises and assets continues to be a
priority. The post-conflict security situation in Beirut remains fragile. The ongoing
political incidents have created further tension and instability. The focus of the
investigation, together with a forthcoming transition towards a special tribunal may
create an environment that makes the Commission’s staff more vulnerable and could
threaten its work. The primary focus of the Commission’s security operations is
therefore to enable the continuation of its mandate by ensuring maximum security
for all personnel, facilities and assets.
112. The Commission’s security team continues to review and update the threat and
risk assessments relating to the Commission in order to ensure that all critical
aspects of security are consistent with relevant security standards. As required,
standard operating procedures and contingency plans are developed or adjusted
based on the current threat and risk analysis.

4.

Supplemental memorandum of understanding
113. On 13 October 2006, the Commissioner transmitted an updated draft
supplemental memorandum of understanding, aimed at supplementing and
modifying the original memorandum signed by the Government of Lebanon and the
Commission on 13 June 2005. The draft supplemental agreement is currently being
reviewed by the Government of Lebanon.

V. Conclusions
114. The Commission’s strategic objective remains to collect evidence against those
responsible for the assassination of Rafik Hariri and the other victims of attacks
being investigated that will be admissible before a future tribunal. It continues to
balance the need for speed in the investigations with the exigencies of applying
appropriate legal standards. During the next reporting phase, the Commission will

20

06-65433

S/2006/962

maintain its current investigative focus as discussed in this report and it plans to
undertake approximately 50 interviews, collect further documentation and acquire
other forms of evidence.
115. The investigation into the assassination of Rafik Hariri is approaching a
sensitive and complicated phase, and the Commission’s work can only be
undertaken with confidentiality in order to create a secure environment for its
witnesses and staff. The Commission and the Prosecutor General of Lebanon remain
in full agreement regarding this position.
116. The Commission’s work on the 14 cases continues to bring to light significant
links between each case and to indicate links to the Rafik Hariri case. Further work
will continue with those links being the focal point of its investigative direction.
Similarly, the Commission will continue to provide support in the Gemayel case and
will concentrate on assisting in the identification of the perpetrators of the crime and
on examining whether links to the other cases exist.
117. The Commission will require further support in the coming months in three
main areas. Firstly, the Commission will work to ensure that the United Nations
management systems in areas such as recruitment, procurement, administration and
financial matters are able to support the necessary pace and direction of the
Commission’s work. Secondly, the Commission notes the varied commitment to the
requests for assistance it sends to numerous States. Delays or lack of responses to its
requests severely hamper the progress of the Commission’s investigations in certain
directions. Thirdly, it is of critical importance that the Commission has access to
those political actors with whom Rafik Hariri had direct contact in the last months
of his life and to individuals involved in the relevant political dynamics in Lebanon,
the broader region and internationally. The Commission looks forward to future
cooperation with such individuals and, where appropriate, State representatives, in
order to ensure the completeness of its investigations.
118. The Commission notes that the overall environment within which it conducts
its work may be characterized as highly unpredictable. The security situation, the
political environment, the previous conflict, the potential for ongoing violence and
issues regarding the future special tribunal may contribute to the reticence of
witnesses to engage with the Commission and makes it more difficult for the
Commission to recruit and retain staff.
119. Finally, the Commission recognizes its additional obligations and role, given
that a special tribunal is likely to be established in the forthcoming although
undetermined period. The dynamic of the Commission will alter as necessary to
accommodate the establishment of the tribunal and, to that end, the Commission
will realign its objectives in part to hand over its fact-finding work to date to the
prosecutor’s office.

06-65433

21
