UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/8*
27 February 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3742nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 27 February 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Somalia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Somalia dated 17 February 1997 (S/1997/135).
"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia, bearing in mind respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia, in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It reiterates that
full responsibility for achieving national reconciliation and for restoring
peace rests with the Somali people.
"The Security Council expresses its full support for the efforts of
regional and other interested States, as well as those of international and
regional organizations, particularly the Organization of African Unity, the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development, and the League of Arab States,
to promote a direct political dialogue and facilitate a broad-based
political settlement in Somalia.
"The Security Council calls upon all Somali factions to cease
immediately all hostilities and to cooperate with the regional and other
efforts for peace and national reconciliation in Somalia, including the
Sodere (S/1997/17) and Nairobi (S/1997/135, annex I) initiatives.
"The Security Council encourages all States to contribute generously
to the appeals of the United Nations to ensure continued relief and
rehabilitation efforts in Somalia, including those aimed at the
strengthening of civil society. It also encourages States to contribute to
regional mediation efforts for Somalia.

* Reissued for technical reasons.
97-05343 (E)

280297

/...

S/PRST/1997/8
English
Page 2

"The Security Council reiterates its call upon all States to fulfil
their obligations to implement the embargo imposed by resolution 733 (1992)
on all deliveries of weapons and military equipment to Somalia. In this
context, it calls upon all States to refrain from any actions which might
exacerbate the situation in Somalia.
"The Security Council expresses again its appreciation for all United
Nations agencies and other organizations and individuals carrying out
humanitarian activities in Somalia. It calls upon the Somali factions to
ensure the safety and freedom of movement of all humanitarian personnel and
to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian relief to the Somali people,
including through the opening of the airport and harbour of Mogadishu.
"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to continue his
consultations with the Somali parties, regional States and organizations on
the role the United Nations can play in supporting the peace efforts,
including on specific options contained in his report (S/1997/135). It
requests the Secretary-General to continue monitoring the situation in
Somalia and to report to it in an appropriate manner on those consultations
and developments in the situation generally.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
