I7NITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

9 MAY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2431)

Page
1
. . , , . . , . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . , . . .. . . .. . . , .

Statement by the President . . . , . . . . . . , . , . , . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . 0. . , . . . I . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , * * . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I....I.

1

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of Nicaragua on the Security
Council addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15746) es.....

1

S/W. 2431

/

2431st MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 9 May 1983, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. UMBA

di LUTETE

(Zaire).

4. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform Council members that I have
received letters from the representatives of Grenada,
Honduras, Mexico and the Syrian Arab Republic, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2431)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ortez Colindres
(Honduras) took a place at the Council table. Mr. Taylor
(Grenada), Mr. Muiloz Ledo (Mexico) and Mr. El-Fattal
(Syrian Arab Republic) took the places reservedfor them
at the side of the Council chamber.

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746).
The meeting was called to order at 11.25 a.m.

5. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin consideration of the
main item on its agenda. It is meeting today in response
to the request from Nicaragua submitted in a letter dated
5 May. Members of the Council have before them the
following documents containing texts of letters addressed
to the President of the Security Council: S/15742, with a
letter dated 2 May from the Deputy Minister for External
Relations of Nicaragua; S/15745, with a letter dated 4
May from the representative of Honduras; and S/15749,
with a letter dated 6 May from the representative of
Costa Rica.

Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from French): At
the outset of our work, I should like on behalf of the
Security Council to extend a warm welcome to the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, Mr. Miguel
D’Escoto Brockmann, who is with us today in this
chamber.
2. On behalf of the Council, I should also like to extend
profound gratitude to Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, the representative of the United States, who presided over the
Council during the month of April. Mrs. Kirkpatrick, a
teacher for many years, conducted the work of the Council with great ability and great diplomatic skill.

6. The first speaker is the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, Mr. Miguel D’Escoto Brockmann,
on whom I now call.

3. Personally speaking, I hope I can reply on the cooperation of all members so that I may discharge the
delicate mission entrusted to me. President Mobutu,
when accrediting me to the United Nations, requested me
to make a positive contribution-in
the first place, as a
national of Zaire, then as an African and finally as representative of a non-aligned State-to the building of an
international order based on greater justice and greater
peace, and where a better life can be had.

7. Mr. D’ESCOTO BROCKMANN
(Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, allow me first of
all to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month, Your vast
experience as a distinguished statesman of your country
and, in particular, your experience as representative of
Zaire and as Minister for Foreign Affairs guarantee that
you will conduct the work with wisdom and fulfil the
responsibilities that you now assume.

Adoption of the agenda

8. Once again we are obliged to come before this body
in order to inform its members of the ever-increasing
magnitude of the aggression against Nicaragua and of
the grave and ever-increasing damage, suffering, death
and destruction that that aggression is producing in my
country.

The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746)
1

judging whether the Sandinist people’s revolution is
responding to the will of the Nicaraguan people. The
United States is using members of the criminal Somozist
National Guard, whom President Reagan himself has
described as freedom fighters, as their instrument for
imposing once again their brand of democracy on
Nicaragua.

9. In March 1982, a detailed analysis of the statements
and actions of the United States Government, on the one
hand, and the increasing number of mititary incursions
across our northern border, on the other, led Nicaragua
to the conclusion that the United States was promoting
an escalation of its armed intervention against our country. On that occasion, Commander
Daniel Ortega
Saavedra appeared before the Council [2335th meet@]
to warn the nations of the world that the Reagan Administration was preparing a massive invasion of Nicaragua
from Honduras. Then, as now, we came here seeking
peace, not confrontation.

14. We repeat that in the first few months of this year
this policy of aggression against Nicaragua has already
caused the death of more than 500 Nicaraguan compatriots. Our Government has recently calculated the material
damage, the delays in development projects and the lost
income caused by the invasion at 58 1;4 million cordobas.
Of that amount, material damage amounts to 113.4 million cordobas and includes the destruction of machinery
and equipment, plants, schools and health centres, as
welf as the destruction of 143 vehicles. There have been
delays in projects and programmes amounting to 119.8
million cordobas. Production damage amounts to 244.2
million cordobas. Lost income is calculated at 104 million cordobas, constituting only a partial amount, The
total is actually much larger because, obviously, the shifting of workers to defence tasks, the destruction of production resources and the costs of replacing equipment
all imply new imports and the shrinking of exports.

10. Today, at a time when my country is the victim of
an invasion which began in late 1982 and involves thousands of soldiers, mainly former members of the genocidal Somozist National Guard, an invasion which has
caused the death of more than 500 Nicaraguan compatriots in the first few months of this year, an invasion
which, as long as it continues to be directed, financed
and armed by the Reagan Administration,
will continue
to kill, spreading terror and anguish among our people
and inflicting ever greater material damage on our
impoverished and destroyed country. At a time such as
this and in these circumstances we come to say that we
want peace, that we need peace, that our people and our
Government demand peace and the cessation of the
unjustifiable and criminal aggression of which we are
victims.

15. To economic destruction we must add the military
aggression we denounced in our previous appearance.
We should point out that in April alone there were 12
naval acts of aggression, two of them carried out by
United States frigates, the FF-1072 Bhkely and the FF-6
Jdius
Furer. Last month there were also 17 armed incursions, including 13 attacks on horder posts, culminating
in the massive invasion from Honduran territory of some
1,200 Somozist guardsmen on 30 April, that is, three
days after President Reagan’s speech to the joint session
of Congress.

11. We have come here today, as in March 1982 and
March 1983, to appeal for respect for the sacred principle
of non-intervention
in the internal affairs of sovereign
States. We are here to insist on the need and obligation
to initiate a dialogue for the purpose of airing differences
between countries and Governments and, if the possibilities of obtaining satisfaction by means of direct dialogue
should appear to be exhausted, to resort to the Council;
but in no case should States Members of the Organization, however large, rich or powerful, be allowed to
resort to the use of force as a means of imposing their
will. Every country, no matter how small, has the same
right to be respected.

16. These invading forces were driven back and fled to
their sanctuary in Honduran territory, where they have
regrouped and form part of more than 2,000 Somozist
freedom fighters, as President Reagan has dubbed the
criminals who are ready to launch another invasion.
Furthermore there are at this very moment another 2,000
mercenaries ready and awaiting only the order to invade
the area of Zelaya Norte, also from Honduran territory.

12. When we first brought our case to the Council, on 2
April
1982 [2347lh meeting], the Latin American
members of the Council-Panama
and Guyanaintroduced a draft resolution [S/1494I]
reminding all
States of their obligations under the Charter, Of the 15
member States of the Council, 12 voted in favour and
two abstained. As you will recall, Sir, the United States
vetoed the draft resolution. This action was, with full
justification, deplored by the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries at the Ministerial Meeting of its Co-ordinating
Bureau held at Havana from 31 Ma.y to 5 June 1982.

17. The declaration that the United States is waging a
war against Nicaragua cannot be taken as a figure Of
speech, much less as provocative rhetoric. The war that
the Reagan Administration is waging against Nicaragua
is no less real for not having been officially declared, and
it does not cease to be a Reagan Administration
war
because the combatants are not thus far regular troops of
the United States Army. From the moment the United
States Government organized armed aggression against
our country, training, financing, arming and directing
the “Somozist freedom fighters”, this could not be considered as anything but a war by the United States
against our nation.

13. Only six weeks ago, when the threat materialized,
we were compelled to appear once again before the
Council [242&h meeting] to denounce the massive invasion of Nicaragua organized, financed, armed and directed
by a great Power which arrogates to itself a right which
belongs exclusively and solely to our people, that of
2

18. The fact that the American super-Power is waging
this war against tiny, tormented, impoverished Nicaragua has been widely reported by all the international
information media, including those of the United States
itself, and it has also been denounced by numerous
United Stati% legislators and is now admitted by the
President himself. I shall not try to prove what is obvious
to all of you. I shall Only remind you of what the United
States press itself has reported on the basis of statements
by the leadership of the invading Nicaraguan Democratic Forces themselves concerning the unusual command structure of what they euphemistically call the
“insurgency”.

“The Ministers denounced the threats and acts ol
aggression against Nicaragua, the financing of undercover actionst the use of United States territory and
that Of Nicaragua’s neighbours for training &merrevolutionarY forces and the violation of Niciiragua’s
airsPace and territorial waters by United States p~anes
and ships-all of which has resulted in terrorist
actions$ armed attacks, the blowing up of bridges and
Other acts of sabotage aimed at overthrowing the
RevolutionarY Government, taking a toll of more
than 400 Nicaraguans killed, wounded and/or kidnapped since 1979”-this was, it must be recalled,
stated in January of this year-“in addition to causing
heavYmaterial damage and lossesto the infrastructure.

19, According to this information that command structure has as its “brain” a corps made up entirely of Americans, experts of the Central Intelligence Agency and
representatives of the Southern Command of the United
States Army based in the Panama Canal Zone. The
responsibility of this general staff is to transmit orders to
a second general staff made up principally of officers of
the Honduran army which, in turn, passes on the orders
to a third general staff composed of officers of the Somozist National Guard.

“The Ministers specifically denounced the systematic attacks being carried out against Nicaragua
from across its northern border by armed bands of
former members of Somoza National Guard, They
noted that these actions formed part of a deliberated
Plan to harass and destabilize Nicaragua, as waspublicly admitted by a foreign Power.” [~/156,?8, anne.~,
paras. 36 and 37.1

23. TWO months later, the Seventh Conference of
Heads of .State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which met at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March, made
an additional appeal for an end to all hostile acts against
Nicaragua and urged the Governments of the United
States and Honduras to adopt a constructive position for
peace and dialogue.

20. According to the same United States media-most
recently Time magazine’s issue of 4 April-the
coordinator of the activities of these different general staffs
is none other than John Negroponte, United States
Ambassador to Honduras, sadly remembered for his role
in the illegal, unjust and equally undeclared war of the
United States against the peoples of Indo-China.

24. The American people are aware of the war that the
Reagan Administration is waging against Nicaragua and
reject it, The 2 May edition of Newsweekquotes Representative Clarence Long, Democrat of Maryland, as saying: “It got a thousand letters in a one-month period.
Only seven were supportive of the President’s policies”
on Central America.

21.

The 2 May edition of the weekly U.S. News and
World Report publishes the thoughts of several American
legislators regarding what the Reagan Administration is
doing against Nicaragua. According to that magazine,
Representative Berkley Bedell, Democrat of Iowa,
declared:
“I returned from my recent trip to Nicaragua with
three strong beliefs. First, what we are doing is morally wrong. These counter-revolutionaries are led by
the security guard of Somoza. They were guilty of
atrocities during the Somoza regime. Now they are
sweeping through the countryside of Nicaragua, kidnapping and murdering innocent civilians. . .

25. A poll conducted by the prestigious The Harris survey, publishedon 5 May, revealed that “despite President
Reagan’sunusual action in addressing a joint session of
Congress . . , a sizable majority of Americans oppose the
President’s policies in Central America”. The survey,
conducted nationally between 29 April-that is, only two
days after President Reagan’s speech-and 1 May,
showed that 64 per cent Of the POpUlation opposes and
only 31 per cent is in favour of the Administration’s
Central American policy, Louis Harris, who conducted
the study, said this rating must be considered a “solid
rejection” of a policy viewed as militaristic and with few
prospects of success.Fearing a total loss of’ credibility in
the eyesof its own people,the Reagan Administration
llas chosen to shield itself behind a supposed governmental practice of neither confirming nor denying the existence of covert actions against other States. None the less,
in the face of persistentchargesthat the Reagan Administration is directing and financing the aggression against
the
Government of Nicaragua, they have had
to make ever more explicit admissions of the undeniable
It is to this, obviously, that The New York Times

“Secondly, what we’re doing is pragmatically
wrong. We’re giving the Government of Nicaragua an
excuse for some of its economic difficulties. . 1
“Finally, I think it is legally wrong. The President is
violating the law of the land and is not abiding by the
treaties to which the United States is a party.”
22. The Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Managua from 10 to 14 January 1983, one of the sessions
with the greatest high-level participation in the history of
our Movement, denounced the United States Policy
towards Nicaragua in the following terms:

legitimate

reality,

3

was referring in its editorial of 1 May on President Reagan’s 27 April speech, when it stated that President Reagan “didn’t deny the undeniable”. However, all these
implicit acknowledgements have now become mere historical footnotes, given the admission by President Reagan himself in his 4 May news conference of his
Government’s role in this dirty war. To use legal terminol%Y, “confession requires no corroboration”.

31. Central America, like many other parts of our
troubled planet, is currently in a state of political turbulence as a result of the misery and the archaic political
and social structures that deny our peoples the kind of
life that they so justly demand. But we have not come
here to speak of the problems of other countries. Nicaragua, with every right on its side, is asking the Council to
consider solely and exclusively the grave problem and
consequences flowing from the aggression it has endured,

26. The confessions and statements by President Reagan in his 4 May news conference and his speech before
Congress the week before would have sufficed to make
us request this meeting of the Security Council, because,
to us and to anyone with common sense, they constitute
a genuine declaration of war by the Reagan Administration and a clear indication that they intend to continue
violating the most basic norms of international law upon
which relations between sovereign States must be based.

32. With respect to the consequences, I wish also to
warn the international community about the undeniable
fact that, to the extent that the Government of the
United States continues to use some States of the region
and to affect the neutrality of others in order to attack
Nicaragua, the danger of regionalizing the war increases.
33, Instead of stubbornly pursuing a policy towards
Central America which the majority of Latin American
and European Governments have judged to be wrong
and based on false premises, the Reagan Administration
would do well to support the efforts undertaken by the
countries of the Contadora Group, efforts which continue to be the principal Latin American initiative in
search of peace in Central America. Nicaragua is working, and will continue to work, to strengthen this
initiative.

27. In any event, those statements only corroborate the
suffering, destruction and death experienced by our
invaded nation.
28. Let us reflect, colleagues of the Council, upon
whether we are willing to accept President Reagan’s giving the United States the right to proclaim as illegitimate
those Governments which he does not like and proceed
to overthrow them. This-which
The Washington Post
calls the “Reagan Doctrine”-is
what constitutes the
greatest threat and the greatest danger to international
peace and security.

34. Our objective in bringing before the Council the
case of the war which the Government of the United
States is waging against Nicaragua-a
State member of
the Council-is,
in the first place and in fulfilment of its
primary responsibility, that it should adopt all necessary
measures within the broad framework of its mandate to
halt this aggression, which is cruel and unjustifiable from
every point of view.

29. I do not wish to go on at length asking representatives to analyse the absurd claim by the Reagan Administration that it is not really trying to overthrow the
Government of Nicaragua. A short time ago we were
visited by United States Congressmen, and in the course
of talks with the head of State at which I was present a
member of the House Select Committee on Intelligence
asked, “Why are you concerned at an invasion that
involves some 7,500 armed men? Are you so weak, so
fragile, that you think that is enough to overthrow you?”
And, without our saying anything, he, on his own initiative said, “Why should you be concerned if the Honduran army were involved? Are you not able to defend
yourselves? ” I think the cynicism of such statements
requires no further commentary on my part,

35. In his report on the work of the Organization’ presented to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, the Secretary-General told us:
“The Security Council, the primary organ of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, all too often finds itself unable to
take decisive action to resolve international conflicts
and its resolutions are increasingly defied or ignored
by those that feel themselves strong enough to do so.”
And he added:

30. I said that I did not want to take up too much time
in an analysis of the absurd claim by the Reagan Administration that it is really not breaking any law, because it
is really not attempting to overthrow the Nicaraguan
Government.
Allow me simply to call the Council’s
attention to a statement made by Congressman Jim
Leach, Republican from Iowa, which was published in
the 2 May edition of U.S. News and World Report:

“It seems to me that our most urgent goal is to
reconstruct the Charter concept of collective action
for peace and security so as to render the United
Nations more capable of carrying out its primary
function.”
The Secretary-General also referred to the lack of an
effective system of collective security and noted that without such a system the small and weak will have no
defence or secure refuge.

“The Administration
is now saying it’s not our programme to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government,
although it may be the goal of the particular groups
we are assisting. To accept that sophistry is to accept
the notion of a tooth fairy.”

36. As a member of the Council, Nicaragua has pondered very seriously the continuing relevance of the
Secretary-General’s words.
4

37, Confirming
positions expressed on earlier occasions, my Government, in a letter dated 4 April 1983
from its Deputy Minister for External Relations to the
President of the Security Council [S/15681], stated that it
was prepared to agree that the Council should give a
mandate to the Secretary-General to contribute to the
esiablishment of a dialogue between Nicaragua and Honduras and between Nicaragua and the United States, in
co-ordination with the countries sponsoring the Contadora initiative. In that same document, my Government
suggested that that dialogue should take place at the
United Nations itself.

measures capable of satisfying the demands of the
region’s peoples, which find themselves trapped deeper
and deeper in the vicious cycle of poverty, exploitation,
disease and hunger.
43. We reiterate once again our willingness to hold an
immediate,
unconditional
dialogue with the United
States Government, at an appropriate level, in order to
find genuine solutions to the critical situation caused by
the United States aggression against our country.
44. We feel that we have been sufficiently clear as to
our objectives in requesting a meeting of the Council. We
have come in search of peace before those with the highest responsibility on Earth for safeguarding international
peace and security. We have not come looking for condemnation; rather, we have come in search of peace. We
have come in the hope that all the Members of the Organization, whatever their size or strength, will take account
of the inescapable obligation to respect the basic principles of the Charter.

38. I think we must express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his availability and his well-known
interest in the search for mechanisms leading to peaceful
solutions, for his offer of good offices, and for his sincere
desire to co-operate in attaining the peace which our
peoples rightfully demand.
39. The Council must recognize that any solution to the
situation facing my country today must have as its logical
and fundamental prerequisites: the unconditional withdrawal of the genocidal forces sent into our country by
the United States; an end to the border attacks from
Honduran territory which the United States directs and
finances; the permanent withdrawal of United States
warships from our territorial waters; a halt to the flights
of spy-planes over our nation; and an end to the participation of the United States intelligence community in the
financing, organizing and directing of overt or covert
forces or plans against Nicaragua.

45. We have not come here to engage in recriminations
or to seek compensation for damage. We do not know
how one could bring back to life all our Nicaraguan
brothers and sisters who have fallen victim to the murderous bullets of the Somozists, who are spreading terror
in our homeland and who at this very moment are killing
our heroic border guards, peasants, students, technicians
and doctors-Nicaraguans
and foreigners alike-as well
as members of our glorious Sandinist People’s Army, the
reservists and militiamen.

40. We should like from this forum to address the great
Power that is attacking us today, as it has done so many
times in our history, and that is trying to limit our right
to self-determination.
We believe that the United States
should direct its great influence towards attaining peace,
not towards making war against countries like Nicaragua, which are devoted solely and exclusively to eradicating injustice and transforming obsolete political, social
and economic structures that have oppressed our people
for centuries and denied them the right to seek a dignified
life. In other words, the United States must put an end to
its aggressive policies against Nicaragua, a country that
seeks only to promote peace and that, for that very reason, is working to carry out the far-reaching changes
required by justice, in the conviction that without justice,
peace is an unattainable illusion.

46. We have come before the Council to respond to
aggression and death with an invitation to frank and
constructive dialogue. We abhor war; we cherish peace.
What is the response of my Security Council colleagues?
47. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Honduras, on whom
I now call.
48. Mr. ORTEZ COLINDRES (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Sir, it is extremely gratifying that a
statesman of your calibre has assumed the presidency of
the Security Council. Your country, Zaire, maintains
equidistant and objective positions, which, we hope and
trust, will be reflected in your actions. In the past three
months the meetings of the Council with regard to the
matter of Nicaragua have been guided by brilliant
diplomats-Mr.
Thomson of the United Kingdom, Mrs.
Kirkpatrick of the United States and now Mr. Umba di
Lutete, and with all three Honduras has felt secure in the
knowledge that the Council is acting with international
probity.

41. We wish to appeal to the United States to direct its
ability to influence towards negotiated, political solutions instead of always choosing military measures.
42. Lastly, we call on the United States to understand
that it is making an historical error by trying to explain
the political upheaval in several Central American countries in terms of East-West tensions. We suggest that the
United States think about what the statesmen of the
Americas and Europe have been impressing on it with
increasing urgency: that the Central American crisis
stems basically from the historical postponement of

49. The Government of Honduras, which feels that it
has been referred to in the words of the Minister for
External Relations of Nicaragua, the Reverend Miguel
D’Escoto Brockmann, wishes to take this opportunity to
make the following statement.
5

50. Once again Nicaragua has asked for the convening
of the Security Council as a matter of great urgency for
the purpose of reviewing the situation prevailing in Central America with regard to what it has called a new stage
of the invasion of its country by forces from Honduras;
and once again Nicaragua has given this highest body of
the United Nations distorted and tendentious information which, if not correctly analysed, might lead this
important debate into grave legal and political errors and
jeopardize the delicate task of the Council, whose primary responsibility is the maintenance of international
peace and security.
51. In making this statement through me, the Government of Honduras wishes first to express its gratitude to
the Council for having made it possible, in an act of
international fairness, for us to ascertain the scope and
details of the situation, This convening of the Council is
extremely important not only for Honduras or Nicaragua but for Central America as a whole and the entire
American continent. It will certainly also have implications for other countries of the world in the matter of
international
relations, especially if one takes into
account the seriousness of the accusations and the mistaken approach on which they are based.
52. We do not believe that the members of this highest
body of the United Nations could be so underestimated
as to be considered nai’ve to the point that they will not
look into all the information provided so as to distinguish, among all the rubbish, what is true and what is
false and get down to the very crux of the problem of
what is now taking place in Central America.
53. In 1979, after a long dictatorship, the people of
Nicaragua, with the direct support of some fraternal
countries of Latin America and with the moral support
of most of the international community, in a long bloody
struggle managed to overthrow General Anastasio Somoza Debayle. Peoples usually band together against injustice; that is why Governments and forces of different
systems arrived at the minimum common denominator:
to allow the people of Nicaragua to establish a new system of institutional
life.
54, It was precisely on 17 July 1979 that the Sandinist
National Liberation
Front, assuming power in the
Republic, made to the Organization of American States
(OAS) a solemn pledge to carry out a plan to guarantee
peace in Nicaragua on the basis of the resolution of the
Seventeenth Consultative Meeting of 23 June 1979which remains in force-which
on that occasion
appealed for hemispheric solidarity in order to uphold
the right of the Nicaraguan people to self-determination,
55. At that time the competent organ for Nicaragua,
considered as the useful forum and instrument for its
political consolidation
internally and internationally,
was the OAS. Before that body they pledged themselves,
among other things, first, to establish full respect
for human rights in Nicaragua in accordance with the
IJniversal Declaration of Human Rights and the American Convention on Human Rights, “Pact of San Jose,

Costa Rica”, of the OAS; secondly, to set up a Government
in Nicaragua following a peaceful and orderly transition;
thirdly, to promote civil justice in Nicaragua and to judge
those accused of crimes against the people of Nicaragua in
accordance with ordinary law and without a spirit of vengeance or indiscriminate reprisals; fourthly, to guarantee
that the collaborators of the former regime could leave, with
all the necessary guarantees, under the supervision of the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the
International Red Cross; and, fifthly, to implement a plan
for holding the first free elections in Nicaragua in this
century so as to allow Nicaraguans to elect their representatives to municipal councils and a constituent assembly and,
later, also elect the highest authorities of the country.
56. That aforementioned pledge, which was transmitted
to the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the States members
of the OAS, has today become mere words-words-mere
words.
57. But that is not enough for those who count up figures in computers: those promises were made four years
ago. None the less, the fraternal people of Nicaragua,
who are today suffering a totalitarian Government maintained by force and in a state of political and social
decomposition, have been counting not only the years
but the months, weeks, and days; they have been marking on the fingers of their hands, just as peasants in Central America count, the dates on which they hope to see
those promises fulfilled
and that much-promised
national salvation become a reality.
58. To the Government of Nicaragua the OAS is no
longer the proper continental body to deal with differences between fraternal nations; it prefers other forumsextracontinental
forums, where there is not the same
degree of solidarity-for
the airing of its disputes. Is it
out of some fear of the commitment it has made to the
American continent that it takes this attitude?
59. Nicaragua is now avoiding regional discussions of
solutions in Central America, discussions which it had
been carrying on since 1821, when the five Central American countries achieved independence from the Spanish
Crown. Today the Sandinist Government, instead of
paying tribute to Ruben Dario and Francisco Moradn,
is paying tribute to Marx and Lenin and-as it has a
right to do-is choosing a new system of values in the
conduct of its public affairs. And it is doing so behind the
backs of its people, preventing them from expressing
their will at the polls, as had been promised, so that they
might choose the system of government under which
they wish to live. Is this not because it knows that the
people would never freely choose to turn their backs on
democracy?
60. Once again Nicaragua-in
the calm words of its
Minister-has,
from its own standpoint, levelled a series
of accusations against my country which, in our opinion,
reflect a deliberately two-fold approach--a very different
approach-to
reality in considering the responsibilities
of our respective Governments.

61. For instance, when a few months ago we conducted
defensive military training exercises in our territorial
waters together with the United States, we were accused
of committing
acts of aggression against Nicaragua,
although that country knows perfectly well that for several decades we had been routinely conducting such operations, long before the Sandinist Government took
power. It is appropriate to be very clear about the fact
that Nicaragua was invited well before the event to send
observers to witness those exercises. This is altogether
normal and proper when one acts in international good
faith.

66. General Somoza labeled as communists anyone who
was against his system of government, and today the Sandinist Government is calling anyone who struggles for freedom in Nicaragua a Somozist. Alfonso Robelo, Violeta de
Chamorro and Arturo Cruz-members of the Governing
Junta of National Reconstruction-are
Somozists, as is
Commander Zero, former Deputy Minister of Defense of
the Sandinist Government and ex-commander of the People’s Militia of Nicaragua, The truth is always brilliant and
cannot be hidden with one’s hand. All of these outstanding
persons are basically dissidents struggling against the goals
of the present Nicaraguan rCgime.

62. On the contrary, the Sandinist Government finds it
totally normal to have in its territory more than 6,000
foreign experts from Cuba, East Germany, Libya, the
Soviet Union and other countries of the same bloc who,
in the guise of doctors, teachers, agricultural and industrial experts whose “beneficent actions” are well known
in countries such as Ethiopia and Angola, are engaged in
other kinds of training and reinforcing.

67. Nicaragua has made accusations in which it has
attempted to implicate our country by clamoring about
the northern border; our armed forces have been
accused, on the international wire services and in communiques of all types, of deploying troops on the border
with Nicaragua and of conducting military mobilization
in different border areas, as though our army were participating in aggression against Nicaragua. Honduras has
been living up to the promise it made to the Council
when Sir John Thomson was Council President. At that
time, upon specific instructions, we gave categorical
assurances that any movement of my country’s troops
would not be across the border to commit aggression;
rather, such a mobilization would be aimed solely and
exclusively at protecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Honduras-a
categorical imperative established in the Constitution of our Republic.

63. Similarly, Nicaragua considers it an act of aggression or an intimidation
of its interests that Honduras
should welcome a head of State of a friendly nation, that
is, President Reagan of the United States. On the other
hand, Honduras, maintaining respect for international
traditions, objectively avoids making such accusations
when Nicaragua is visited by heads of State and highlevel officials such as the Prime Minister of Cuba, Fidel
Castro. There we see a very different scale of values.

6X. Honduras wishes to point out to the Council that
Nicaragua has not presented any clear evidence to prove
the allegations-made
on radio, television and in the
Council-of
participation of the Honduran army in the
acts of aggression attributed to it. We would point out
that we have responded to all those allegations specifically from time to time, and notification has been sent to
the competent international bodies-the OAS and the
United Nations, At the same time, it must be noted that
our country has a voluminous list of violations of our
own sovereignty and territorial integrity by Nicaragua.
These problems could be resolved once and for all if the
proposal made publicly by our country last November
were accepted. That proposal called for international
supervision and monitoring, not only of the border but
also of strategic areas, such as ports, airports, military
zones and training schools, making it possible to see
exactly who is promoting this climate, who is logistically
and materially sponsoring and supporting subversion in
Central American territory. I would ask the representative of Nicaragua why his Government does not accept
the international observation and supervision proposed
repeatedly by Honduras in all the afore-mentioned areas.

64. In this meeting urgently requested by Nicaragua,
my Government is accused of an alleged new stage of
invasion on the part of Somozist troops from Honduras.
This is a new fallacy which should come as no surprise to
the members of the Council or to those who are aware of
the reality in Nicaragua. At the present time in that fraternal country fighting is going on along the northern
border with Honduras, on the southern border with
Costa Rica, and in the central part of Nicaraguan territory, more than 150 kilometres from our border. Those
who are fighting-we
repeat-are Nicaraguans on Nicaraguan territory trying to obtain justice, through a
national insurgency, against a Government, the Sandinist Government, that promised them free elections, a
pluralist government, a mixed economy and freedom of
religion and conscience, and who do not accept the type
of government that is being supported behind the backs
of the people.
65. That people of Nicaragua, among whom I have
been many times and among whom I have family, have
demonstrated their iron-clad resolve to take a new path
in history. The members of the Council may be sure that
they will never turn their backs on democracy if they are
allowed freely to decide their own destiny-democracya system deeply rooted in the heart of American traditions that was defended by our forefathers such as
Bolivar, Josh: Cecilio de1 Valle, and Father Hidalgo, to
mention oniy three of our heroes on the American
continent.

69. Let us, meanwhile, Iook at the other side of the
coin. Not everything is sweetness and light in this world
of upheaval. Nicaragua, with its dual policy, is presenting
two positions which must be separated, disentangled,
and examined, because the world is complex. It is not in
an air-conditioned room such as this that the destiny of
the world can be decided or that the lives being taken at
this moment can be saved. While we find ourselves here,
7

the inundation of El Salvador with arms and the attempt
to block arms for Nicaragua. Honduras has never denied
that it has 50 American instructors under the provisions
of treaties similar to those signed by almost all of the
countries of Latin America, which in no way compares
with the plethora of Cuba army equipment existing in
Nicaragua.

listening to elegant phrases in six languages, the world is
faced with 41 countries in a state of upheaval and there
are people dying in all parts of the world, many of them
struggling for democracy and to obtain an authentic
Government
which expresses the aspirations of the
people.
70. We are going to present evidence of that quiet and
modest policy, presented in the voice of a priest, a friend
of mine, a man of deep academic learning and enormous
speaking ability. But it is also possible, equally quietly, to
see things from a different perspective.

75. As regards troop mobilization, since we are talking
about peace, Nicaragua is the one that recently had such
a mobilization.
We would specifically point to the mobilization effected in Chinandega involving 3,000 troops,
including tanks and artillery, to strengthen its contingents in that sector. Nicaragua has quartered troops in the
areas bordering on my country-which
requires vigilance on our part-made
up of the following military
forces: a great number of battalions in the areas bordering Choluteca, El Paraiso, the Mosquitia region and the
department of Gracias a Dios.

71. At present Nicaragua has the following forces. I
think it would be well to make a comparison. When
Nicaragua was saying that some members of the United
States Congress had gone to Nicaragua and asked: “Are
you able to defend yourselves against Honduras?” I
thought he was going to say, “Can you defend yourselves
against the United States?“or against-let
us sayAfghanistan, or another Power. But no-it was a question of their “defending themselves against Honduras”.
Nicaragua has a Sandinist People’s Army of 25,000 welltrained regular troops, a people’s militia of 40,000 troops
40,000 people in active reserves, a Sandinist air force of
2,000 persons, a Sandinist navy of 2,000 persons, a Ministry of the Interior comprising 10,000 persons. These figures contrast with Honduran military power, which
numbers only 17,000 men in its armed forces, including
the police forces of the country.

76. So that the Council can have a clear idea of the
accusations and can maintain an open mind and heart
in regard to the problem, we should consider the entire
context of the problem: what is the reason for this
troop deployment? Is it designed to prevent an alleged
incursion from Honduran territory by those “1500
Somozists”?
77. It is worth while drawing the Council’s attention to
the fact that Honduras’ budget for its armed forces and
defence is $47 millon, a figure which in the past three
years has increased by barely five per cent.

72. The conservatively derived figures for Nicaragua’s
military growth I have cited force the conclusion that
Nicaragua today has power superior to the combined
power of the forces of Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador. And that is not all. With that power, Nicaragua
has publicly stated that its objective is to have 200,000
people under arms-in other words, 10 per cent of the
country’s total population.

78. On the other side of the coin, Nicaragua devotes
about $130 million to its war effort. We have information that it receives a larger amount in terms of equipment and weapons from countries that share its Marxist
ideas. No one can deny that a few days ago Brazil confiscated 100 tons of weapons and explosives that were being
transported in four Libyan planes that landed in its territory and that Nicaragua itself acknowledged here in this
Secretariat that they were intended for it, nor that Cuban
boats are unloading large quantities of war material in
the rivers at Rama and at Bluff on the Atlantic coast, nor
that Costa Rica has announced the detention of a boat
carrying weapons and dynamite. Recently Colombia,
one of the countries of the Contadora Group, had to
refuse to allow other planes carrying arms to Nicaragua
to cross its territory.

73. If we break down the list of military equipment, so
as not to speak only of the two American ships going
through territorial waters, Nicaragua has four battalions
of long-range heavy artillery of Soviet manufacture
equipped with 152-mm guns and multiple 122-mm UM21 guns. Nicaragua also has two battalions of T55-type
heavy tanks and one battalion of light-weight tanks, two
battalions of anti-aircraft artillery with multiple guns,
two battalions of UTR60 armoured vehicles for troop
transport and 850 troop transport trucks of East German
manufacture, and in addition it currently has four airstrips able to receive high-technology aircraft and is preparing to improve them, equipping them to be able to
handle MiG-type aircraft, while Honduras, for its part,
has nothing that can compare to this list.

79, All this clearly indicates who is intent on continuing
a wanton arms race which constitutes a danger not only
for my country but for the whole Central American
region. Members of the Council will see whether or not it
becomes a danger to the American continent. To this I
should like to add that my delegation has just received
information
that four other DC-10 aircraft are leaving
Libya in another attempt to flood our region with a huge
quantity of war material. We know the routes; permission has been requested.

74. Our armed forces comprise only one battalion of
light-weight tanks and some outdated transport equipment, which renders impossible any parity of forces. All
of Nicaragua’s armament is reinforced by specialized
advisers, who also train the subversive movements operating in the region. This is another principle of duality:

80. However, Nicaragua has systematically refused to
discuss the Honduran proposal to achieve general dis8

armament in the region through serious and responsible
multilateral agreements for establishing a balance of forces of an essentially defensive and limited character and
to ensure the national integrity and the defence of the
respective territories. My country must formally denounce before the Council the danger to peace in Central
America represented by the imbalance in weaponry
created by Nicaragua, which, with a disproportionate
increase in its military forces, can only be pursuing
expansionist goals in the region. We should like to warn
you of the risky nature of this pre-war situation, having
regard, moreover, to the public statements made by the
Co-ordinator of the Sandinist revolutionary junta, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra, to the effect that he
would be prepared to consider the deployment of atomic
missiles by the Soviet Union, should that Power request
his Government’s
permission. That statement clearly
constitutes a grave threat to the peace of the continent
and in its turn violates all agreements .of the interAmerican system on that subject, especially the Treaty
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), whose principal architect, the
Government of Mexico-I
am informed that on 24 October the Government of Nicaragua signed the Treaty of
Tlatelolco-is
another Member State that has made
great efforts to promote the peace that is now about to
fall to pieces.

within its own territory, All the armed clashes that Nicaragua denounces have taken place within Nicaraguan
territory-here
are all the references-and are waged by
Nicaraguan citizens grouped together in political sectors
opposed to that rCgime, These denunciations are nothing
but attempts to disregard the existence of this internal
problem. The problem exists and cannot be covered upit exists. Why in my country, a democracy, do the forces
not rise up in spite of the promises that they have made
that they are going to back guerrilla movements?
Because they do not have the support of the people. Such
denunciations are nothing but a refusal to recognize reality, a premeditated attempt to internationalize
a conflict. When I came to New York they had just destroyed
nine bridges, including the most important bridge on the
Pan-American Highway through El Salvador.
83. Honduras feels compelled to insist that the problem
of the communicating
vessels in Central America can
only be solved in a civilized way-and we are in agreement on this-through
regional dialogue. In its view this
must be guided by a genuine Central American peaceloving spirit at the level most suitable for beginning that
dialogue. For us such a dialogue is a dialogue among the
five foreign ministries of the Central American countries.
That is where we can analyse, debate and solve all the
problems, not by looking at the interests of just one
country, but by seeing the problem as pertaining to the
whole region and, of course, by considering all interests
within a global context. In such a dialogue aspects may
arise that need bilateral solutions. Let us be clear; let us
discuss them; let them complement this serious and
responsible understanding in Central America. We are
not running away from bilateral dialogue.

81. The Government
of Nicaragua-the
Sandinist
Government-is
not just arming itself out of all proportion or just making aggressive statements; it has also
carried out a clearly interventionist policy in neighbouring States by promoting the traffic in weapons. I have
seen them; I have witnessed them; they exist. If members
would like to see the masses of photographs we can circulate them, but we do not wish to involve the SecretaryGeneral in more expense. We are trying to avoid
superfluous expenditure. Interventionism is a risky business. As well as the traffic in weapons, terrorism and
subversive movements exist in the region, and this is conducive not to peace, which is what we are appealing for
now, but to the maintenance of a climate of tension and
violence in Central America. In this respect Honduras
must declare its readiness to exercise its sovereign and
legitimate right to defend its democratic system of life,
which derives from free elections and is supported by our
authorities’ respect for public freedoms and for the free
expression of our people, where there is free expression
of thought and respect for freedom of religious beliefs
and for free association.

84. In line with this thinking, our Foreign Minister, Mr.
Edgardo Paz Barnica, made a dramatic appeal for peace
to the OAS, calling on it to recommend to Costa Rica, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua that,
with the help of other Latin American countries, their
Foreign Ministers meet in order rapidly to seek such an
agreement.
85. It should be noted that the Permanent Council of
the Organization of American States has before it a draft
resolution put forward by Honduras, in the sense already
indicated, and Colombia, on its own behalf and on
behalf of Mexico, Panama and Venezuela, countries that
constitute what is called the Contadora Group, requested
suspension of the discussion of the item in order to allow
the Foreign Ministers of the Contadora Group countries
to initiate their own moves with the five Central American countries in order to identify possibilities for resolving the serious crisis in the area. The delegation of
Honduras then accepted the fraternal initiative of the
Contadora Group and Nicaragua did so too, thus committing themselves before that regional body not to take
steps in the United Nations so that the negotiations of
those friendly Contadora countries could proceed.

82. The international
community must understand,
analyse and reaIize that there are different facets to every
situation. Let us not be swayed by smooth talk, because
we diplomats are skilled at that sort of thing. We put on
a show; we are skilled in the art of persuasion. They have
even changed their spokesmen because their words
sound sweeter today, None the less, we continue to assert
that the concerns and problems afflicting the Government of Nicaragua are basically internal problems. Those
problems that are being fought over today arise from the
growing opposition of the Nicaraguan people due to
unfulfilled promises that have led to an armed struggle

86. The nkgotiations have progressed with admirable
dedication to the cause of peace. They are continuing
without any obstacle of any sort being set up by my
9

Government, which has informed the regional organization of its intention to allow sufficient time under our
gentlemen’s agreement, which was unanimously supported by the Permanent Council. Honduras has not
taken any further action concerning its proposal, which
is under discussion. That gentlemen’s agreement is, however, being violated here today by Nicaragua.

91. There are already more than 30,000 Nicaraguans in
my country fleeing from persecution and extermination,
We must therefore ask: Are there any Honduran citizens
who have fled from Honduras into Nicaragua in search
of justice? The answer is a categorical “NO”. It is Nicaraguans of all ages and both sexes who, day after day, cross
our border in their thousands in order to save their lives
and those of their loved ones, joining that vast and sorry
multitude of those who have suffered for their religious
beliefs, such as the Moravians, the Mormons, the Jehovah’s Witnesses and others. Nor can we forget the thousands of political prisoners incarcerated in secret prisons
to conceal them from the protective supervision of the
humanitarian institutions entrusted with protecting the
individual and political rights of the human being. These
are structures that the Sandinist Government has vowed
to destroy.

87. In their preliminary conclusions the Ministers of the
Contadora Group identified the serious problems affecting the Central American region. Those Ministers are
more aware than any of us of the situation because they
have been travelling recently through the region and talking with leaders of the armed forces, with Presidents of
the Republics and with everyone who is really well
informed. They are getting their information first hand,
not from the press or from campaigns of distortion. The
Contadora Group has identified as Central American
problems the following:, the arms race, arms control and
reduction, the traffic in weapons, the presence of military
advisers and other forms of military assistance from outside, actions aimed at destabilizing the internal order of
States, verbal threats and aggression, military incidents
and border tensions and, as a priority concern, the violation of human rights and individual and social guarantees, as well as serious problems of an economic and
social nature that underlie the crisis that affects the
region.

92. Following this analysis, which I consider to be of
international importance, it is fitting to ask, with all due
respect: What is Nicaragua really seeking by calling for
this urgent meeting, in violation of the gentlemen’s agreement we reached in the OAS? My delegation can find no
justification
for this-nothing
but words, words and
more words-unless the purpose is to cast a smokescreen
around the actions of its own Government aimed at destabilizing Central America. While we are here, I repeat,
in this air-conditioned environment, vast quantities of
weapons and explosives are being moved into the region.

88. We cannot deny that in some places our peoplesour Indians-have
a greater capacity for corruption and
fewer prospects than they did when Christopher Columbus set foot on our shores, because instead of pulque
they now drink rum, and some of them drink whiskey.
89. I have already explained the position of Honduras
on the various topics under discussion, but in order that
the Council may see things in their proper context, I
should like to clarify some basic aspects. We wish to state
once again, in line with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the OAS, that my country would
be prepared, together with the other Central American
countries, to conclude serious and responsible agreements guaranteeing that none of those countries will take
any action to destabilize the internal order of other
States. Honduras also declares its readiness to co-operate
in finding a solution to the grave economic problems,
which we cannot ignore, and the social problems that are
also part of the crisis affecting our region,

93. In the face of the grave problem created in the
region by those actions, my country believes that we
must take urgent action and that such action must be
aimed first of all at not undermining the effort being
made by the Governments of the Contadora Group with
the consent of the OAS Permanent Council. Why should
we circumvent them, when a short while ago we were
telling them at the presidential level that they could count
upon our support in opening up a dialogue? And while
they are flying in one direction, we are flying in another;
some fly high and others fly low, In the face of this grave
problem my delegation would, with all due respect, suggest to the Council that, following the guidelines of the
charter of the regional organization, the OAS, and the
Charter of this world Organization, the United Nations,
the subject should, in the first instance, be further
pursued in the OAS if the peace-making efforts of the
Contadora Group should prove fruitless. At the present
time this Group has the unanimous backing of the OAS
Permanent Council.

90. It must be pointed out that in the sensitive area of
human rights-for
sometimes those of us who do not
suffer forget about those people who are at this very
moment suffering in this regard-Nicaragua
has been
increasing its repressive actions against its ethnic minorities, the Miskito, Sumo and Rama tribes, uprooting them
from their regions and creating a mass exodus into Honduras, thus aggravating the food problem at a time when
my country has a very high unemployment rate, and we
continue to accept hordes of peoples seeking humanitarian refuge.

94. Let us await the results, and, with the understanding that civilized dialogue is the best method for solving
problems between nations, this Council should recommend that Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Costa Rica should begin, at the foreign ministers
level and with the presence and collaboration of other
Latin American countries concerned about this situation,
the keenly desired dialogue that will cover regional problems as a whole and lead to serious, responsible agreements that can provide a solution to the grave problems
of Central America.
10

95. This is not a problem between Nicaragua and Honduras, and let us not be mistaken; it is a regional problem
in which other countries outside the region are involved.
It is a serious problem. You have allies, you have defence
pacts, and you are perfectly well aware that the pieces on
the chessboard are being moved from both sides. It is not
a problem between two pygmies, but one of giants. I
should like to be on another planet right now so that I
could look down and see what is really happening, for it
is not in a microscopic context that we will solve the
problems between Nicaragua and Honduras. There are
larger interests at stake, and you are intelligent, mature
people who will not be misled by details.

dinary experience to hear the representative of Nicaragua’s harsh dictatorship speak of the rule of law, talk
about American public-opinion polls, quote American
media and even American elected officials. I am especially struck by the invocation of the principle of nonintervention by Nicaragua’s dictators. Since they have
come to power they have been busy fomenting war in the
region, destroying the peace and the possibility of progress in El Salvador, Honduras and other neighbouring
States, and forcing militarization
on the region.
102. The United States does not invade small countries
on its borders. We do not have 100,000 occupation
troops in any country in the world-least of all on our
borders, Our neighbours need have no such concerns.

96. Logically, we do not exclude the possibility that
within that regional dialogue the bilateral dialogue suggested by Nicaragua may be opened and that we can
proceed to discuss all the solutions to those aspects of
Central America’s problems, without restrictions, but
also without limiting ourselves to two countries. This is
not a bilateral problem between Honduras and Nicaragua. The weapons that are intended to overthrow the
Government of El Salvador are moving through my territory. I do not want continually to cite newspapers, but I
am going to quote from The New York Times of yesterday, in which there was an indication that weapons have
been moving through my country towards El Salvador
by eight routes, and that at the same time they are being
routed around it through the Strait of Jiquilisco or the
Gulf of Fonseca. We believe that what is sauce for the
goose is sauce for the gander, and you know that in the
United States there are both geese and ganders in this
struggle.

103. However, since the representative of Nicaragua
has relied so heavily on American media this morning in
his presentation to the Council, I thought that the record
ought to be set a bit straight and that I might have
recourse as well to some American media concerning
events in Central America-for
example, the respect
which the Government of Nicaragua shows regularly for
the principle of non-intervention
in the affairs of its
neighbours.
104. The 9 May issue of Time magazine, for example,
has a very interesting article-which
I recommend to
members of the Council-entitled
“How the Salvadoran
rebels order outside help for their revolution”. It begins
as follows: “the building of a Nicaraguan arms link to El
Salvador began almost as soon as the victorious revolutionaries took power in the Nicaraguan capital of Managua in July 1979.” It has maps with arrows which
describe routes. They are not quite as good as our
Government’s maps but they are not bad; they are good
enough that members of the Council can get a general
impression of the regular flow of arms from Nicaragua
through Honduras into El Salvador,

97. In the life of nations it is not unusual for controversies to arise, but we also know that solutions to all of
them can be found through good faith and the creation
of conditions in which justice and respect for the obligations deriving from honourable pacts between serious
and responsible countries, such as Honduras, are
maintained.

105. The article describes various arms infiltratiOn
routes, It says, for example, that one “hugged the Honduran Pacific coast between Nicaragua and El Salvador,
then angled into the remote areas of El Salvador where
Marxist rebels hold almost undisputed sway. U.S. analysts estimate that 15 to 20 such land routes exist across
Honduras. ” One wonders about Honduras’ right to be
free of infiltration by its neighbours.

98. I know that my statement was longer than 30 minutes, because, owing to the Council’s rules, I may not
have another opportunity to speak today.
99. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
have received a request from the representative of the
United States of America to speak in exercise of the right
of reply. Although it is late, I call on her.

106. The article continues:
Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
I, too, should like to begin my remarks by congratulating
YOU, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the
Council and to express our confidence in your sense of
fairness and skill in conducting its affairs.
100.

“Other military shipments come in by air and sea,
Sandinista smugglers have been known to move supplies directly across the 20-mile-wide Gulf of Fonseca.
When the going is safe, the Nicaraguans make nighttime forays from the Pacific gulf port of Potosi aboard
small fishing boats, equipped with false bottoms, or
50”foot frame canoes. That practice has now been curtailed because of the patrols of U.S. electronic surveillance ships in the axea and the greater vigilance of the
Salvadoran and Honduran navies.”

101. It is an extraordinary experience to hear the representative of Nicaragua’s harsh dictatorship invoke the
principle of non-intervention in internal affairs, the Charter of the United Nations and other international law,
and accuse the United States of invasion. It is an extraor-

11

(:

right of course-there is a debate. The debate is on the
question of whether the United States should help the
people of El Salvador and the people of Nicaragua to
defeat the effort to impose upon them totalitarian dictatorships with the assistance and by means ofarms toted to
them by a ruthless, international terrorist. There is a
debate in the United States about whether the United
States should leave small countries powerless, small peoples helpless, without defence against conquest by violent
minorities trained and armed by remote dictators.

One can readily understand why neighbours with such
practices would not want any electronic surveillance in
their region.
107.

The article continues:

“At night, the Jiquilisco region is also known as a
favorite destination of arms-laden helicopters [for Nicaragua] and light fixed-wing aircraft.. , . An important
alternative air route for the smugglers [from Nicaragua] is the former British colony of Belize into Guatemala. After that, the rebels and their supplies filter
south into Salvadoran rebel strongholds.”

112. Such a debate is under way in the United States. It is
not completed. And we will continue that debate; we will
continue it in our own way. We will continue it not by the
method of lies, but by the method of democracy. The
method of democracy relies on discussion, We will make
our decision at the end of our debate, and we will make
that decision by democratic means. We very much wish
that the Government of Nicaragua would join us in such a
democratic decision process. We very much wish that
there could be a debate in Nicaragua about the public
policies of that Government. We very much wish that the
people of Nicaragua-its journalists, its politicaf leaderswere free to make their arguments in public arenas, to
discuss the questions before that people, to criticize their
Government, to rise in legislative arenas and state their
criticisms freely. We wish the people of Nicaragua had the
opportunity to be polled by honest and objective publicopinion organizations. We wish the people of Nicaragua
had the opportunity to settle their discussions and decisions
and debates by voting.

Apparently, the Government of Nicaragua has a bit of a
problem respecting the right of the Government of Guatemala also to be free of infiltration across its borders.
108. The article is very detailed. It sums up its point
about the extent and details of the supply route between
Nicaragua and El Salvador with a line which it also uses
as its title-“Like
a Sears, Roebuck Catalogue”. Rebels
in El Salvador can order from Nicaragua whatever they
need. One unit may say: “I need candles, boots, batteries,
diarrhoea medicine, bullets and mortar rounds.” If they
do not get what they want, they complain. The fact that
they complain shows that they have a pipeline that they
think they can depend on,
109. Of course, the consequence of this gross violation
of the principle of non-intervention in the life of neighbouring States by the Government of Nicaragua is the
destruction of peace in the region, and it is very specially
tragic for the Government and society of El Salvador,
where the economy has been deliberately targeted and
deliberately destroyed. I pointed out not long ago in a
discussion of this same issue that some 34 bridges and
145 electrical transmission towers were destroyed in El
Salvador last year, that some 18,000 Salvadorians had
been put out of work by that destruction.

113. We in the United States will live by the results of
our democratic processes. We can wish nothing better
for the people of Nicaragua than that they be given a
comparable opportunity.
114. The relationship between the Government of Nicaragua and its people is, of course, at the heart of much of
the discussion here. What is the nature of the problem of
the representative of Nicaragua’s new dictatorship? What
is the nature of what he calls an American invasion?
Needless to say, there is no American invasion in Nicaragua. It is a fact that there is fighting in Nicaragua. It is a
fact that there is very widespread unhappiness-misery,
indeed-in Nicaragua. It is a fact that the Government of
Nicaragua has a problem. The nature of that problem is,
of course, not international. The nature of that problem
is national. Nicaragua’s problem is with Nicaraguan% In
Nicaragua today, Nicaraguans fight other Nicaraguans
for the control of their country’s destiny.

110. Two weeks ago the President of the United States
of America spoke to the Congress and pointed out the
following in his statement:
“Tonight in El Salvador, because of the ruthless
guerrilla attacks, much of the fertile Iand cannot be
cultivated; less than half the rolling stock of the railways remains operational; bridges, water facilities, telephone and electric systems have been destroyed and
damaged. In one 22-month period there were 5,000
disruptions of electrical power, and one region was
without electricity for one-third of a year.”

115. I thought, since the representative of Nicaragua
had brought to the Council’s attention so many items
from the American press, I might impose on the Council
a second item from The Washington Post of yesterday,
which was referred to by the representative of Nicaragua.
Pointing out the advantages of free discussion, by the
way, you can find a lot of different kinds of evidence in
our newspapers. The item that I should like to bring to
the Council’s attention is a column by one Jack Ander-,
son, who is a well-known liberal columnist in the United
States, not a reliable supporter of the Administration

Those are the consequences for one of Nicaragua’s neighbours of Nicaragua’s respect for the principle of nonintervention.
111. The representative of the Government of Nicaragua has referred repeatedly to the debate now under way
in the United States among Americans about what American policy should be with regard to the area. He is quite
12

that currently governs the country. The column is
entitled “A Popular Force”, and I should like to read
from it briefly.

“While Congress debates the Reagan Administration’s clandestine operations in Nicaragua, the American public is beset by conflicting information about
exactly what is going on there.
‘I
.

.

.

“To get some reliable, firsthand answers to [some]
crucial questions, I sent my associate, Jon Lee Anderson, to the troubled region. He has just returned from
a week-long foray into northern Nicaragua with antiSandinista guerrillas. They belong to the Nicaraguan
Democratic Forces (FDN), the major group of., .
insurgents.
“He traveled with a well-armed, 50-member guerrilla band led by a commander whose nom de guerre is
El Gorribn-The
Sparrow. Their base camp was deep
in the rugged mountains of Nicaragua’s Nueva Segovia province, near the Honduran border.
“It quickly became obvious that the guerrillas had
the support of the populace. They were fed and protected by local peasants at every step. Traveling on
foot, and only at night, to avoid detection by government troops, the guerrillas spent the days hiding out in
‘safe houses’, often within shouting distance of
government-held towns. If the peasants had wanted to
betray them, it would have been a simple matter to tip
off the Sandinista militia to their hiding places.
“The peasants also provided The Sparrow with UPto-the-minute intelligence on the whereabouts, movement and strength of the Sandinista forces.
“The anti-Sandinista guerrillas’ military prowess is
not so clear-cut. My associate discovered this to his
dismay when he accompanied The Sparrow’s band on
a planned pre-dawn ambush of government troop carriers along a country road.
66. . . the guerrillas were themselves surprised by
sniper fire.. . and were forced to pull out. The retreat
was carried out skilfully, however, and two nights
later the guerrillas avenged their defeat with an attack
on the hilltop snipers’ nests, The FDN commandos
treated the snipers to a half-hour barrage of rockets,
grenades and machine-gun fire, before returning satisfied to their base camp.
“Most of the FDN guerrillas were local peasants,
not Somocista exiles. But there were also former
National Guardsmen, and they tend to be in positions
of command because of their military experience.
“Still, the core of the The Sparrow’s group consisted of locally recruited peasants. In fact, on my
associate’s last day with the rebel band, he witnessed

the arrival of 50 new recruits, all of them peasants
from the neighbouring province of Madriz.
“One of the new recruits was a defecting Sandinista
army instructor, There were other ex-Sandinistas in
the guerrilla troop. One was Dunia, a star graduate of
the Sandinistas’ post-revolution literacy campaign.. . I
Dunia did so well she was rewarded with a junket to
Cuba. She is now the camp medic for the The Sparrow’s band.
“The rebels and their noncombatant collaborators
cited a variety of reasons for their disenchantment
with the Sandinistas: enforced food rationing, expropriation of the farmers’ markets, enforced organization of peasant co-ops, the Sandinistas’ anti-religious
policies and harassment of the Catholic Church.
“The Sandinistas themselves indirectly aided the
guerrillas’ recruitment of at least a dozen of the new
arrivals. They said they had been under increasing
pressure to join the militia. Forced to take sides, they
chose the ‘Contras’.
“Still, it was not an easy choice for many. They
expressed genuine anguish at being forced-one way
or another-to
fight against fellow Nicaraguan%
“‘We don’t want to fight our Nicaraguan brothers,’
they said. The ones they’re after are the Sandinista
leaders and their Cuban, East German, Bulgarian and
other foreign advisers.”
That is not the end of the column: there are two paragraphs left, for anyone who is interested.
116. I should like very briefly to reiterate to the Council
that the United States Government has repeatedly,
throughout the brief history of the Sandinist dictatorship, sought to establish constructive relations with that
Government and during the period of its destabilization
of the area sought to work with others in the area to
achieve regional peace.
117. In August 1981, on a special mission to Managua,
Assistant Secretary of State Thomas Enders presented a
five-point peace plan to the Sandinists to reduce regional
tensions. Based on the termination of Nicaraguan support for guerrilla groups, the plan called for a United
States pledge to enforce strictly laws governing exile
activities in United States territory, reaffirmation of nonintervention and non-interference by all parties, limits on
arms and military forces, resumption of United States
economic assistance to Nicaragua, which had been very
substantial, and a United States-Nicaraguan cultural
exchange programme. The Sandinist Government made
no substantive response.
118. In April 1982, United States Ambassador Anthony
Quainton delivered an eight-point peace proposal to the
Sandinists that called for an end to Nicaraguan support
for guerrillas in neighbouring countries. It called for lim:
its on arms and foreign military advisers, a joint pledge

of non-interference
and non-intervention,
arms-limit
verification measures, resumption of United States economic assistance, implementation
of cultural exchange
programmes, and the reaffirmation of Sandinist commitments to pluralism, free elections and a mixed economy.
The Sandinists made a non-substantive response that did
not even address the United States plan, but presented
only rhetorical counter-proposals.

cially small nations, especially nations with powerful
neighbours, should ponder carefully this case, should
think well about what is once again being demanded of
the Council by the Government of Nicaragua. The
Government of Nicaragua has once again come to us,
demanding of the United Nations international protection while it destabilizes its neighbours. It is claiming that
a people repressed by foreign arms of a super-Power has
no right to help against that repression. That is a principle which, I should suppose, every Member of the United
Nations that is in fact committed to principles of national
independence, self-determination and non-intervention
would do well to think hard on.

119. In October 1982 eight regional democracies,
including the United States, set forth the essential conditions for peace in Central America-again
including
verifiable limits on arms and foreign military advisers,
national reconciliation through the democratic process, a
halt to support for insurgent groups, mutual respect for
pledges of non-intervention
and respect for basic human
rights. Countries asked Costa Rica to discuss these conditions with Nicaragua. That too came to naught.

124. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply, and I now
call on him.

120. In addition, the Sandinists have rejected other
proposals put forth by their neighbours. As recently as
April 1983, they refused to meet with Costa Rica, Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala in multilateral discussions supported by the Contadora Group-but
the
Council has already heard about that.

125. Mr.

D’ESCOTO
BROCKMANN
(Nicaragua)
from Spanish): I simply wish to recall
something I have already said in my presentation. We
have not come here to speak of the problems of other
countries. As is its full right, Nicaragua has brought
before the Council for consideration solely and exclusively the grave problem and the consequences of the
aggression of which it is the victim.
(interpretation

121. The Sandinists’ insistence on bilateral rather than
mutilateral talks underlines their desire to resolve their
external problems while avoiding the issue of their export
of revoIution, war and misery to their neighbours.

126. With regard to the consequences, I wished also to
alert the international community to the undeniable fact
that, to the extent that the United States Government
continues using some States of the region and impairing
the neutrality of others to attack Nicaragua, the danger
of regionalizing the war increases.

122. The record speaks for itself. I should just like to
close these remarks by reminding the members of the
Council that, in his speech to a joint session of the United
States Congress, President Reagan asserted:

127. I wish to be quite frank and, hence, I cannot fail to
say that, as a Central American, I share the shame which,
I am sure, the sister people of Honduras feel at the sad
words just spoken by the man who is supposed to represent them in this forum but who, in fact, only wished to
represent the interests of those who attack us, the interests of those who increasingly commit the Government
of Honduras to the Reagan Administration’s
dirty war
against Nicaragua.

“To support our diplomatic goals in the region, I
offer these assurances”, and I should like to offer these
assurances ae;ain to the Council on behalf of the
Government of the United States.
“The United States will support any agreement
among Central American countries for the withdrawal, under fully verifiable and reciprocal conditions, of all foreign military and security advisers and
troops.

128. The representative of Honduras did not wish to
respond to our appeal for peace. Following guidelines of
“higher-ups”, he opted to ignore the existence of something which even the Reagan Administration
no longer
dares to deny.

“We want to help opposition groups join the political process in all countries and compete by ballots
instead of bullets.
“We will support any verifiable, reciprocal agreement among Central American countries on the
renunciation of support for insurgencies on neigh:
bours’ territory.

129. At no time in our statement did we attack Honduras. Nevertheless, we have now heard a long statement by
the representative of Honduras in which all kinds of
improprieties and lies were directed against Nicaragua
and in which he dealt with matters within the sole and
exclusive purview of Nicaragua. But since the representative of Honduras did not see fit to address the specific
situation we have brought before the Council for consideration, that is, the aggression of the Reagan Administration against Nicaragua, we thought Mrs. Kirkpatrick
might do so when she asked to speak. However, she

“And, finally, we desire to help Central America
end its costly arms race and will support any verifiable, reciprocal agreements on the non-importation
of
offensive weapons.”
123. Finally, I should like to say to members of the
Council that every nation in the United Nations, espe14

confined herself to doing what she has done on many
previous occasions: she quoted from a recent article from
Time magazine describing some alleged routes for a supposed traffic in arms being used by Nicaragua through
Honduran territory in order to send arms to El Salvador.
No proof whatever has been produced; there was simply
a repetition of what we have already heard many times
from the Reagan Administration.
130. But as was stated in the very comprehensive report
given in yesterday’s edition of The Washington Post under
the title, “US-Backed Nicaraguan Rebel Army Swells to
7,000”” -which,
in addition to the prominent place
given.to it on page one, was allotted much space in the
inside pages and also included a chart-this army, organized, trained and financed by the United States Government, which in December 1981 amounted to 500 men,
now numbers some 7,000 men, also led and financed by
the United States.
13 1. The article explains how all of this was started by
the Reagan Administration to stem an alleged arms traffic; how the representatives of the Central Intelligence
Agency, who to some extent have had to report to the
House Select Committee on Intelligence, have acknowledged that on no occasion have weapons been intercepted
in this supposed weapons traffic; and how more and more
they have had to accept that, in reality, the creation of a
military force to detain a supposed arms traffic was
nothing more than a pretext, because it is now clear that
what is at issue is an attack against the Government of
Nicaragua to impose once again on Nicaragua a Somozist
brand of democracy.
* Quoted in English by the speaker.

132. As I said before, the article is very long and I will
not read it ali, but we are going to request that it be
published as an official document of the Council so that
all the members of the Council can duly reflect on its
contents. The article says that in spite of there being an
initial prohibition to use former Somozist guards among
those troops being organized by the United States, it
became necessary to use them because no one else
wanted to fight; those are the exact words that you will
be able to read in this article later. President Reagan
actually describes them as “freedom fighters”: the Somozist brand of freedom that he would like to impose on
Nicaragua again, a Somozist democracy that we already
know, that we and our entire people have repudiated and
expelled definitively from our territory, in spite of the
imperial will.
133. I consider it important that the Council, that all of
us here, reflect and seriously consider the specific situation which Nicaragua has brought to you for your consideration, and that, pursuant to our responsibility to
safeguard international peace and security, we take the
necessary measures to achieve the immediate withdrawal
of the invading troops from our territory and to put an
end also to all acts of aggression against our territory
from outside and to the financing, training, and directing
of the mercenaries that the Government of the United
States is using to attack our country.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

NOTE
’ Official
Supplement

Records of the General
No. 1 (A/37/1).

Assembly,

Thirty-seventh

Session,

. ,,
