S/PRST/2006/44

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 November 2006
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5562nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 November 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council pays tribute to the sense of civic responsibility
once again demonstrated by the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, who participated peacefully and in large numbers in the provincial
elections and the second round of the presidential election held on 29 October
2006.
“The Security Council expresses its gratitude to the Independent
Electoral Commission and the Congolese National Police, which played a
central role in, respectively, organizing the elections and providing security for
them. It underlines the role of the High Media Authority, the International
Committee of Eminent Persons and the International Committee in Support of
the Transition (CIAT) in promoting a smooth conduct of the electoral process
and a calm political climate and reaffirms its support for them. It also
welcomes the support provided for the holding of the elections by the United
Nations Mission (MONUC), the EUFOR operation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the country’s other international and regional partners, in
particular South Africa and the European Union.
“The Security Council takes note of the fact that voting generally took
place in an orderly and safe atmosphere. It deplores the isolated incidents that
occurred, notably in Bumba and Bikoro in Equateur province and in Fataki in
Ituri district.
“The Security Council recalls that the Independent Electoral Commission
is responsible for announcing the election results. It calls on all political actors
and the Congolese people to await and receive these results calmly and
responsibly, refraining from any incitement to hatred or recourse to violence
and respecting democratic institutions and the rule of law.
“The Security Council attaches great importance to the signing of a
declaration of post-electoral intent by the representatives of the two candidates
in the second round of the presidential election, on 29 October in Kinshasa. It
emphasizes that political differences must be settled by peaceful means only

06-60584 (E) 071106

*0660584*

S/PRST/2006/44

and calls on the parties to comply with all the confidence-building measures to
which they agreed after the incidents of 20 to 22 August 2006.
“The Security Council recalls that these elections are historic for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and looks forward to the installation of a
democratically elected government. It stresses that the new authorities and all
Congolese political actors will be responsible for ensuring the long-term
sustainability of the restoration of peace and stability and for continuing to
promote national reconciliation and the establishment of democratic
institutions and the rule of law in the country.”

2

06-60584
