138

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

a view to phasing out, as appropriate, the activities of the
Institute in the most cost-effective manner possible, and to
submit to the General Assembly at its forty-second session
a detailed proposal on the reallocation of the appropriate
and essential activities of the Institute to other entities of
the United Nations system;
6. Urges ali States that have not yet contributed to the
Institute to do so, calls upon ali States to increase their
contributions to the Institute at and following the 1986
United Nations Pledging Conference for Development
Activities, in order to enable the Institute to implement
the restructuring plan and continue to fulfil its important
mandate, and appeals to those donors that do not intend
to pledge contributions to consider contributing to the Institute at a leve! commensurate with their capacity;
1. Appeals to ali States to provide appropriate special
purpose grants to enable the Institute to implement the
training and research programmes that cannot be financed
from its General Fund, and calls upon intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations to contribute to the
Institute.
98th plenary meeting
5 December 1986

41/173.

United Nations University

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the United Nations University,
Having consídered the report of the Council of the
United Nations University on the work of the University
in 1985,29
Noting with appreciation the contributions of ali countries that have supported the University,
Also notíng wíth appreciation the continuing interest of
the Government of Japan in, and its support for, the construction of a permanent headquarters building,
Expressing íts appreciation to the Government of Finland for the continued financia! and other support it provides to the first research and training centre established
by the University, the World lnstitute for Development
Economics Research,
Noting decision 5.2.4 adopted on 23 May 1986 by the
Executive Board of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its one hundred
and twenty-fourth session,
Noting with satisfaction that 1985 marked the tenth anniversary of the establishment of the University and that
during its first ten years the University has developed a
distinctive institutional identity within the United Nations
system and the international academic and scientific community,
1. Welcomes the progress achieved by the University
in implementing programmes of research, advanced training and dissemination of knowledge, as well as in implementing the activities planned within the framework of
the first medium-term perspective (1982-1987);
2. Notes with appreciation the decision of the Council
to undertake a comprehensive externa! evaluation of the
work ofthe University during its first ten years, in order to
assess the extent to which the University has fulfilled the
objectives of its Charter, with a view to making proposals
29 Ofjicial Rccords o/ thc General A ,scmbly, Forry-firsl Session.
Supplcmenl No. 31 (A/41111).

to strengthen its future performance and thus contributing
significantly to the planning of its future endeavours;
3. Notes with satisfaction that the World Institute for
Development Economics Research began operations at
Helsinki in 1985 and that it has made considerable progress on the three research themes for its initial programme: "Hunger and poverty: the poorest billion";
"Money, finance and trade: reform for world development"; and "Development and technological transformation: the management of change";
4. Also notes with satísfaction the progress being made
towards the establishment by the United Nations University of other research and training centres, particularly the
proposed Institute for Natural Resources in Africa;
5. Requests the United Nations University, when
drawing up its report to the General Assembly, to take
into account the comments made by Governments in the
Assembly on the manner in which the activities of the
University are presented, in particular by strengthening
the analytical content of the report;
6. Notes the continuing and intensified co-operative activities of the United Nations University with the United
Nations, its bodies and the specialized agencies, on the one
hand, and with the international academic and scientific
community, including national research centres, on the
other, which enhance the responsiveness ofthe University
to global issues and problems and bring its work into
closer relation with the concerns of the United Nations
system and the world academic community with regard to
those issues and problems;
7. Recognizes that the University needs to intensify its
fund-raising efforts to build up its Endowment Fund and
Operating Fund in order to increase its core income;
8. Earnestly appeals to ali States to take cognizance of
the progress made by the United Nations University and
the relevance of its work to the concerns ofthe United Nations, to contribute urgently and generously to its Endowment Fund and its subsidiary institutes and, additionally
or alternatively, to make operating contributions to the
University to enable it to fulfil its mandate efficiently, in
accordance with its Charter and with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly.
98th plenary meeting
5 December 1986

41/174.

Unified approach to development analysis and
planning

The General Assembly,
Recallíng its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the
annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade,
Recalling also its resolution 38/179 of 19 December
1983 on a unified approach to development analysis and
planning,
Mindful of its resolution 40/178 of 17 December 1985
on strengthening the role ofthe United Nations in the field
of international economic, scientific-technological and social co-operation, in which it stressed, ínter alia, the willingness of Member States to strengthen the United Nations system as a framework for constructive dialogue and
joint efforts in solving international economic problems,
especially those confronting the developing countries,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1986/5 I of 22 J uly 1986, in which the Council en-

V.

dorsed the conclusions of the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination at its twenty-sixth session, concerning
the United Nations special responsibility for carrying out
research on global and sectoral issues, and their interrelationship, in order to assist Member States and the deliberations of the competent intergovernmental bodies,
Believing in the usefulness of integrating economic and
social components in the formulation of policies and programmes at the national and international levels for the
benefit of social and economic progress and human wellbeing,
Stressing that the eradication of hunger and malnutrition and the solution of other economic and social problems on the basis of industrial, agricultura! and rural development are among the objectives of the Third United
Nations Development Decade,
Recalling the United Nations Programme of Action for
African Economic Recovery and Development 19861990, adopted b the General Assembly at its thirteenth
special session, 3
Reaffirming that each State has the sovereign and inalienable right to choose its economic and social system in
accordance with the will of its people and without outside
interference,
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
a unified approach to development analysis and planning,
in particular the observations and conclusions contained
therein; 31
2. Considers that an integrated approach to development analysis and planning, which takes into account differing economic, social and political features of national
economies, is one of the tools for the attainment of sustained social, economic and human development;
3. Invites States to support the efforts of developing
countries, if they so request, to strengthen their management capacity to apply a unified approach to development
analysis and comprehensive macro-economic strategies
and planning, especially with regard to integrating food
and agricultural production in all sectors and supporting
industrialization, economic and social infrastructure and
human resources development;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take into account
a unified approach to development analysis and planning
when preparing economic and social studies, ongoing research, projections and reports, including the World Economic Survey and the Report on the World Social
Situation, as well as the appraisal of the implementation of
the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to
make available to States the experience gained in the use of
a unified approach to development analysis and planning,
taking into account the fact that new ideas relating to the
promotion of social and economic development are
emerging.

6

98th plenary meeting
5 December 1986

30 Resolution S-13/2, annex.
11 A/41/323-E/1986/77 and Corr.1

139

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

and Add.1

41/175.

University for Peace

The General Assembly,
Reca/ling its resolutions 33/109 of 18 December 1978,
34/111 of 14 December 1979 and 35/55 of 5 December
1980,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolutions
1985/2 of 24 May 1985 and 1986/6 of 21 May 1986,
Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/6.
98th plenary meeting
5 December 1986

41/180.

Net transfer ofresources from developing to developed countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/56 of 22 July 1986,
Profoundly concerned at the net transfer of resources
from developing to developed countries, which is taking
place at alarming levels and accelerating rates and which
is adversely affecting the development efforts of developing countries and the living conditions of their people,
l. Reaffirms the urgent need to take appropriate and
effecti ve meas u res in the fields of money, finan ce, debt, resource flows, trade and development, in order to halt and
reverse the net transfer of resources from developing to developed countries;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the report called for in Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/56, also to take duly into account the interrelationship between the issues of money, finance, debt, resource
flows, trade and development.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/181.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 40/170 of 17 December 1985,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
1986/49 of 22 July 1986,
Recalling further the Programme of Action for the
Achievement of Palestinian Rights, adopted by the lnternational Conference on the Question of Palestine, 32
Noting that the programme of economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people requested in General Assembly resolution 38/145 of 19 December 1983 has not
been prepared,
Noting the increasing need to provide economic and social assistance to the Palestinian people,
1. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
assistance to the Palestinian people; 33
2. Welcomes the decision of the Secretary-General to
send a mission to prepare the programme of economic and
social assistance to the Palestinian people requested in
General Assembly resolution 38/145;

32 Report of the International Conference on the Question of Palestine,
Geneva. 29 August-7 September 1983 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.83.1.21), chap. I, sect. B.
13 A/41/,l<l and C'orr.1 and Add 1 and 2.
