UNITED NATIONS

AL RECORDS
S

n
rf
h

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

th

z
cl
11

MEETING:

14 APRIL

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page
ie
Ple
is

-il

to
3r
lit
Lie
le
ry
‘ts
to
a
us

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/221 3) . . , , . . , . , , . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . . . . . . . , , . . , . . . , . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Secllrit y Council
(S/l 3885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Force
in Lebanon (S/l3888 and Corr.l) . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e . . . . . . . . . . , . . .

1

SlPV.2213

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capita1 letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarter-l y Supplrmmts
of the Clffic~irrl Rec~~rds qf the Security C~unc?l. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rrsolutiom and
Decisions of the Security Coumil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2213th MEETING
IIeld in New York on Monday, 14 April 1980, at 11 a.m.
President:

Mr. Porfirio

MUfiOZ

LED0

(Mexico).

those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant Provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,
China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional
1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blurn (Israel),
Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan) and Mr. van Buuren (Netherlands) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2213)

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation front Spanish):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received a letter dated 13 April from the
representative of Tunisia [s/13889] which reads as
follows:

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/13888 and Corr.1).
The meeting

“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation to the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate
in the consideration of the agenda item ‘The situation in the Middle East’, in accordance with
the Council’s usual practice.”

was called to order at 12.05 p.m.

4. The proposal of the representative of Tunisia is
not made under rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure but, if approved by the Council,
the invitation to participate in the debate would confer
on the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) the
same rights of participation as those conferred on a
Member State when it was invited to participate
under rule 37.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13888
and Corr.1)

5. Does any member of the Council wish to speak on
this proposal?
6. Mr. vanden HEUVEL (United States of America):
The United States delegation has repeatedly made
clear our view that it is inappropriate for the Council
to couch an invitation to the Palestine Liberation
Organisation to participate in the debate in terms that
some seek to interpret as conferring rights of participation as if the PLO were a Member State. For this
reason, we will once again vote against the manner in
which this invitation is phrased.

1. The PRESIDENT
(‘interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with the decision taken at the
2212th meeting, I invite the representative of Lebanon
to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation (zf the President, Mr. Ta&i
~~?on) took a place at the Council tuble.

(Leh-

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fvorn Spanish):
I wish to inform the members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Israel,
Jordan and the Netherlands in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite

7. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Sparzish):
As no other member of the Council wishes to speak
I will now put to the vote the proposal of the representative of Tunisia.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

1

closing to UNIFIL
troops of the coastal road and of
all roads in the enclave, the headquarters in Naqoura is
completely isolated and the problem of the resupply
of the observation posts on the international
border
has reached the critical point. The immobilization
of
all four UNIFIL
helicopters-I
reported yesterday that
they had been destroyed by artillery fire-has deprived
the headquarters
of its mobility,
its capacity for
emergency
resupply
and its medical evacuation
capacity.

In ~CIVOUI’: Bangladesh, China, German Democratic
Republic,
Jamaica,
Mexico,
Niger,
Philippines,
Tunisia,
Union
of Soviet
Socialist
Republics,
Zambia
Against:

United

States of America

Abstaining:
France, Norway,
Portugal,
United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The proposal
4 abstentions.

was adopted

by 10 votes to I, MJith
13. I am continuing my efforts at all levels to remedy
this extremely grave situation, and I shall keep the
Council informed of further developments.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terzi (Palesfine Liberation
Orgarzization)
took the place
reserved for him at the side of tha Council chamber.

14. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatio,? from Spanish):
The first speaker is the representative of Lebanon.
I now call tIpon him.

8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretaiiun
from Spanish):
I now wish to inform the members of the Council
that I have received another letter dated 13 April,
from the representative
of Tunisia [S/13890], which
reads as fo1Iows:

15. Mr. TUI?NI
(Lebanon):
Before beginning my
statement, I should like to inform the Council of an
important
development.
The Commander-in-chief
of the Lebanese Army, Genera1 Victor Khoury,
yesterday evening addressed to General Emmanuel
Erskine, Commander of UNIFIL,
a message proposing
that the Lebanese detachment of the UNIFIL
area of
operations be moved to At-Tiri to share in the responsibilities of peace-keeping.

“I have the honour to request the Security Council to extend an invitation to Mr. Clovis Maksoud,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to
the United Nations, to participate in the consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in the
Middle East’, in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.”

16. I felt that this was a major development of which
I had to inform the Council, not only because of its
symbolic value as yet another step towards enabling
Lebanon to recover its sovereignty, but also because
the Lebanese Army, thus acquiring a new dimension
as a peace-keeping force, will stand side by side with
soldiers who have come from countries as far away as
Fiji and Ireland, to mention only those, for the
defence of the cause of peace and international
law
and order.

Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Council decides to accede to this request.
It was so decided.
9. The PRESIDENT
(interpretafion
from Spanish):
The Secretary-General
wishes to make a statement,
and I now call on him.

17. Two years ago we met in this very chamber to
debate, as we are doing today, an Israeli invasion of
my country. We then created-25 months ago-what
we thought would be an interim peace-keeping force,
a very interim force indeed, some of us thought.
We thought and hoped that Israel would comply with
the unanimous,
unequivocal
and very determined
resolution adopted by the Council on 19 March 1978
[resolution 42.5 (1978)]. By that resolution, the Council called for

10. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
It may be useful
to the members of the Council if I give a brief
account of developments
since its meeting yesterday
112212th meeting],
11. I have this morning been officially informed by
the Permanent
Mission of Israel on behalf of its
Government that all Israeli troops have now withdrawn
from southern Lebanon. However, the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has been unable
to confirm the extent of the withdrawal, as its freedom
of movement in the encfave is still severely restricted.
This situation illustrates once again how essential it is
for UNIFIL
to have complete
and unrestricted
freedom of movement in its entire area of operation.

“strict respect for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon within
its internationally
recognized boundaries”
and called upon Israel

12. In the UNIFIL
area the situation is quiet, but
still tense, as efforts to defuse the situation continue.
There will be a further meeting to this end with all
the parties concerned on Wednesday
16 April in
Nazareth. In the mean time, however, UNIFIL’s
situation remains extremely difficult. As a result of the

“immediately
to cease its military action against
Lebanese territorial
integrity and withdraw forthwith its forces from all Lebanese territory”.
18. Since then, the Council has held innumerable
debates on the continued Israeli aggression against
2

Lebanon.
The mandate of the interim, the very interim,
?eace-keeping
Force has been renewed-sometimes
:br six months, sometimes for five, sometimes for
Tour-but
always in the hope that Lebanese
sover‘ignty would sooner or later be restored, Israeli military
k\ction cease and, with the co-operation of all parties
=oncerned,
peace and security at last be restored in
:he south, along the internationally
recognized bounkries,
within the framework of a reactivated General
qrmistice
Agreement,
in conformity
with Council
‘esolutions
dating back to over 30 years ago, to 1948
wtd

of the Charter must be invoked
an end to its aggression.

to force Israel to put

23. Israel has now withdrawn, we are told, but we
have reason to doubt that that withdrawal is real and
total. Measures must be taken to put an end once and
for all to the intolerable situation in which Lebanon’s
international boundaries remain at the mercy of Israel’s
licence and abuse.
24. My second conclusion is the following. The socalled Lebanese de facto forces, whatever the context
within which they were deveIoped,
have become
nothing but an accessory of Israel’s occupation. Their
acts are not only shameful, irresponsible and inadmissible, they are, in Lebanon’s judgement,
a dangerous
form of treason, dangerous to the unity and integrity
of Lebanon and dangerous to the safety and security
of the peace-keeping forces. From a reading of the
news from Israel and some United Nations reports
from the field, one is even tempted to believe that
Major Haddad has become dangerous to himself, to the
people he claims to represent and, last but not least,
to his Israeli supporters. If he has not yet become a
danger to Israel, he has certainly ceased to be an asset
and may have become a useless embarrassment.

to 1949.

19,

Mr. President, this is your first debate on Lebanon
your election to the Council. It is reassuring for
1s
that you should be in the Chair, as it has become
:ustomary
to expect from the President, while the
zouncil
is debating peace-keeping in Lebanon, great
Batience,
an acute sensitivity
about human rights,
~tl unfaltering concern for international
justice and,
Lbove all, an unparalleled
dedication to the ideals of
Beace, liberty and national dignity and independence.
fou
have displayed all these qualities, which are
nherent
in your country’s
political
culture. The
-ebanese
who, for almost a century now, have found
L haven in Mexico are a living testimony of our respect
br your heritage and our sense of the community of
he
Mexican and Lebanese peoples’
aspirations.
therefore hope that you will hear our case today
kom that point of view.
;ince

25. In the interests of peace and in compliance with
the resolutions of the Council, an end must be put to
the very existence of the so-called defrrcfo forces. All
the parties concerned must unconditionally
co-operate
with the Secretary-General
and UNIFIL
in the dismantling of every possible obstacle that may prevent
the total deployment
of UNIFIL,
the safety and
freedom of action of the Force and the full implementation of the Council’s resolutions,
for nothing
short of that can be conducive to the objective conditions that will guarantee security in the area and
prevent any further menace to international
peace in
the Middle East.

‘0.
We have read with the greatest interest the
‘pecial
report submitted to the Council by the Secreary-General
on 11 April [S/13888]. The Council has
11so heard Mr. Waldheim during the consultations on
“riday
and yesterday. We have also heard him this
clorning,
as we heard him yesterday in his statement
opening the present debate. In those statements, the
Secretary-General
conveyed to us in precise and lucid
anguage
the indisputable
facts of the peace-keeping
ragedy
as well as the miseries of a land-my
homeand-which
has been raped and destroyed. He also
nvited
the Council to address itself to the very fundanental
question of the future of peace-keeping and
LOW we can enable UNIFIL
to carry out the peace:eeping responsibilities
entrusted to it by the Council.

My third conclusion
is the following.
The
cowardly and foolish attacks against the positions and
men of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) are now acquiring a most dangerous
dimension. The very validity of Lebanon’s international borders is being questioned through the rejection of the Armistice Agreement and the Armistice
Line, which is nothing else in Lebanon’s case but its
internationally
recognized boundaries.
We expect
all those-friends
and foes afike-who
claim to seek
peace in the area on the basis of mutual recognition
of sovereignty and the inalienable
right to selfdetermination
and secure borders, not to tamper with
but rather to defend the one frontier which has never
yet been questioned in the Middle East, the frontier
of the most peace-loving country, which has been a
casualty of both tiar and peace.
26.

:I*
My delegation has nothing to add to the reports
before us, so let me be very brief and merely submit
vhat we believe to be the logical, and hence unavoid.ble, conclusions, in the light of Council resolutions,
barticularly
resolutions 425 (1978), 426 (1978) and 459
1979).

First, Israel has not, as it claimed on 13 June 1978
s’/12736],
withdrawn from Lebanon. It: has always
,een there and has now returned in force, claiming
he right to conduct military action within our interlationally
recognized boundaries, on the fallacious
.nd inadmissible pretext of acting in self-defence and
Dr its own protection. This violation of international
aw must be condemned, and every relevant provision
.2.

27. In this context, we want once more to reassert
the total solidarity of the League of Arab States,
including the Palestine Liberation Organization,
with
3

--

border, especially if guaranteed
credible deterrent force of UNIFIL.

Lebanon’s commitment
to resolution 425 (1978). Our
Arab brethren are no less aware than we are that
Israel’s present challenge to our internationally
recognized boundaries is but another expression of its longheld territorial ambitions in the south of our country.
Hence, we are all determined, within the framework
of Arab solidarity, to give no pretext to those who
covet still more Arab land for holocaust and sacrifice.
One West Bank is enough, and Lebanon and all the
Arabs will not allow the South of our country to
become another Israeli arena for yet another war of
settlements, whoever the settlers may be.

32. We expect that the Council will once more find
it possible to vote unanimously
in favour of such a
draft resolution, which will be submitted in due course
through the appropriate channels. It is the only natural
and logical conclusion to what we have heard from.
the Secretary-General,
who has so dramatically reported to us in his own simple, direct, candid but
frank and forceful manner, effects that are equally
tragic for all of us.

28. Allow me now to conclude by stating what we
specifically request from this Council.

33. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation from
French): We have met today to consider the particularly disturbing situation prevailing in southern
Lebanon. The reports which the Secretary-General
has made to us, in particular that of yesterday and
the one he has just made to the Council, leave no doubt
about the attacks on UNIFIL
or the seriousness of the
damage caused by the harassment on 12 April, particularly to the Force’s headquarters in Naqoura, which
is UNIFIL’s
centre of operations.

29. In its resolution 459 (1979), the Council once
more expressed its feeling that my Government,
in
consultation
with the Secretary-General,
should draw
up a joint programme of action to implement UNIFIL’s
mandate. Such a programme was drawn up and submitted to the Secretary-General
on 26 January.
30. We had hoped that it would be possible to build
on what had been so painstakingly
achieved by
UNIFIL
in four long, yet all interim, mandates. Today
we are back at the very beginning,
in a situation
which is, I dare say, worse than what we were in on
I9 March 1978, because not only has Lebanon been
invaded again but the peace-keepers have themselves
been attacked and abused, have had their credibility
challenged and their very safety threatened beyond
all tolerable limits.

34. We deplore the intervention
of Israeli forces in
southern Lebanon. This is an inadmissible infringement
of Lebanon’s territorial integrity and sovereignty; it
constitutes a violation of the United Nations Charter
and particularly of the United Nations resolutions on
UNIFIL.
Of course, we take note of the information
given today to the Secretary-General by the Permanent
Mission of Israel with regard to the total withdrawal of
Israeli forces. But, as we have just learned, the Secretary-General is not yet in a position to confirm that
withdrawal, because of UNIFIL’s
lack of freedom of
movement in the area allocated to it under its mandate,
It is extremely important, therefore, for the Force to
be able to enjoy complete freedom of movement in
its area of operation.

3 1. While paying a tribute to UNIFIL
for its valiant
action, we, and they, have the right to expect from the
Council a resolution clearly leading to the following:
-First,
an immediate
tility against UNIFIL;

by the militarily

cessation of all acts of hos-

35. We also condemn
the operations launched
against UNIFIL
over the last few days by the clefacto
forces. We may wonder about the supposed advantage
to be derived from such activities by these elements
which, thanks to their substantial equipment, have
been able to engage in murderous operations against a
force whose peace-keeping mission restricts its ability
to respond. We shall not attempt to describe these
feats of arms so cheaply performed at the expense of
the soldiers of peace.

-Secondly,
a free, unhindered and total deployment of UNIFIL
up to the internationally
recognized
boundaries;
-Thirdly,
a specific and clear injunction to all concerned to enable UNIFIL
to use all its powers not only
to protect its own security, which is paramount, but
also to oppose all those who use force against peacekeeping; indeed, UNIFIL
must be given the means
to shoulder the mandate that it was given by this
Council;

36. These various actions introduce an additional
element of complication into a region that is already
seriously disturbed. They also seriously interfere with
the role of UNIFIL
as laid down in resolution 425
(1978)-and
thus, the prestige and credibility of the
United Nations. This role, which is more indispensable than ever, not only to prevent a general resumP
tion of fighting but also to reduce incidents, must be
preserved at all costs. In the interest of effectiveness,
we might even contemplate a stricter application of the
terms of UNIFIL’s
mandate relating to cases of legiti-

-Fourthly,
a condemnation of Israel’s aggression,
the immediate
and unconditional
withdrawal of all
Israeli army units, and the dismantling and disarming
of its surrogate "de facto forces”;
-Fifthly,
a reactivation of the General Armistice
Agreement,
with its appropriate structures and provisions, particularly
UNTSO, as the only valid framework for the security of all on the Israeli-Lebanese
4

mate self-defence laid down in the report of the
Secretary-General
[S/12611 of 19 March 19781.

less than anybody else. Indeed, as we have stated on
many occasions, Israel’s proximity to that unfortunate,
strife-torn
and battle-scarred
land heightens our
concern and our interest in seeing peace and tranquillity
restored to it. Israel fully supports the national sovereignty, territori,.d integrity and unity of Lebanon
within its interr-:rtionally recognized boundaries.

37. We should like to take this opportunity to pay a
tribute to the spirit of sacrifice and the discipline
displayed by all the officers and men of UNIFIL
in
particularly difficult circumstances in the performance
of their mission. We express our admiration for the
way in which the Irish contingent
faced up to a
harassing situation. I should also like to convey my
condolences to the representative of Fiji on the loss of
a soldier from his country’s contingent in the course
of the clashes on 12 April,

44. Israel has expressed these sentiments more than
once, and they constitute the foundation of its policy
towards Lebanon. Regrettably, scant notice has been
taken of Israel’s neighbourly goodwill. The cancerous
presence, in Lebanon generally and in the south of
the country in particular, of the terrorist PLO, and
internecine violence, as well as the massive presence
of the Syrian occupation forces, have reduced Lebanese sovereignty to a shambles. The high hopes
entertained by many that the deployment of UNIFIL
would, in the language of resolution 425 (1978), help
in “restoring
international
peace and security and
assisting the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the
return of its effective authority in the area” have not.
been fulfilled,
notwithstanding
the courage and
patience almost invariably displayed by the officers
and men of UNIFIL.
There is a continuing, indeed
a growing, presence of PLO agents and operatives
in UNIFIL’s
area of operation. These terrorists
harass the villagers in the small area between
UNIFIL’s
area of operation and the border of Israel,
whose defence is in the hands of the local Lebanese
forces under the command of Major Haddad. We are
fully aware that at times there is regrettable and
perhaps even unnecessary and avoidable friction
between these local forces and UNIFIL,
but we
cannot help wondering whether the capacity of some to
acquiesce in the presence of PLO terrorists and their
provocations
against the local villagers is not considerably greater than their understanding of and
empathy with the reactions to these sinister PLO
designs on the part of their intended victims.

38. As it has stated repeatedly, the French Government has always condemned all acts of violence and
terrorism, particularly the taking of children as hostages at the Misgav Am Kibbutz, an act whose odious
nature no consideration can mitigate. My Government
once again recalled its position on this point very
recently,
on 11 April, in the French National
Assembly. Such acts serve only to underscore the need
for and the urgency of a negotiated and balanced
settlement in the region.
39.
We fully approve of the positions taken by the
Lebanese Government with regard to UNIFIL
in the
letter which the representative of Lebanon addressed
to the President of the Council on 10 April [s/13885].
In this connection, France wishes to recall the
importance
it attaches to respect for the territorial
ivtegrity,
sovereignty and political independence
of
Lebanon
within its borders. We cannot, therefore,
allow those principles to be periodically
threatened,
and we are determined to make every effort to see
that they are recognized by everyone.
40.
The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative
of Israel, on
whom I now call.

42.
Let me also take this opportunity
of expressing
my compliments to the representative of Jamaica, who
conducted
the Council’s business last month in an
exemplary
fashion, with all his customary aplomb.

45. As on previous occasions, attempts are being
made to gloss over the real issues relating to UNIFIL’s
mandate. Let me remind the members of the Council
that UNIFIL
was established not only for the purpose
of confirming the withdrawal of Israel from Lebanon
-which was in fact completed and confirmed by the
UNIFIL
Commander on 13 June 1978-but also for the
twin purposes of “restoring international
peace and
security and assisting the Government of Lebanon in
ensuring the return of its effective authority in the
area”. In order to achieve those purposes, UNIFIL
was ordered to prevent the infiltration
of armed
personnel into the areas under its control, an instruction aimed at preventing the PLO from returning to
the region, which was free of their presence at the time
of UNIFIL’s
establishment,
this being a necessary
condition for the establishment of international peace
and security.

43.
The Government of Israel deeply deplores the
current tension in the south of Lebanon. It does SO no

46. Council members are well aware that, unfortunately, UNIFIL
has been unable to achieve its

4 I. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Since this is the first time
that I have addressed the Council this month, Mr. President, let me take this opportunity of conveying to you
my felicitations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of April. You represent
a country with which mine has the friendliest and
most cordial of relations and you personally have
exhibited
qualities of diplomacy
and statesmanship
which augur well, not only for your conduct of the
Council’s
business this month, but also for the two
years during which Mexico will serve on the Council
and will, I am confident, contribute positively to its
work.

5

objectives, for it has been persistently obstructed
and subverted by the terrorist PLO. A worrisome
situation with dangerous implications has been created
by the fact that large numbers of PLO terrorists have
been permitted to infiltrate UNIFIL’s area of operation and to establish themselves in it. Moreover, the
number of terrorists within UNIFIL’s area of operation
has considerably increased since the cessation of fire
of last August entered into force. Attempts at infiltration by terrorists, literally under the eyes of UNIFIL,
have intensified in recent months. It will be recalled
that paragraph 21 of the Secretary-General’s report
for the period from January to June 1979 [S/13384]
indicated that UNIFIL
stopped some 40 major
infiltration attempts, involving 140 terrorists. By
contrast, paragraph 36 of the Secretary-General’s
report for the period from June to December 1979
IS1136913mentions 110 infiltration attempts involving
almost 800 terrorists, which is to say that the rate of
attempted infiltrations during the second half of last
year has gone up almost three times and the number
of terrorists involved almost six times. This serious
phenomenon, which still continues, indicates the true
extent to which the PLO is prepared to “respect”
UNIFIL and the cessation of fire.

UNIFIL in the fulfilment of their duties.
persuaded that UNIFIL is prevented from doing
more to stem PLO incursions because its attention
is occasionally diverted to altercations with the local
Lebanese forces. Such an argument is indeeda caseof
putting the cart before the horse.
51. The hundreds of PLO terrorists within UNIFIL’s
area of operation are, of course, additional to the
1,500PLO terrorists under arms in the “Tyre pocket”
south of the Litani river, reaching to within eight
miles of Israel’s northern border.
52. This is by no means the end of the story,
because directly north of the Litani river, in Nabatiye
and in the region of Sidon, not to speak of Beirut
and Tripoli, another 10,000 to 12,000 PLO terrorists
are to be found. This, then, is the true measureof the
problem. Until it is faced, no real improvement in the
situation can be expected.
53. It should be borne in mind that virtually all of
the UNIFIL soldiers who lost their lives as a result of
hostile action in recent months were killed, directly
or indirectly, by PLO activities, as has been the case
with regard to the overwhelming majority of the
fatalities which UNIFIL has suffered in the line of
duty since its inception in March 1978.

47. According to information in the possession of the
Government of Israel, the PLO and its associates
have established themselves in about 40 locations
within UNIFIL’s area of operation, and they are
several hundred strong. There may be discrepancies
between Israel’s count and that of UNIFIL, but there
is no difference of opinion about the fact that that
presence has grown over the last 12 months, let alone
since the time of UNIFIL’s arrival in 1978, when it
was zero-as observed by the Commander of UNIFIL,
Ma;jor General Erskine, in the interview he gave,
published in The Ti’nzesof London, on 11 March last.

54. In this connection, Israel would like to extend
its deepest condolences to the families of the men of
UNIFIL who made the ultimate sacrifice in southern
Lebanon in recent months. We also wish to express
our wishes for a full and speedy recovery to those
officers and men who were wounded in the clashes.
55. The PLO’s tactics are well known. As has been
their deliberate practice in the past, they hide behind
refugees and Lebanese villagers. They do so for the
transparent purpose of shielding themselves and
making it all the more difficult to root them out.
Moreover, in southern Lebanon there is an additional
element in the PLO’s tactics. There they are also
hiding behind the shield of the United Nations peacekeeping forces. This surely is totally inadmissibleand
must be regarded for what it is: the total abuse of
international peace-keeping.

48. The several hundred PLO terrorists located
throughout UNIFIL’s area of operation are to be found
in small pockets, larger encampments, and even in
private houses in villages. They carry out various
activities in the area of operation, including patrols,
and enter villages to pressure, blackmail and intimidate
the local population-not
to mention the obvious,
namely to harass the United Nations forces.
49. The large terrorist presence in UNIFIL’s area
of operation and the increasing frequency of the
terrorists’ attempts to infiltrate that area not only
demonstrate how serious the terrorist activity is, they
also point to the fact that many terrorist infiltrators
have escaped UNIFIL’s notice. In addition, they suggest that even those who have been caught are likely
to succeed in infiltrating the area the next time around.

56. As has been acknowledged by the Secretary
General in several of his reports concerning UNIFIL
the situation in the south of Lebanon cannot be
detached from the situation in the country as a whole,
Attempts to detach it will not enhance the causeof
international peace and security and in fact are bound
to fail.
57. Not only do Syria and the PLO continue to
exploit the agony and turmoil of Lebanon, but other
Arab States also continue to see in the crisis of Lebanon a means of advancing their own partisan aims
within the well-known web of inter-Arab rivalries,
This tragic phenomenon came out into the open at the

50. Members of the Council will readily understand
that we are talking here of a considerable threat by
the PLO to three tangible targets: to the citizens of
Israel, particularly in the north of the country; to the
villagers in southern Lebanon; and to the men of
6

3 y r./

lil to b
1 doin
tkntio
le 10~;

casec
WIL’
to thl
locket’
in eigh

Tenth Arab Summit Conference, held last November
in Tunis, from which the terrorist PLO emerged
declaring that it would continue to use Lebanese territory as a Staging ground for its criminal activities. The
PLO thus openly and brazenly defied President Sarkjs
of Lebanon, who, according to a Reuters report of
21 November, told fellow Arab Heads of State that
“the Lebanese Government must be able to dictate
where Palestinian commando forces are based; the
commandos must stop military operations against
Israel from south Lebanon”.

: story

Jabatiyr
F Beiru
xrorist;
‘e of thl
nt in L

ly all0
result0
direct11
the case
of the
,* line 01
I extend
: menof
southern
express
to those
Aashes,
hasbeen
.e behind
o for the
ves and
lem out.

ldditional
are also
nspeacesible and
abuseof

lecretary
UNIFIL,
annot be
; a whole,
causeof
ve bound
ntinue to
but other
is of Lt+
isan aims
rivalries,
penat‘06

58. I should also like to draw the attention of the
Council to remarks made last December by the Prime
Minister of Lebanon with regard to the PLO terrorist
presence in the south of his country. In an interview
in the Lebanese newspaper Monday Morning of
10 December, Mr. Al-Hoss said that the terrorist
presence in UNIFIL’s
area of operation violated
Security Council resolutions. He continued by saying
that his country would try to bring about the thinning
down or the total withdrawal of the terrorists in that
area. Not only have the PLO terrorists not withdrawn
from UNIFIL’s
area of operation in the intervening
period but their numbers have even increased since.
59. Shortly after midnight on the night of 6 to 7 April,
five PLO criminals
penetrated into Israel from
UNIFIL’s
area of operation in southern Lebanon.
They entered Kibbutz Misgav Am, about half a mile
from the border with Lebanon, and seized two nursery
buildings in which innocent children, all less than three
years old, were sleeping, together with some nursing
mothers.
60. The terrorists’ aim was to take the infants hostage
and hold them to ransom in an attempt to gain the
release of 50 PLO criminals sentenced by Israel courts
to various terms of imprisonment.
Beyond that, the
PLO timed their attack, in the same way as the Council’s deliberations were staged in the last fortnight,
with the obvious purpose of trying to disrupt the
current talks between the leaders of Israel, Egypt and
the United States further to promote the peace process
in the Middle East.
61. A terrorist group which belongs to the PLO,
calling itself the “Arab Liberation Front” and operating under the direction of PLO headquarters at Sidon
in southern Lebanon, immediately took responsibility
for this outrage, which resulted in the deaths of a
toddler and a valiant civilian, as well as the wounding
of four toddlers, together with the death of an Israel
Defence Forces soldier and the injury of 11 other
soldiers in the actions taken to free the little hostages.
62. AS is well known, the PLO is nothing but an
instrument in the hands of the Arab States which
created it, The particular terrorist group which Perpetrated the outrage at Misgav Am has close connections with Iraq, and in their announcement taking

-

0

’

responsibility for the atrocity they stated that it was
carried out to mark the thirty-third anniversary of the
founding of the Baath Party, Indeed, on 6 April-one
day before the atrocity-the head of the terrorist PLO,
Yasser Arafat, addressed a gathering in Beirut to mark
the same occasion. Arafat stressed the PLO’s links
with Iraq and praised the assistance the latter gives to
the PLO.
63. But to return to Misgav Am, the Kibbutz guards
quickly gained control of one of the nursery buildings
and freed the children and several mothers inside,
Later, an Israel army unit, which was rushed to the
scene, engaged the terrorists at the second nursery
building. By 10 o’clock in the morning the children and
other hostages there had been freed and the five
terrorists had been killed.
64. All of us saw on television, in horrifically vivid
colours, the gruesome acts carried out by the terrorists
against innocent babes and toddlers. All of us have
seen the horror pictures published in the press, pictures
of children’s cribs and play-rooms riddled with bullets,
stained with blood.
6.5. Here at the United Nations attempts are being
made to manipulate the Security Council, as well as
other organs of the Organization, to suit the whims
and wishes of the terrorist PLO. This travesty has
reached such proportions that, in the meetings of the
Council held last week, at the instigation of the PLO,
no speaker-not one speaker-saw fit even to mention
the atrocity perpetrated by PLO thugs at Misgav Am,
let alone condemn it. Incidentally, the PLO boasted
that criminals of various nationalities from Syria to
Pakistan participated in this outrage. I am sure all
those countries must be exceedingly proud of this
contribution to humanity.
66, Once again, at Misgav Am, the true face of the
PLO was revealed. Israel was in no need of such an
ugly reminder, for the violent images of their savagery
are burnt deep into our consciousness. We are entitled
to expect that the correct lesson will be drawn also
by those statesmen and politicians who still entertain
illusions about the PLO’s professed moderation.
67. It is not simply that these terrorist thugs set out
on their murder mission on the last day of the Passover
festival in order to turn what is otherwise a joyous
occasion into a tragedy of unspeakable human grief.
It is not just that these PLO thugs stoop so low in
their cowardice and in their total lack of human feeling
as to take hostage babes in arms. Children have for
years now been a prime target of PLO terror. Thus,
for example, in May 1970 a school bus from Avivim
was viciously attacked near Bar-Am, close to the
border with Lebanon and not far from Kibbutz Misgav
Am. That horrendous act resulted in the death of nine
children and three adults, as well as the wounding of
19 small children, most of whom were still in primary
school.

68. Over the last decade there have been many other
unconscionable acts of this kind. The catalogue of
inhuman crimes is long and sickening. Not one year
has gone by without the slaughter of Israeli children
at the merciless hands of the PLO. Israel has brought
all these incidents to the attention of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General, but to no avail.

73. In the wake of the atrocity at Misgav Am, and
in the light of information that the terrorist PLO was
planning further outrages of this kind, the Israel
Defence Forces took certain limited measures, the
purpose of which was to foil these plans. The steps
taken have been completed, and all Israeli soldiers
have now completely withdrawn behind the border
with Lebanon.

69. Last Monday’s outrage at Misgav Am was not the
first time that the PLO had used UNIFIL’s area of
operation and set about its criminal acts through
UNIFIL’s lines. Thus, for instance, on 13 January
1979, in the attempt at the guest-house at Ma’alot,
reported in my letter circulated as document S/13028,
it was clear that the three PLO terrorists involved had
crossed through UNIFIL’s
lines on the way to
Israel. The same holds true for a group of six PLO
terrorists encountered and eliminated on 16 April 1979
by the Israel Defence Forces near the village of
Zar’it close to the northern border of Israel, as reported
in my letter circulated as document S/13261.

74. I should point out that in the course of the last
year Israel has foiled at least 10 such attempts by the
PLO to cross the border from UNIFIL’s area of
operation with murderous intent.
75. As is well known, it was not the Government of
Israel that called for the establishment of UNIFIL.
Indeed, given the parliamentary constellation prevailing in this Organization, had Israel made such a
suggestion it would never have even got off the ground
and UNIFIL would never have been established,
Nevertheless, both the Secretariat and the offkers and
men of UNIFIL are well aware of the help which
Israel renders through its good offices in trying to
resolve difficulties which arise from time to time
between UNIFIL and the local Lebanese forces in the
south. We will go on doing what we can.

70. The background to the PLO terrorist attack on
Kibbutz Manara on the border with Lebanon on
9 May 1979, reported in document S/13312, was and is
equaliy disquieting. In that incident an Israel Defence
Forces patrol wounded and captured one terrorist. He
disclosed that the group had set out from Tyre. They
entered UNIFIL’s area of operation from the north
and proceeded through UNIFIL’s lines to the village of
Shaqra, which is well within UNIFIL’s area of operation. At the village they received weapons and instructions about their operation before crossing the
border into Israel. Their orders were to carry out
indiscriminate murder of Israeli civilians. After an
exchange of fire with the Israel Defence Forces
patrol, the terrorists who were not wounded fled to
Lebanon in the direction of Mis-Al-Jebel and from there
they backtracked to Shaqra.

76. Let us never lose sight of the fact that the
Lebanese villagers in the south have genuine reason
to fear for their lives. In view of their previous experiences and in the light of what has happened in the
north of Lebanon, those villagers know that their own
Government does not at the moment possessthe means
to guarantee their security. Their fears have been
exacerbated by the penetration of hundreds of PLO
terrorists into UNIFIL’s area of operation and in the
light of their experience that where UNIFIL goes, the
PLO follows. For the present, the local Lebanese
forces defending the villagers and villages in the south
represent their only protection. No credible alternative
to those local forces has yet been presented. Whosaever wishes to suggest that the villager’s fears are out
of place is taking on a grave responsibility, There is
nothing in the recent record of the area which should
lead those villagers to expect otherwise. Certainly,
no one can seriously advise the villagers in the south
not to regard the threats to their existence seriously
so long as the Lebanese Government is unable to
reassert its sovereignty in the south. While Israel has
made it clear that it cannot be indifferent to the fate
of the villagers in the south, it cannot assume responsibility for their actions. They act in accordance with
what they judge to be a matter of their own survival,

71. Another attempt at indiscriminate murder was
made on the night of 6 to 7 February last, when a
group of PLO terrorists crossed the border into Israel
from Lebanese territory, west of Kibbutz Eilon, as
reported in my letter circulated as document S/13785.
The group, which was on a murder mission against
civilians in Israel, was encountered by a patrol of the
Israel Defence Forces. After throwing hand grenades
at the patrol, the group turned around and fled. It
was pursued by the patrol, but it escaped into the
area controlled by UNIFIL.
72. A State’s right to take the measures necessary to
halt and to foil terroristic activities emanating from
across its boundaries is a principle well recognized
by the doctrine and the practice of international law
alike. The Government of Israel, like any other
government, has the right, indeed the duty, to take all
the measures necessary to protect the lives and safety
of its citizens. In so doing, the Government of Israel
is in fact exercising the inherent right of self-defence
enjoyed by every sovereign State-a right that is also
recognized under Article 51 of the Charter.

77. We sincerely hope that such clashes as have
occurred in the last few days do not recur. But we are
firmly convinced that their prevention is more easily
attained by patient talks on the ground than by inflammatory debates in the Security Council.
78. Over and beyond that, we are convinced that
there will not be any long-term improvement in the
situation until the fundamental problem plaguiflg
8

,

southern Lebanon, and indeed Lebanon as a whole,
is tackled. That is to say, there will be no real change
the better until the Pi0 and all alien forces remove
themselves or have been removed from Lebanese

soil, so that Lebanese independence, sovereignty and
unity can be restored.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
auprts
des ventes.
New York ou Genive.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

DES

NATIONS

sent en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section.
New

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estln
en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirljase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et les agences
g : Nations

dCpositaircs
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Ventas,

83-61462-August

1986-X
