VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

{a)

10.

National targets and strategies for women's integragration and participation in economic and social
deve.Jopment with special emphasis on the subtheme
"Employment, Health and Education":
(i) Planning and monitoring;
(ii) National machineries;
(b) Regional and international targets and strategies,
taking into account the subtheme "Employment,
Health and Education".
Adoption of the report of the 0:mference.

33/190.

Preparations for the World Conference
of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and
Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 5 of its resolution 31 / 194 of
22 December 1976,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "Work of the Preparatory Committee for the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women during its first session" ,138
Conscious of the need to prepare fully for the
Conference,
Requests the Secretary-General, in proceeding with
the arrangements for the preparation of the World
Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace, to bear in mind
paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 31 / 194
and to so implement the move decided upon in that
resolution as to ensure the necessary preparations for
the Conference and the effective participation of the
Advancement of Women Branch of the Centre for
Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the
Secretariat.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979

33/191.

Venue of the World Conference of the
United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in paragraph 20 of which it decided to
convene at the mid-term of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace a world
conference to review and evaluate the progress made
in implementing the objectives of the International
Women's Year as recommended by the World Conference of the International Women's Year and, where
necessary, to readjust existing programmes in the light
of new data and research available,
Noting with appreciation that the Government of
Denmark has offered to act as host for the Conference, rnn
Noting also with appreciation the offer of the Government of Costa Rica to act as host to the Conference, 140
Decides, after being informed of the friendly and
cordial understanding between the two countries offering to act as host to the World Conference of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace:
(a)
To accept, with thanks, the offer of the Government of Denmark to act as host to the Conference;

( b)

To hold the Conference in Copenhagen in

1980.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979
1 39 A/C.3/33/5.

138 A/33/339 and Corr.I and Add. I.

169

140 A/C.3/33/4.
