A/64/PV.89

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

89

th plenary meeting
Friday, 21 May 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Sangqu
(South Africa), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 33 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee) (A/64/407/Add.1)
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee which is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote or position. The
positions of delegations regarding the recommendations
of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are
reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or

in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee, I should like
to advise representatives that we are going to proceed
to take a decision in the same manner as was done in
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee,
unless the Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
64/266).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 33?
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-37119 (E)

*1037119*

A/64/PV.89

Agenda items 48 and 114 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in
the economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/701)
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by thanking all the panelists and participants for their
presentations and useful insights on the emerging
concept of human security. We would also like to
recognize the personal interest of the Permanent
Representative of Japan in pursuing this debate in the
United Nations and to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (A/64/701).
The concept of human security, from a layman’s
perspective, might appear quite obvious and is perhaps
well captured in paragraph 143 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) as freedom from
fear, freedom from want and the right of all individuals
to live in dignity in order to fully develop their
potential.
However, as noted in paragraph 143, there is a
need to clearly define the concept of human security in
the multilateral context. The basic framework for this
discussion was, of course, provided in a reference in
the same paragraph to the three mutually interlinked
issues of security, livelihood and dignity, with the
individual at its centre.
In our discussions on the definition, it is
important to ensure that human security is clearly
situated within the parameters of non-aggression,
non-interference in the domestic affairs of States, the
right to national self-defence and State sovereignty,
which are the bedrock of international relations and
domestic governance. The definition needs to
recognize that the primary responsibility for human
security rests with States and Governments. Obviously,
there can be no place for interventionism in the concept
of human security. The concept must be people-centred
and should go beyond the narrow framework of
protection of populations from physical insecurity, as
in situations of war and conflict, to a much broader
framework that encompasses multidimensional and
comprehensive parameters, with development as an
important pillar.

2

We recognize the complexity associated with this
concept and its multidimensional linkages at the
national, regional and international levels. The major
international challenges of today in fact require the
tackling of the persistent and chronic social and
economic challenges which confront States. At the
United Nations, we have pledged to address these
challenges in numerous ways, but most importantly by
focusing on the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals.
The Secretary-General’s report also meticulously
establishes the direct linkage of the exacerbation of
these challenges by the recent global crises, including
the financial and economic crisis, energy price
fluctuations, food security challenges, and the adverse
ramifications of climate change. These challenges, of
course, are no longer confined within national
boundaries. In this regard, it is imperative to stress the
need for genuine international cooperation, which
recognizes the inherent constraints many developing
countries face, especially in mobilizing internal and
external
resources
for
socio-economic
and
development activities.
In India, we are committed to ensuring
fundamental rights and dignity to every citizen. In
recent years, the thrust of our socio-economic
development has, moreover, moved on to inclusive
growth, that is, bringing the fruits of economic
development to all sections of our society, particularly
in rural India and among the more vulnerable. It is our
belief that a comprehensive approach to human
security is the only way that this concept would help
every human being explore his or her potential to the
maximum, while pursuing a life of dignity in a safe and
healthy environment.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): We thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening this debate on
the Secretary-General’s report on human security
(A/64/701). We thank the Secretary-General for putting
it before this Hall and, of course, following in my
Indian colleague’s footsteps, we recognize the
immense contribution Japan has made in taking this
matter forward.
In 2005, we got together as sovereign States and
decided that we needed to dilate on the concept of
human security in the world. Over the past 24 hours,
with maybe more today, we have heard various
concepts enunciated. There have been different

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

nuances in different contexts, but let us first remember
what, in founding the United Nations, we brought to
the Charter that is also relevant to this document. We
decided to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. We decided to reaffirm our faith in
fundamental human rights and in the equal rights of
men and women and of nations large and small. We
decided to promote social progress and better standards
of life in larger freedom.
The afore-cited purposes of the United Nations
Charter presented a balanced encapsulation of the
concept of human security, but the fruition of the
purposes has, at best, been uneven. Continuing and
growing financial and political disparities fly in the
face of calls for equal rights for individuals and
nations. The world has yet to reach a stage in which
human security is extant in letter and spirit, that is, a
state in which all human beings have equal rights to
life, liberty, food, health, employment and
opportunities to live with compassion and dignity.
Having reviewed the Secretary-General’s report, I
have the following thoughts to offer. First, human
security requires a gradual approach in which models,
such as that for poverty eradication, are developed for
subsequent replication as human security projects.
Second, to foster trust, human security
interventions should be made in areas which are
acceptable to all Member States.
Third, it is important to address entrenched
systematic inequalities, such as agricultural subsidies,
that negatively affect the developing agrarian
economies and to promote agricultural productivity in
developing countries through, inter alia, technology
transfers. This relates specifically to the continent of
Africa.
Fourth, it is essential to expand the scope of
human security-related work beyond humanitarian
agencies to include development entities, including
such United Nations agencies as the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Environment Programme. Those agencies’
input will help impart greater clarity and relevance to
the concept of human security.
Fifth, in regard to different attempts to define the
impetus for human security, the report identifies three
common elements: current and emerging threats, the

10-37119

protection and empowerment of people, and
non-encroachment on State sovereignty. While these
elements could provide a basis for further discussion,
there is a need to avoid subjective interpretations of
current and emerging threats, which is the main reason
for the division of debate in this house.
Sixth, human security should be a unifying rather
than a divisive concept and should promote
intercultural, inter-religious and inter-faith dialogue,
with cooperation and understanding being key words.
Seventh, the right to food, the right to adequate
housing and sanitation, and the right to adequate
standards of health should be indispensable parameters
for human security.
We must not forget how human security, which
forms the core of this document, needs to be
remembered. I would like to cite the earliest definition
that arose in this Hall: to be able to give the right to
protect the vital core of all human lives in ways that
enhance human freedoms and human fulfilment. That
should be something we must remember and not forget.
And to this very aspect of human rights, security
and development, I would like to add that there is a
basis upon which we can work, and which we could
take as common international ground without
interfering with anyone, but recommending that three
important concepts would be part of a minimum
delineation and understanding of human security. The
first concept, which the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) is developing, is the legal
empowerment of the poor; the second is the economic
improvement of the poor; and the third is the
empowerment of women, a concept that the UNDP, in
working through human rights declarations and
development, is bringing to the fore, especially in Asia,
where 70 per cent of the population is young people.
Therefore, because mothers care for feeding and
dressing the young and look out for their health and
their education, roughly 75 per cent of the population
as a whole would be reached under the simple rubric of
the empowerment of women. These are important
aspects that cannot and should not be in any way
ignored.
Finally, I would add by way of conclusion that
the unequal progress in and distribution of the
promised fruits of globalization are major challenges to
human security. Undemocratic global decision-making
exacerbates apprehension about the possible abuse of

3

A/64/PV.89

human security for political ends. Accordingly, the
promotion of equitable global governance is necessary
for universal ownership of the concept of human
security.
Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for introducing his
report on human security (A/64/701). At the same time,
I would also like to thank President Treki of the
General Assembly and the delegation of Japan for their
initiative in arranging this opportune occasion to
exchange views on human security in the United
Nations system as a follow-up to the World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1).
The Republic of Korea, as a member of the
Friends of Human Security, has recognized the
substantial contribution that the notion of human
security has made to the work of the United Nations on
every occasion where this issue has been discussed.
Our view of human security is that, first, it is a useful
concept that complements the traditional concept of
security. The important goals of the United Nations —
peace and security, development and human rights —
are all closely linked to human security. Similarly,
these goals are closely linked with one another, despite
their perceived differences. In many ways, human
security is the specific point of convergence among
them. Given the multinational and complementary
nature of human security, our work for peace,
development and human rights could and should be
viewed through a framework that reflects the notion of
human security.
Secondly, my delegation views human security as
a relatively new approach for addressing various
threats or challenges, rather than as a binding principle
or overarching legal issue. Rather than top-down,
human security brings a human face of insecurity to the
forefront in a more bottom-up approach. In this
connection, my delegation believes that, with
continued work on this significant issue, the broad idea
of human security can eventually be put in place in the
field in such a way that the focus is on individuals and
communities
through
robust
protection
and
empowerment. It could be an important new tool for
the international community to use as it seeks to make
greater progress in achieving our goals in real and
tangible terms.

In this regard, my delegation welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on human security. It
effectively brings the membership up to date on some
of the key developments and advances that have been
made on the issue of human security since the 2005
World Summit, outlining the principle for
incorporating human security and its application in
current organizational practices and priorities. The
report also provides a definitional overview vis-à-vis
State sovereignty and the responsibility to protect.
By specifically applying the concept of human
security to different and often varied priorities of the
United Nations, the report of the Secretary-General
conjoins the notion of human security with tangible
issues that affect not only the work of the Organization
but the entire world. Indeed, it provides a succinct look
at the multidimensional impact of the economic and
food crises, global health threats and climate change.
That is then contrasted with human security’s inherent
linkages with the prevention of violent conflicts,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
It is critical to restate, as noted in the report of
the Secretary-General, that the application of the
concept of human security does not bring additional
layers to the work of the United Nations. Instead, the
notion of human security reinforces and complements
the activities of the Organization in these critical fields.
We are confident that human security has an important
role to play in the future of the Organization that will
benefit immensely from its forward-thinking,
synergistic application.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea would like
to reiterate its strong belief that every human being is
entitled to live free from fear in full dignity. In this
regard, we hope that the United Nations can continue
to explore ways to make practical use of the notion of
human security for the benefit of people and make a
profound impact on the ground.
Mr. Koterec (Slovakia): Allow me to start by
expressing my appreciation to the delegations of Japan
and Mexico for taking the initiative, with the kind
support of the President of the General Assembly, to
organize this important discussion on human security.
My delegation also welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (A/64/701), which provides an
excellent basis for today’s deliberations.
The issue of human security is both relevant to
and promising in fostering security, prosperity and a

4

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

dignified human life. It contains valuable information
on the implementation of important elements of the
World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) and poses
many thought-provoking questions on the way forward.
I wish to stress that Slovakia aligns itself with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union.
However, in addition, I would like to make some brief
remarks in my national capacity.
Slovakia is a strong supporter of the concept of
human security because, in our view, it reflects a close
linkage between the three pillars of United Nations
activity: security, development and human rights. Even
though the concept brings a new way of thinking about
security, putting people at the centre, we agree with the
opinion that it should complement and conjoin the
activities of the United Nations, bring added value and
not add an extra layer to the Organization’s structures
or cause duplication of action. While the concept is
broadly defined and cross-cutting, its individual
components are already well developed and continue to
be pursued. As an example, we need but mention the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission.

building are necessary preconditions for
successful security sector reform, but they cannot
be the goal per se. Security sector reform should
therefore be accompanied by implementation of
the principles of good governance, transitional
justice, democratic accountability and respect for
human rights. Security sector reform will make
sense only if it brings about concrete
improvements in the everyday life of people. It is
important that they can see the benefits and trust
the effort made, support it and participate in it.”
Effective coordination of international efforts and
their individual participants in post-conflict areas is
another key point we would like to make. Yes, that has
been said many times. However, we hope that the longlasting processes of United Nations system reform,
particularly the concept of “delivering as one”, can
bring tangible results very soon and reinforce the
central role of the United Nations.

With security and development interlinked, the
need for security sector reform is often a precondition
for conflict prevention and for stable and sustainable
post-conflict development. There are real cases when
an inability to carry out reform of the security sector
led to the collapse of peacekeeping or peacebuilding
efforts. Let me quote my former Foreign Minister,
speaking at the regional workshop held in Cape Town,
South Africa, in 2007:

Furthermore, Slovakia is convinced that the role
of regional, subregional and other international
organizations should be promoted. These organizations
play a crucial role in developing and implementing
relevant programmes. From that perspective, let me
mention two concrete activities sponsored by Slovakia.
Human security and its linkages to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations were intensively discussed
during the regional workshops held in Buenos Aires in
September 2009 and in Jakarta in March 2010. The
workshops were organized by Slovakia together with
Argentina and Indonesia, respectively, in order to
ensure that regional views are better reflected in
broader United Nations policies in this field. As the
Co-Chairs’ statement from Buenos Aires concludes, the
United Nations approach to security sector reform
could benefit substantially from regional experiences
in areas such as the prevention of violence. This was
recognized to be of increasing importance, given the
continuous paradigm shift in international security
towards a human security agenda. We are also
encouraged to see the emphasis placed by the World
Bank on linking security and development, conflict
prevention and prosperity and justice.

“One cannot omit the most noble, and in
fact the ultimate, objective of security sector
reform, which is improvement of people’s lives
through this public service. Security sector
reform cannot be aimed at mere institution- and
capacity-building. Institution- and capacity-

Last but not least, I would like to emphasize the
role of non-State actors, which often play a central role
in identifying a problem, helping to implement relevant
policies and programmes, carrying out oversight as
well as providing social services. Their engagement
has to be recognized and further supported.

Slovakia, as the initiator of the United Nations
Group of Friends on security sector reform, places the
notion of human security at the centre of its activities
in this area. As the 2006 European Commission
concept paper on European Community support for
security sector reform rightly put it, citizens should be
able to expect the State to be capable of maintaining
peace and guaranteeing the strategic security interests
of the country, and of ensuring that their lives, property
and political, economic and social rights are
safeguarded.

10-37119

5

A/64/PV.89

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate once again
that Slovakia considers the concept of human security
to be a part of the international community’s endeavour
to tackle the core issues which the United Nations was
built to address. The concept of human security
highlights synergy in United Nations endeavours for a
good cause.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan aligns
itself with the statement made on behalf of the
European Union. However, we would also like to
contribute to the discussion in our national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening the informal
panel discussion and the thematic debate and to thank
the Secretary-General for the submission of his report
on human security (A/64/701), which provides a
comprehensive update on developments related to the
advancement of human security since the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1).
In 2005, heads of State and Government stressed
the right of people to live in freedom and dignity, free
from poverty and despair, and they recognized that all
individuals, in particular vulnerable people, are entitled
to freedom from fear and freedom from want, with an
equal opportunity to enjoy all their rights and fully
develop their human potential. To that end, we
committed ourselves to discuss and define the notion
of human security.
The General Assembly held a thematic debate on
22 May 2008 to reflect on the scope of the human
security concept and to further explore ways to follow
up on the reference to this notion in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome. Although various interpretations and
understandings were presented during the course of the
deliberations, the thematic debate undoubtedly
demonstrated the growing interest in the concept.
Despite obvious divergences, the emphasis was on the
need for a new culture of international relations that
calls for comprehensive, integrated and people-centred
approaches.
As the report of the Secretary-General points out,
human security is gaining wide support in the United
Nations and other forums. Notable contributions have
been made in defining the notion of human security
since it was first introduced as a distinct concept in the
1994 Human Development Report of the United
Nations Development Programme. Thus, we take note
of the key human security initiatives undertaken by

6

Governments, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations
system,
regional
and
subregional
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
institutions.
The report of the Secretary-General refers to the
need for an expanded paradigm of security in order to
better address the multifaceted, complex and
interrelated challenges that we face today. Human
security is inseparably linked with concepts such as
national security; the settlement of conflicts and
peacebuilding;
people-centred
socio-economic
development and human rights; the eradication of
poverty; and addressing the effects of climate change.
At the same time, human security depends on a number
of critical factors, among them the need to ensure, first,
that parameters for behaviour are based on the
normative standards set by the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
The consequences of contemporary armed
conflicts are devastating, from threatening the very
existence of States and undermining their sovereignty,
integrity and unity to the high proportion of civilian
casualties, massive forced population displacements
and the creation of mono-ethnic areas which resemble
the terrible concept of ethnic cleansing. Indeed,
conflicts mainly affect civilian populations and pose
major risks to people’s survival, livelihoods and
dignity, and thus to human security.
The report of the Secretary-General makes it
clear that human security underscores the universality
and primacy of a set of freedoms that are fundamental
to human life. In that context, protecting civilians and
upholding humanitarian law, with special focus on
vulnerable groups such as children, women, the elderly,
refugees and internally displaced persons, are essential
in conflict situations and must remain an absolute
priority for the United Nations as a whole, for the
General Assembly, for the Security Council and, above
all, for Member States.
Taking into consideration what I have said,
human security, as we understand it, is expected to
serve to enhance the sovereignty of States and
strengthen their integrity, unity and stability in an
effective and sustainable manner, as well as to focus on
long-term prevention and people-centred responses.
We share the view reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General that human security should not bring
additional layers to the work of the United Nations. At

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

the same time, the United Nations is instrumental in
addressing this topic and related issues, although
additional discussions are needed on the notion of
human security, its advancement and its application to
the current priorities of the Organization.
We look forward to the continuation of
constructive dialogue and to further reports of the
Secretary-General on progress in mainstreaming
human security in United Nations activities.
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/64/701), which provides a
very good basis for further discussion and elaboration
of the concept of human security. We also acknowledge
the role of Japan and other delegations concerned in
bringing this issue forward.
Let me state at the outset that Jamaica supports
the holistic approach taken in the 1994 Human
Development Report of the United Nations
Development Programme, which argued in favour of a
new paradigm of sustainable human development, a
new form of development cooperation and a
restructured system of global institutions, characterized
as freedom from fear and freedom from want. It has
been argued quite convincingly that the concept of
human security has implications for all the pillars of
the United Nations agenda: the peace and security,
human rights and development dimensions, among
others.
Human security is often referenced in the context
of the interrelatedness of security, development and the
protection of civilians. Moreover the concept
underscores the need for multisectoral responses and
collaboration among all stakeholders: Government,
non-governmental organizations, and regional and
international organizations.
Human security seeks to distinguish itself from
traditional notions of national security that focus on the
protection of the State from external threats, and to
give greater credence to the protection of individuals
and communities. In this context, a people-centred
view of security is critical to maintaining national,
regional and global stability and to addressing, in a
comprehensive
manner,
the
complexity
and
interrelatedness of the new security threats of the
twenty-first century.
In general, Jamaica can agree with the following
positions articulated in the report: First, a people-

10-37119

centred approach is necessary to solving global threats
and challenges. Second, in the context of the
interconnected nature of threats and challenges facing
the international community today, there is urgent need
for an expanded paradigm of national security. Third,
in order to find a permanent solution to the myriad of
threats and challenges, it is necessary to identify and
address their root causes. Fourth, approaches to
addressing human insecurities must be tailored to local
contexts. Fifth, in addressing human insecurities, there
can be no distinction between civil, political,
economic, social and cultural rights, which are
indivisible and mutually reinforcing. Sixth, human
security is inconsistent with interference in the internal
affairs of sovereign States and is also inconsistent with
the use of force against sovereign nation-States.
Seventh, human security, if implemented with the input
and buy-in of all stakeholders within a society, can
strengthen a State’s overall security and, in the long
run, contribute to a more stable international security
environment. And eighth, the twin pillars of
empowerment and prevention which underpin the
concept of human security are mutually reinforcing and
must form the basis for action and serve as the
barometer by which success in this area is judged.
We further underscore that all efforts to augment
human security in various communities and countries
around the globe must be part of a nationally owned
process. At the same time we would like to express a
word of caution based on the following factors.
The concept of human security, as we all know, is
mired in controversy because of the lack of consensus
over its precise definition, the threats from which
individuals should be protected and the appropriate
mechanisms for responding to those threats. Human
security is also an emerging theme, and not an accepted
norm under international humanitarian law. The
concept of human security is therefore still very vague
and requires further development.
We note that there are two schools of thought on
the scope of the concept of human security. On the one
hand, it is to be considered solely in the context of
violent threats associated with civil war, genocide and
the displacement of populations. However, the second
and much broader perspective of the human security
agenda includes a range of threats, including those
resulting from environmental disasters, disease,
poverty and general economic deprivation.

7

A/64/PV.89

We also wish to point out that one of the
recommendations of the report is for a report on
progress in mainstreaming human security in United
Nations activities to be submitted every two years.
However, we would wish to ask this question: has there
been General Assembly approval for the mainstreaming
of this concept? How can we proceed to mainstream
human security without consensus on its definition and
scope? Is there a framework or plan of action through
which this mainstreaming is expected to take place?
We need further clarification on those issues.
Let me turn next to peacebuilding and
peacekeeping. In countries emerging from conflict,
immediate concerns about personal safety and security
are coupled with equally urgent concerns for adequate
food and shelter. There is also the question of ensuring
long-term sustainable growth and development as a
means of preventing a relapse into conflict.
Peacebuilding must be considered in a holistic
manner. The rule of law, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, security sector reform and the
holding of elections are all crucial components of the
peacebuilding strategy but should not in any manner
preclude efforts to ensure sustainable development in
countries emerging from conflict. Rather, as stated by
the Secretary-General in his address to the recent joint
meeting of the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), they must work on
parallel tracks. They are all factors which impact on
human security and which must be addressed
simultaneously and over a sustained period, to
facilitate meaningful results on the ground in postconflict countries.
The current review of the Peacebuilding
Commission should seek to fashion new approaches
and to strengthen areas where there have been
successes in its working life so far. In this context,
lessons learned over the period of existence of the
Commission, as well as the results of the work of the
Commission’s Working Group on Lessons Learned and
input from the Secretary-General’s report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(A/63/881) will prove invaluable to the process.
The immediate challenge for post-conflict
countries remains how best to quickly return to
normalcy and a path towards sustainable growth and
development. For this to be accomplished, human
security must be paramount in every poverty reduction

8

strategy and strategic framework for peacebuilding
adopted for countries on the Peacebuilding
Commission’s agenda. Socio-economic concerns must
also be addressed, including those relating to youth,
women and other vulnerable groups. Employment
generation, education and training, investment and
private sector renewal should form the core of
promoting human security and peacebuilding.
In a post-conflict scenario, the reintegration of
former combatants must be given special attention.
Priority should also be directed towards enhancing
dialogue and reconciliation among political parties and
warring factions and, where necessary, sincere efforts
must made to settle outstanding issues, particularly
those identified as a source of conflict. Internally
displaced persons and returning refugees must find
comfort in returning to their former places of abode. As
has been mentioned several times during this debate, a
gender perspective must also be fully integrated into all
peacebuilding efforts.
Jamaica has always maintained that there should
be seamless synergy between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. There is also a need for stronger
coordination between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Field Support and the
Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO). Following the
ongoing review process, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the PBSO must be further strengthened to ensure
that the Office remains a key mechanism for ensuring
the coherence of all activities of the Organization in
post-conflict situations.
In conclusion, let me repeat that, notwithstanding
its potential positive aspects, the concept of human
security remains vague and therefore requires further
elaboration. That lack of clarity has no doubt
reinforced the perception that it may be used as a tool
or excuse for interference in the internal affairs of
States. What is therefore required is for the concept to
be addressed in a far more holistic and broader
perspective, taking into account the interrelatedness of
the three pillars of the United Nations system and the
wide range of threats and global economic risk factors
that pose serious challenges to human security.
Let me reiterate that equal attention should be
given to the development dimension in providing
human security; otherwise, countries run the risk of
sliding back into conflict. Finally, that also highlights
the need for a change in the current global order to

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

reverse global economic imbalances and distortions in
international trade and to address climate change and
other existing challenges to sustainable development,
so as to ensure the very credibility of the concept of
human security.

development and lead to tensions, acts of violence and
armed conflicts, and possibly to grave humanitarian
crises with serious and complex human, economic,
political and security costs at the national, regional and
international levels.

Mr. Kurer (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank the President for having
organized this meeting to discuss the report of the
Secretary-General on the concept of human security
(A/64/701). This is an important subject as it relates to
liberation from fear and poverty and ensures that
people can live in dignity. In essence, the subject is
rooted in the Charter of the United Nations.

As an African Arab country of the Mediterranean,
Libya both influences and is influenced by the
geopolitical climate and its effect on what we might
call geo-human security — whether in Palestine or the
Middle East, Africa in general or the Mediterranean
region. My country has therefore tried to resolve
conflicts in various regions in Africa, convinced that
regional and international cooperation is necessary to
address economic and social security challenges. Some
of those conflicts date back to the colonial period, its
destructive wars and their impact on our peoples and
States, which should be compensated for the damage
they suffered at the time. This would help them to
develop their national capabilities and to reject unjust
and unbalanced conditions in unilateral negotiations.
Human security efforts have illustrated how we can
have a positive impact on the threats to peoples and
societies in developing countries, especially in Africa
and the Arab region.

An essential aspect of human security is the
assumption by Governments of the main responsibility
for safeguarding the security, livelihoods and dignity of
their citizens. This requires cooperation among
Governments and States in order to identify threats and
confront them on the basis of their own national
priorities and strategies and the best use of their
resources to promote human security and stability
domestically, regionally and internationally.
Regional and international organizations to which
Libya belongs have taken up these issues. For instance,
the African Union and the League of Arab States have
considered all the various aspects of this subject. We
have taken a number of steps to ensure the security of
our peoples in the face of worsening challenges that
threaten human security, including fluctuations in food
prices, climate change, the international financial and
economic crisis, cross-border crime, armed conflict,
trafficking in humans and drugs, and illegal
immigration. All of these threats have led to conflict
and outbreaks of violence, which endanger human
security and transcend the traditional concept of
international peace, security and stability. If poor
countries are to be able to address those issues, there
must be international cooperation to push negotiations
on achieving development and on reaching consensus
towards the attainment of the Millennium Development
Goals.
Human security requires concrete and stable
national institutions to guarantee peace and security
and promote human development and dignity. To that
end, we must establish international partnerships based
on the sovereign equality of and mutual respect
between States, and avoid the use of force or sanctions
against developing countries, which can undermine

10-37119

In conclusion, let me say that we support the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report to
strengthen multilateral cooperation through the United
Nations, its various bodies and mechanisms, and
regional and subregion organizations, which should be
based on respect for the sovereignty and independence
of peoples. This is a new, people-centred culture in
international relations that requires global ways of
strengthening human security.
Mr. Bairagi (Nepal): I wish to begin by thanking
the President for convening this important meeting
pursuant to paragraph 143 of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1), and yesterday’s special
panel discussion on the theme “People-centred
approaches: the added value of human security”. It is
equally important to acknowledge that the Government
of Japan has attached great importance to this issue. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on human security (A/64/701), as well as for his
introductory remarks to the Assembly.
The concept of human security is still evolving.
Yet, we acknowledge the contribution made by the
Friends of Human Security, the Human Security

9

A/64/PV.89

Network and the Independent Commission on Human
Security in advancing the concept over the years.
We are participating in this debate with the
expectation that the intergovernmental discussion on
the concept of human security will help to enhance our
understanding of the issue involved and its practical
utility in the overall context of multilateral policy
deliberations. The report of the Secretary-General has
indeed made an attempt to shed light on some of the
important issues from the perspective of human
security. We believe that the report of the SecretaryGeneral provides a good basis for substantive
discussion to develop a universally accepted definition
of human security. Our deliberations here should aim
that objective.
Human security conditions may vary significantly
across countries and communities. It is equally
important to understand that both the causes and
manifestations of insecurity depend on a complex
interaction of local, national, regional and international
factors. In that context, we underscore the usefulness
of having a comprehensive, integrated and peoplecentred approach to deal with a multitude of
contemporary challenges having significant implications
for human security.
In fashioning such an approach, it is important,
first and foremost, to underscore the sanctity of
national authority and responsibility as paramount and
indispensable in providing security to people and
promoting their well-being. It is our firm belief that the
concept of human security needs to be defined and put
into action in conformity with the principles and
purposes of the United Nations as enshrined in its
Charter.
It is acknowledged that freedom from fear,
freedom from want and freedom to live in dignity
constitute the core of human security. Those freedoms
serve as the bedrock of the United Nations Charter, and
the United Nations is entrusted with advancing those
freedoms. However, for a variety of reasons, the world,
under one umbrella, has not achieved an identical level
of development for everyone. That means that there is
a problem somewhere.
What is visible is that the gap between the rich
and poor is constantly widening. Consequently, a large
chunk of humanity is still struggling to emerge from
the dehumanizing conditions of poverty and hunger.
Unfortunately, the plight of those people has been

10

further compounded in the wake of multiple crises for
which they are not responsible. As a consequence, for
the first time in history, more than 1 billion people are
now hungry. That speaks of a humanitarian crisis of
colossal a scale that challenges our conscience.
There exist a number of other pressing challenges
to the security and survival of poor people around the
world. Poverty is still all-pervasive, and it creates a
significant obstacle to the realization of human
development goals. The global financial and economic
crisis, together with the energy crisis and the adverse
and uneven impacts of climate change, has not only
reversed hard-earned development gains — including
those made towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) — but has also threatened
to push the livelihoods of millions of people in poor
countries to the margins.
Mrs. Gallardo Hernández
Vice-President, took the Chair.

(El

Salvador),

The spread of deadly diseases in recent years, one
after another, also poses a serious threat to people
everywhere, and more so in poor countries. Conflicttorn countries lack adequate economic and social
infrastructure for recovery, reconstruction, rehabilitation
and reintegration. Building that vital infrastructure is
essential to ensuring sustainable peace and stability in
those countries.
Our understanding is that the reduction of poverty
and hunger, the removal of existential threats arising
from climate change, global pandemics and
preventable conflicts, and the creation of an enabling
environment for the development of human potential
for all should constitute the foundation of the concept
of human security. Meeting the challenges of human
security requires, inter alia, an enhanced flow of
financial resources and a supportive international
environment, together with a large policy space for the
countries concerned. In order for poor countries to be
able to build on that foundation on a sustainable basis,
the entrenched imbalances in the international
economic, financial and trade relationships must be
rectified, for under the current systems the equitable
and judicious sharing of the benefits of globalization
has failed to materialize.
In less than four months from now, our leaders
will assemble in New York to review the MDGs. That
occasion will be the last such, but it must be made a
decisive event for the international community to

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

galvanize global partnership towards achieving the
MDGs. Poor countries are the ones lagging behind in
meeting many of the MDG targets. It is not because
they lack political will and commitment to achieve the
MDGs, but because they confront serious structural
impediments and high levels of economic vulnerability
in their development process.
We look forward to an enhanced global
partnership so that issues, concerns, difficulties and
special needs and aspirations of countries like ours are
addressed in a comprehensive manner that takes into
account the severity of the problems we confront.
Building productive capacity must be a long-term goal
of
international
assistance.
Sustaining
MDG
achievements will require sustained economic growth
and
sustainable
development;
otherwise,
our
achievements will prove to be transitory and ad hoc.
Addressing the challenges to human security is a
primary responsibility of a nation. However, challenges
of a transboundary nature, given their scope and
impact, require collective solutions at the regional and
global levels. As a multilateral framework for a global
policy discourse, the United Nations is legitimately
placed to address the multitude of challenges to human
security, in keeping with the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Mrs. Bibalou (Gabon) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Assembly President, Japan
and Mexico for having taken the initiative to organize
this important meeting. My delegation would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his excellent
presentation of his report in document (A/64/701),
which is devoted to the issue of human security in
accordance with paragraph 143 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1). We very much
appreciate its scope and clarity.
The report takes up numerous aspects associated
with the sovereignty of States, inter alia, and to the
responsibility to protect. It also outlines some ways of
promoting human security at the national, regional and
international levels.
The main definition of human security put forth
by the report has to do with human dignity and the
right of every person to pursue happiness and wellbeing. There can in fact be no security or development
without fully meeting the basic needs of peoples. It is
important to promote initiatives and policies that aim at
promoting development with a human face that is

10-37119

based on justice, equality, solidarity and peaceful
coexistence.
In Gabon, human security is at the heart of the
Government’s priorities in the field of sustainable
development. That concept is in line with our
community values of brotherhood and solidarity. In
that connection, the Government has always invested
in the implementation of policies aimed at improving
the living conditions of the most vulnerable people,
such as women, girls, handicapped persons and the
elderly. Such efforts based on solidarity contribute to
strengthening the national unity and well-being of all
our people, including displaced persons and refugees
who have found asylum in our land after having left
conflict areas.
With regard to that last group of people, the
Government is working in partnership with the Office
of
the
High
Commissioner
for
Refugees,
non-governmental organizations and other United
Nations specialized agencies in Gabon. That dynamic
cooperation has resulted in community projects that are
fully in keeping with combating poverty and exclusion.
Those programmes make it possible for refugees to
gradually achieve economic and social inclusion, while
at the same time benefiting local populations and
contributing to harmony and social tranquility in host
areas. The three main components of the programmes
are revenue-generating activities, agriculture, and
vocational training for target groups such as young
mothers and children who have dropped out of school
in the refugee community.
The encouraging results achieved in this area
would not have been possible without the active
cooperation of the United Nations and our development
partners. Here I would like to welcome the recent and
laudable decision of the Japanese Government to
provide Gabon, through the United Nations Trust Fund
for Human Security, the amount of $2,194,426. This
donation will be used to improve the situation of
refugees and vulnerable populations living in Gabon. It
joins other initiatives that have already been
implemented in this area by Japan in partnership with
the Government of Gabon.
To conclude, allow me to agree with the
Secretary-General when he affirms in the summary of
his report that
“[k]ey human security initiatives undertaken by
Governments,
regional
and
subregional

11

A/64/PV.89

intergovernmental organizations, as well as the
organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system, are presented as examples of the reach of
this important concept and its growing
acceptance.”
With these words I wish to highlight the major role
played by the United Nations Trust Fund for Human
Security in the implementation of programmes that
seek to improve the living conditions of populations
even beyond national borders.
Mr. Tagle (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
President for convening this debate for exchanging
views on the important report of the Secretary General
on human security (A/64/701), presented to the
Assembly in accordance with paragraph 143 of the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), in
which the heads of State and Government committed
themselves to discuss and define the concept of human
security.
Chile, as a member of the Human Security
Network, associates itself with the statement made
yesterday by Costa Rica in its capacity as Chair of the
Network (see A/64/PV.88).
In our view, the foundation of human security is
the dignity of every human being, with no distinction
whatsoever. Unlike classical security based on the
concept of the nation-State, human security makes each
person the focus of rights in the international sphere.
Chile sees human security as an emerging
concept involving a commitment by national States to
perform without restriction in the sphere of law and
multilateralism in order to care for their citizens and
for any individual, wherever he or she may come from.
This perspective also presupposes progress in the
conceptualization of security, which has attracted
growing international support. This is due both to the
recognition granted to the individual in international
law and to the priority that respect for and promotion
of human rights has on the international agenda. That
is why the Assembly is today discussing the concept of
human security and its usefulness for the international
community — a debate in which Chile has been
involved from the beginning.
This new concept goes beyond the physical
integrity of individuals in situations of crisis or
international armed conflicts, since it also includes
threats to personal integrity derived from internal

12

armed conflicts, daily social violence, the availability
of small arms and light weapons, organized crime,
natural disasters, climate change and financial crises,
among other serious threats to people.
Like any bold doctrine, human security has had
its detractors and problems. Some actors in the
international system distrust human security, since they
believe it can be a pretext for intervening in States’
internal affairs in order to alter their conduct, violating
their sovereignty. That idea is wrong. As emphasized in
section III of the Secretary-General’s report, one of the
ultimate goals of human security is precisely to
strengthen national institutions so as to be able to deal
with current problems and threats to the population.
Our effort to operationalize the concept of human
security will bear fruit in the joint endeavour to apply
theoretical principles to practice so as to be specific
about the contribution of human security to tackling
the problems on the international agenda, since we
believe that human security, by definition, provides a
new way of dealing with the threats on the
international agenda. As was pointed out by Professor
Fukuda-Parr yesterday, human security provides a
framework for analyzing the prevention of conflicts
and fighting poverty.
In view of the width of this new concept of
security and its scope, we believe that it has a huge
political potential that can be translated into specific
actions to benefit people. Human security should not
be opposed to classical national security, as shown in
the report of the Secretary-General, but — quite the
contrary — should complement it to form an
integrating whole that will result in a substantial
improvement in standards of individual security.
Mr. Suazo (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, the delegation of Honduras would like to echo
the thanks that have been expressed to the President of
the General Assembly for his decision to organize this
debate on human security, in line with the mandate of
the 2005 World Summit.
In presenting his first report (A/64/701), the
Secretary-General stressed the importance of human
security in attaining economic and social development
as a concept very close to the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter (see A/64/PV.87). That
report, in addition to being very useful for this debate,
is a source of new ideas and concepts that will help us

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

a good deal on the path to adopting decisions on
related items on our agenda.
Yesterday as well we had the opportunity to listen
to and participate in a panel organized by the
presidency of the General Assembly. We want to thank
the panelists for their presentations, which cleared up a
lot of doubts about some of the principles and ideas
and the scope of what should be understood by human
security — although it was recognized that this concept
has still not been clearly defined and that we should
continue to study it.
Contrary to the outdated concept of national
security as linked to the interests of the nation-State —
which consequently limited the responsibility of the
State to protect its own citizens in the face of extreme
situations such as serious violations of human rights
and of the right to enjoy fundamental rights and
freedoms — human security is now becoming a much
broader, more comprehensive concept that associates
individual and collective security with all rights
inherent to the human being. It is in this context that in
our country we are aware of the need to recognize and
implement the concept, which we consider to be
intimately linked to the Millennium Development
Goals as well as to human development in a horizontal
and a vertical fashion.
Honduras has taken on the commitment to
consolidate and strengthen the development of a human
security policy within the framework of the Plan de
Nación: Visión de País, a plan for the country proposed
by the President of the Republic, Don Porfirio Lobo
Sosa. The plan is consistent with international
principles in this area and aims to bring about social
peace, internal security and national development in a
harmonized way.
The initiatives that Japan and other Member
States have formulated in this forum should be given
particular attention by the international community,
since it is vital for the survival of human beings in a
globalized and interdependent world to confront
together the armed conflicts, natural disasters, climate
change, extreme poverty, discrimination in all its
forms, pandemics, nuclear risks, food insecurity,
migration and crimes against humanity, to mention just
a few.
As has been mentioned, there are other issues that
should be considered and included in the definition and
concept of human security. Our country thus believes

10-37119

that it is the responsibility of all States to contribute to
the development of national and international policies
and mechanisms to jointly address those various threats
in a multidimensional and multisectoral approach.
It is for those reasons that Honduras shares and
will support initiatives by the countries members of the
Friends of Human Security. We are committed to
finding a broad definition of that concept, which, it
should be understood, should be constructively
observed in meeting the commitments flowing from its
implementation.
Mr. Loayza Barea (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia welcomes the Secretary-General’s efforts in
preparing his report on human security (A/64/701).
Following extensive review, we believe that the
concept of human security is fairly abstract and
imprecise, especially when it comes to its
implementation on the international level.
In that regard, from the report of the SecretaryGeneral we can see that there are several definitions of
human security and that the concept is used in various
ways that make it difficult to generalize about it. The
use of the concept at country level cannot be
extrapolated to the international level because other
basic considerations are involved, such as national
sovereignty and international security.
It is not enough to say that the concept of human
security does not imply the use of force against the
sovereignty of States. To the contrary, it is crucial to
make it clear that it cannot entail any form of
interference in the internal affairs of any country in a
way that undermines its sovereignty. A concept on a
par with — or worse, that even rises above — the
principles of non-intervention, national sovereignty
and territorial integrity poses a threat to world peace.
Thus, any partiality or limitation that focuses on
certain sectors, as we glean from the report, can sap the
integrity of the concept and poses a risk that the
concept could be interpreted in a narrow sense.
The report of the Secretary-General raises many
questions by suggesting that the existence of weak
governmental institutions is one of the causes of
human insecurity. We wonder who is to determine
when a governmental institution is weak. The financial
crisis sparked by weak governmental regulatory
institutions in developed countries has led to a serious
situation of human insecurity throughout the world.

13

A/64/PV.89

Can all the countries of the world now intervene in
those weak institutions of the North? Or, as always, is
this just a one-way concept to perpetuate a posture of
interference and conditionality vis-à-vis developing
countries?
I point that out because in citing various elements
and examples, the report fails to mention many causes,
such as the instability and crises in developing
countries caused by the policies of the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, the establishment of
military bases on peaceful continents such as Latin
American and the development of genetically modified
organisms that affect nature and human health. The
report refers to helping countries to reduce tensions
resulting from climate change. But it does not say that
it is essential for developed countries to quickly and
drastically reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. Nor
does the report refer to the historic responsibility and
ecological debt of developed countries to developing
countries, which is the source of much human
insecurity.
Another worrying issue is the implication that in
the future an effort may be made to link the concepts of
human rights and human development with that of
security. That is of concern not only because it opens
the door for the Security Council to increasingly insert
itself in issues that are not in its purview, but also
because it frames the issue in terms of threats and fear
and, as a result, feeds the type of psychosis that
throughout history has been used to justify acts of
aggression against countries and peoples.
With all due respect, we do not share that vision
of promoting a life free from threats. What we must do
is to foster a life of complete fulfilment for human
beings in harmony with nature. We do not think that
having to always think of where danger lies and what
the next threat is are the way to develop humankind to
the fullest. Non-observance of human rights cannot be
linked with the concept of threats; it must be linked to
the concept of injustice. All our countries must support
each other to ensure the effective enjoyment of human
rights. That should include, for example, sending a
signal to world to proclaim this as the year of the
human right to water, instead of expanding a concept
that accentuates people’s fears and makes them believe
that well-being means being free from threats.
The peace we all want requires clear concepts
that do not give rise to confusion or bad interpretations.

14

The Plurinational State of Bolivia therefore proposes
that it would be better to talk about justice, equality
and sustainable development in order to ensure the full
enjoyment of human rights.
Mr. Ebner (Austria): Austria fully aligns itself
with the statement made yesterday by the
representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union, as well as with the statement made by the
representative of Costa Rica as Chair of the Human
Security Network. Please allow me to add some
remarks in our national capacity.
Austria has been strongly committed to human
security for many years, in particular through our
membership in the Human Security Network. Austria
appreciates the efforts to carry the human security
agenda forward within the United Nations system and
warmly welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(A/64/701) as an excellent basis for our discussions.
The report frames the concept of human security in a
comprehensive manner, helps to clarify some common
misperceptions and highlights the added value and
practicability of the human security approach.
As pointed out in the report, the concept of
human security has emerged as a result of, and in
response to, the increased interdependency of threats
and challenges. It is placed at the intersection of
security, development and human rights. The concept is
a cornerstone of Austria’s foreign policy, and we are
committed to promoting it in a spirit of dialogue,
cooperation and consensus-building. Let me give three
examples where, in our view, the concept of human
security has provided valuable guidance.
First, with regard to the protection of civilians,
Austria decided to make the protection of civilians a
key priority during our current term as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council. That
is why we took the initiative of introducing what
became resolution 1894 (2009), on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, on the occasion of the tenth
anniversary of the Council’s initial consideration of the
subject. The resolution addresses existing gaps in the
protection work of the United Nations, in particular in
the field of peacekeeping, and lays out concrete
measures to improve the protection of civilians on the
ground.
We need to live up to our shared responsibility to
effectively respond to situations where the safety and
security of civilians is in danger. No conflict justifies

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

breaches of international humanitarian law or the
refusal of access for humanitarian workers to civilians
in need. Equally, no conflict justifies impunity for
those who have committed serious crimes against
civilians. Austria is committed to taking the
implementation of that resolution forward in the
coming months.
Secondly, the tenth anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security provides us with a unique opportunity to
achieve substantive progress in furthering the
implementation of that resolution in all four of its
areas: participation, prevention, protection and
peacebuilding and early recovery. There seems to be
wide agreement that the Security Council should seize
this opportunity to renew its commitment to women
and peace and security and strive for concrete results,
in particular with a view to strengthening
accountability for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000).
Austria strongly welcomes the establishment of
the position of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
we are pleased that Special Representative Margot
Wallström has begun her work with a recent visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Resolution 1888
(2009) has further provided the Special Representative
with a number of tools at her disposal, such as a team
of experts who can be deployed to provide technical
support and capacity-building in countries affected by
widespread sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict.
And finally, on children and armed conflict: as a
member of the Human Security Network, and in
particular during its tenure as its Chair, Austria gave
special priority to the protection of children, who are
often targeted during conflict. Austria is fully
committed to contributing to protecting and assisting
children in situations of armed conflict, bilaterally, in
the framework of the European Union and in particular
at the United Nations. The United Nations has taken on
a leadership role through the Special Representative on
Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF, as well as
through the development of a range of specific tools, in
particular a monitoring and reporting mechanism on
serious child rights violations.
Mr. Carrión-Mena (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): Ecuador appreciates the Secretary-General’s

10-37119

report on human security (A/64/701), which we are
discussing today, and recognizes it as a useful tool in
our efforts to establish common positions on this
subject. My delegation has followed and will continue
to follow with interest the development of the concept
of human security — no easy task, given the various
criteria, positions and concerns, many of them
legitimate, that have been put forward by delegations.
We are nonetheless sure that the discussion will help
develop the subject so as to allow us to achieve
consensus on a definition and an understanding which
all Member States can endorse.
I would like to emphasize the report’s statement
that that “[h]uman security is based on a fundamental
understanding that Governments retain the primary role
for ensuring the survival, livelihood and dignity of
their citizens” (A/64/701, summary) and that it
“encompasses freedom from fear, freedom from want
and freedom to live in dignity” (para. 4). My country
shares these aims, particularly since our own political
constitution affirms the right to a life of dignity, on the
basis of which our National Development Plan and
National Plan for Well-Being were designed for the
sustained and comprehensive development of
humankind.
It is precisely on these foundations that we have
launched a national project, with international scope,
that I would like to describe today: the Yasuní ITT
Initiative, an innovative, visionary proposal for
sustainable development in my country whereby my
Government has committed itself not to exploit
petroleum resources — in an area rich in hydrocarbon
deposits — in Yasuní National Park deep in the
Ecuadorian Amazon. In this way we are protecting the
indigenous peoples living in voluntary isolation in the
area; we are not deforesting; we are preserving the
area’s mega-biodiversity, avoiding emissions and
proposing to change our country’s energy sources. The
project has a broad, integrated, people-centred scope.
Its vital components include: climate change;
sustainable development; human, economic and social
rights; international solidarity; and, of course, peace.
We are close to concluding negotiations for
establishing an international trust fund to be
administered by the United Nations Development
Programme, which will permit this unique idea to
endure and will promote real and practical
sustainability for our planet.

15

A/64/PV.89

Some of the aims of the project are related to
those expressed in the Secretary-General’s report on
human security. The common interests and vision
initiated by Japan, among others, which can spur the
development of States and, especially, of their peoples,
are why Ecuador will participate positively in
achieving a definition and understanding of human
security in line with our concepts and interests.
The report contains a number of definitions of
and references to human security; one, in fact,
mentions Ecuador, which, in article 393 of its political
constitution, declares that
“The State shall guarantee human security by
integrated policies and actions, in order to
promote the peaceful human coexistence, foster a
culture of peace and prevent violence and
discrimination and the commission of crimes and
misdemeanours.”
This mandate is expressed in a national context where
the primary role and participation lies with the State,
which must ultimately provide the right to a life of
dignity for every citizen of Ecuador.
My delegation considers that human security, in
the international context, is a work in progress,
evolving in the light of the growing interdependence of
vulnerabilities facing peoples and communities. We
maintain that human security, because it is
multidimensional and firmly human-based, must
investigate and take into account additional elements,
including the situation of international migrants and
those displaced by internal conflicts; and that it should
analyse the relationship between human security and
its contribution to processes that can lead to
sustainable development and the fulfilment of the
Millennium Development Goals.
Ecuador stresses the following as elements in our
participation in building and disseminating the concept
of human security: first, we should be guided by
respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, particularly the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and non-intervention;
secondly, that its aims be people-centred in order to
promote human, economic and social rights and to
favour sustainable development; thirdly, that its aims
should not restrict or limit the principal role of the
State in its national territory, but rather should
strengthen it; and finally, the natural framework for all
of this is the General Assembly, and its scope should be

16

clarified in order to avoid any possible subsequent
invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter relating to the
Security Council.
Some of these elements have also been outlined
in the Secretary-General’s report and mentioned by
other delegations before me. Their comments help to
bring greater consistency to this proposal, as clarifying
these aspects will give it more certainty and ensure a
joint effort free of fear and reservations.
Mrs. Juul (Norway): Let me first of all thank the
President for convening this meeting, and the
Secretary-General for his report on human security
(A/64/701) — the first of its kind. It is an excellent
report that helps us to clarify and show the relevance of
this concept in very educational terms. That was
needed.
Norway is a member of the Human Security
Network. We thank Costa Rica for its tireless efforts to
promote human security. We fully subscribe to its
statement made earlier on behalf of the Network. I
would also like to express Norway’s great appreciation
to Japan for its leadership on human security, both at
home and on the international stage.
The time has now come for all of us to give this
valuable concept the attention it deserves. Why? The
concept of human security connects the dots of an
interdependent world. It provides direction to our
endeavours to promote better policy coherence so that
our policies for peace, human rights and development
can become mutually reinforcing to a greater extent
than currently is the case.
The crux of the matter is a framework for
international cooperation that enables States and local
communities to protect the freedom of their people —
their freedom from fear, freedom from want and
freedom to live in dignity — by empowering the
individual human being. This concept has particular
relevance in a world where rapid global integration has
created not only great economic gains, but also an
unprecedented concentration of wealth and power
within and across borders, thus undermining social
stability and peace.
We believe that the concept of human security
can do for protection and peace what the concept of
human development has done for economic policy
thinking — bring equality, fairness and justice into the
equation. Norway therefore supports the initiative of

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

developing a draft resolution of the General Assembly
on human security.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation would like to thank the
President for having organized this important debate on
human security, at which we should openly and
transparently discuss an issue on which it has not yet
been possible to achieve a definition that enjoys the
consensus of the international community. We would
also like to thank Japan for its leadership on this issue.
Our delegation has read with interest the report of
the Secretary-General (A/64/701), whose efforts we
appreciate. However, we are concerned that the
Secretariat has already adopted measures on this issue
as if it had already been defined and agreed by Member
States. The reform proposed by the Secretary-General
does not have a clearly established mandate, given that,
in the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1),
heads of State and Government committed themselves
only to considering and defining the concept of human
security in the General Assembly. That is the process in
which we are currently involved.
The report is a compilation of the various
opinions on the issue that could lend themselves to
multiple different interpretations and definitions. It
covers aspects ranging from the identification of the
new concept of human security within the concept of
human development to others that could lead to
violations of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, such as non-interference and non-intervention
in the internal affairs of States, respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, the non-use of force and
human rights violations.
At the United Nations, only the General
Assembly has the purview to discuss such issues so
that States may fully share their experiences and learn
best practices. There are many good practices in
developing countries that we could share with
developed countries, especially when it comes to
placing people at the heart of policies and humanizing
policies and Government programmes.
The security of people is the direct responsibility
of States; it is up to them to ensure it and to prevent
situations that jeopardize it. The United Nations should
support national plans upon the request of States and in
line with the principles to which I have already
referred.

10-37119

Nicaragua’s national reconciliation and unity
Government defines human security on the basis of its
human development programme, which each State
should provide. We believe that key elements for
ensuring the security and development of our people
include job creation, social investment in health and
education, and the establishment of conditions in
which all people have the opportunity to live better, as
security is built through development.
In our country, we have created an integrated
humanist model of development, based on the power of
citizens, that is designed to overcome poverty. The
Nicaraguan people and their historic, cultural, political,
economic and social experiences are at the heart of that
model. The ultimate goal of this new model is the
survival and fulfilment of human beings and structural
changes to overcome exclusion and liberate the human
development potential of Nicaraguans, in particular the
poorest, women, young people, native peoples,
descendants of Africans and the handicapped, among
others. Growth is the criterion for success, as are the
elimination of poverty and hunger and the
establishment of conditions conducive to the full
development of all Nicaraguans in a sovereign,
independent country united with all the peoples of the
world.
We give shape to the concept of human
development
by
increasing
opportunities
for
individuals and expanding their capacity, while at the
same time ensuring full observance of their human
rights and basic freedoms. State institutions also
provide and guarantee our people the range of
opportunities necessary to ensuring both their survival
and their effective exercise of freedoms whereby they
can develop fully. That is a crucial focus of the citizendriven development model. That is how we ensure the
human security of our people. We would like to see
these concepts of human security reflected in any
future definition of the subject.
Our efforts to ensure the human security of our
people are reflected in the acknowledgements we have
received over the past three years from agencies of the
United Nations system, which have recognized the role
of the Government of Nicaragua in protecting native
populations and restoring their rights, as well as our
policies to ensure food and nutrition sovereignty and
security, our poverty-reduction policies and, lastly, our
status as a country of full literacy.

17

A/64/PV.89

In conclusion, the subject of human security
should continue to be discussed by the General
Assembly, where 192 States that have a voice and a
vote will, we hope, be able to come to a consensus
definition. If the international community is truly
interested in the subject of human security, it should
begin to demonstrate that by moving ahead on areas
that most affect human security, such as, inter alia, the
right of the Palestinian people to a State on their own
territory, total and complete nuclear disarmament, a
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in order to
ensure that global warming is limited to less than
1.5 degrees centigrade, and the fulfilment by the
developed countries of their commitments to
eradicating world poverty.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Monaco recognizes and welcomes the
great support of Member States for advancing the
concept of human security since the General
Assembly’s thematic debate on human security in May
2008.
We have seen major progress in the
understanding of human security in response to the
commitment undertaken by the heads of State and
Government at the 2005 World Summit, which reflects
the need to address, together and with concrete action,
the myriad crises that, as the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/64/701) recalls, have affected us all in
recent times. As we prepare to evaluate the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals,
the right of all human beings to live in freedom and
dignity, shielded from poverty, despair, fear and want,
is at the heart of our priorities. It is therefore high time
that we pursue our efforts in favour of human security
in order to respond appropriately to targeted situations.
The first report of the Secretary-General is
particularly significant in that it outlines the evolution
of this concept, which is at the heart of the principles,
activities and priorities of our Organization at the dawn
of the twenty-first century.
We are working to ensure that all people, in
particular the most vulnerable, are able to enjoy all
their rights and to realize their full potential on an
equal footing. The crises that we have endured since
2008 — rising food and oil prices, economic and
financial turmoil, conflict situations, climate change
and natural catastrophes, the spread of infectious
diseases and other health risks — have taught us that

18

the threats of our time are interlinked and
transnational, and therefore demand an integrated and
coordinated response. To that end, every Government
must build robust institutions and to facilitate equitable
social development. All States must promote and
ensure respect for the rule of law, which is the lynchpin
of the peace and security of their citizens. The
advancement of the values we all share within the
international agenda will build our capacities and
contribute to the achievement of our common
objectives.
A global approach based on a broadened
understanding of human security would enable us, on
the one hand, to develop mechanisms to rise to
emerging challenges and, on the other, to avert
situations that threaten civilian populations and to
support early warning systems that would reduce their
impact and identify their underlying causes. In that
respect, our Government underscores the importance of
promoting the concept of human security, which
undoubtedly brings added value to our work.
The Government of the Principality has always
pursued policies of people-centred international
cooperation, seeking to improve living conditions and
development, particularly for the most vulnerable,
women, children and the disabled. We therefore wish to
add our voice to the groundswell of support in favour
of promoting and strengthening human security.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia has taken note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on human security (A/64/701). My country
thanks the President of the General Assembly for
having convened this debate, and recognizes the active
role played by Japan in advancing discussions on this
item.
My delegation reaffirms that, as was decided at
the 2005 World Summit, the General Assembly is the
appropriate forum for States to consider and define the
concept, scope and possible contributions of human
security. Given the implications of this exercise, the
broad participation of all Member States is essential if
we are to have a fruitful discussion and achieve an
outcome that reflects general consensus among States.
The right of people to live in freedom, peace and
dignity is reflected in the objectives and constitutional
foundations of the Colombian State, whose national
policies are centred on three areas: the construction of
security based on democracy, socially responsible

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

investment and social cohesion based on freedoms. The
applied actions and positive transformation that have
been carried out in Colombia in each of these areas in
recent years respond to the aspirations to development,
security, peace, and the protection of rights expressed
at the 2005 World Summit.
In the discussion on a possible definition of the
concept of human security, we believe that certain
criteria must be taken into account. First, it is
important that our development of the scope and
application of the concept of human security contribute
to a comprehensive consolidation of the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations. A comprehensive and appropriate definition of
human security would contribute to promoting friendly
relations among nations and international cooperation
on economic, social, cultural and humanitarian matters.
It would also promote development, human rights and
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States.
Secondly, it is important that the concept of
human security contribute to preserving the various
commitments and definitions adopted by the United
Nations in various areas, which are very often the
product of complex discussions. We note that the report
of the Secretary-General suggests that we analyze how
various social, economic, political, environmental and
cultural problems are related to the issue of human
security. In each of these fields, the Organization has
established actions that encourage States, the
international community, civil society and other
relevant players to act. Human security should not
change but must promote the application of political
agreements and international normative frameworks as
defined by the Organization.
Thirdly, the report before us today mentions,
among various common definitions of human security,
three aspects: the importance of the concept in dealing
with multiple and complex threats; the role of the
protection and empowerment of individuals as a basis
for and goal of security; and the prohibition of the use
of force against the sovereignty of States. In this
respect, it is important to stress once again that a
definition of human security should contain operational
aspects that clearly recognize the lead and inalienable
responsibility of States for ensuring human security
and the importance of strengthening national capacities
to that end. We should also specify the supporting role
that can be played by the international community

10-37119

through cooperation and assistance, in coordination
with national development policies and plans.
Finally, the identification of areas in which the
concept of human security could apply will depend on
the scope of its definition. The Secretary-General’s
report suggests some problems and global crises as
potential areas of application of this notion. We should
examine with a global perspective other international
problems that impact the dignity and security of
persons and affect countries in all regions. It will be up
to States to evaluate in each area the necessity and
added value of applying the concept.
The rights of all people to live free from fear and
want and to have equal opportunity to enjoy all their
rights and fully develop their human potential are
inarguable objectives that all States should pursue. We
reiterate that this debate of the General Assembly
should help us to find a common understanding of
human security. Intergovernmental consensus on this
issue is a necessary objective if we are to make
headway in our integration of the concept into United
Nations activities, including its various agencies, funds
and programmes.
Mr. Oussein (Comoros) (spoke in French):
Yesterday and today, we have heard a number of very
incisive analyses and proposals from speakers who
preceded me in elaborating on the important subject of
human security. I will therefore be brief.
I would like to begin by thanking the President of
the Assembly for organizing this important debate. My
thanks go also to the Secretary-General for the quality
and clarity of his report (A/64/701), and to the Friends
of Human Security, chaired by Japan and Mexico, for
their efforts to advance a common understanding of
this issue, which has raised some concerns, notably
over the relationship between human security and
national sovereignty and the distinction between this
concept and the responsibility to protect. We believe
that the Secretary-General’s report should dissipate
those concerns, in that it defines the concept, both in
theory and application, as an indispensable tool for
addressing the many crises and challenges facing the
international community.
This concept, as everyone knows, has always
been of interest to the international community and
regional and subregional organizations in that, as
redefined, it takes into account not only the
comprehensive respect for human dignity and human

19

A/64/PV.89

rights, but also the creation of the political, economic,
social, cultural and environmental conditions for the
exercise of those rights, without reference to which it
is impossible to reasonably discuss human security.
Emphasis is thus placed on the indivisible links among
peace, security and development. This was reaffirmed
by the League of Arab States and the African Union,
notably in their Non-Aggression and Common Defence
Pact. Nevertheless, in defining this concept we will
need to strive resolutely to eradicate poverty and
eliminate inequalities through reform of the
international economic order, and to pay special
attention to the right to development as a right of the
highest priority.
I would like to conclude by highlighting the
central place the concept of human security should
occupy in United Nations activities, and by expressing
the hope that our debate will become an important
resource for future deliberation.
Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): Through
me, the Republic of Guinea wishes to express its
gratitude to the President of the Assembly for
convening this important debate on the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/64/701), which highlights the
progress that has been achieved in advancing human
security, pursuant to the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1).
At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon on the quality and
richness of his report, which takes stock of the
activities, initiatives and major programmes devoted to
human security undertaken by Member States and the
international community as a whole. We also thank the
Governments,
civil
society
groups,
eminent
personalities, and the Friends of Human Security,
which have made a great contribution to defining and
implementing the concept of human security.
The Republic of Guinea has actively participated
in various meetings on this issue and welcomes the
gradual emergence of an international consensus on the
need to adopt approaches to the definition of the
concept of human security that are global, integrated,
people-centred and founded in the principles of the
United Nations Charter.
We welcome, in this context, the stress laid in the
Secretary-General’s on elements common to all
definitions of human security. What emerges is that

20

human security is based on the establishment of what
the African Union calls the
“social, economic, political, environmental and
cultural conditions necessary for survival and the
dignity of the individual, including the protection
of and respect for human rights, good governance
and ensuring that each individual is guaranteed
the opportunities and choices for his complete
development”.
This human-centred approach naturally entails
responsibilities for individuals and populations as well
as for States. We support the relevant sections of the
Secretary-General’s report that underscore the key role
of Governments and populations in matters of peace,
stability, development and the implementation of the
responsibility to protect, in full respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
Beyond the realm of the theoretical, my country
is one of the main beneficiaries of human security
projects, thanks to the catalytic role played by Japan
and the support of the agencies of the United Nations
system. Based on our experience, we believe it
essential to develop human security practices,
particularly in fragile States or those in post-conflict
situations. The United Nations remains the most
appropriate multilateral forum for an inclusive and
participatory approach by all stakeholders with a view
to better defining the concept of human security and
advancing it throughout the world.
Guinea welcomes the inclusion of the concept of
human security among the priorities of the United
Nations, in particular in meeting the many challenges
linked to the global financial and economic crisis, food
price volatility, food insecurity, the spread of infectious
diseases, climate change, conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It is high time to
integrate
human
security
projects
into
the
implementation of the United Nations priority
objectives, above all in order to facilitate the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs).
In this respect, we need to focus priority attention
on the countries that are still far from being able to
meet their commitments and on the MDGs that are at
risk of not being achieved by 2015. It is particularly
urgent to revive the global fight against illiteracy and
poverty and to eradicate the scourge of HIV/AIDS by
promoting universal access to prevention, treatment,

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

care and support services. Let us not forget that
HIV/AIDS and other major pandemics, such as malaria
and tuberculosis, remain the primary cause of death
among women of child-bearing age worldwide, of
childhood diseases and death in the poorest and most
vulnerable regions.
The implementation of a global programme of
human security could encourage a better linkage
between national, regional and international efforts to
achieve the MDGs. We also need to ensure that the
political will fueled by the movement in favour of
human security is reinforced by expanding the donor
base and a substantial increase in funding to the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security.
In conclusion, my delegation supports the
recommendations set forth in the Secretary-General’s
report and reiterates its commitment to advancing the
right of all to live free from want and fear and in
dignity.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): I thank the
President of the General Assembly for convening this
two-day plenary on the concept of human security.
Solomon Islands would like to begin by associating
itself with the statement issued by Australia on behalf
of the Pacific Islands Forum and the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Nauru on
behalf of the Pacific small island developing State.

provide a sense of security to the most vulnerable and
marginalized citizens.
Human security is about freedom from want. The
two other freedoms — freedom from fear and freedom
to live in human dignity — naturally follow. We say
this against the backdrop that we live in a divided
world where one portion has too much food and the
other suffers from a lack of it. Human security is about
correcting these imbalances by investing in people to
help them help themselves.
My delegation’s concern is that our commitment
to cooperating remains wanting. Medicines are not
widely distributed, the world is getting more
militarized, and human rights principles continue to be
politicized here in this very Hall, making the
application of the concept distant and vague. In other
words, we have left the victims to fend for themselves.
Genuine dialogue is replaced with confrontation.
I say this as the representative of a country
emerging from conflict. Our calls for assistance during
our ethnic conflict in 1999 were not heard by the
international community until in 2003, when our
regional neigbours came to our aid under the Regional
Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands.

My delegation, in our national capacity, would
like to share our views, as mandated by the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), in which the
General Assembly is requested to discuss and define
the concept of human security. Human security is
discussed in chapter IV of the Outcome Document,
“Human rights and the rule of law”. Various definitions
have emerged; however, a common definition remains
elusive as we continue to seek consensus on the matter.

What is troubling for us is that each time we
come up with concepts and mechanisms to build
confidence among ourselves, we continue to fail
ourselves. The concept looks good on paper and we hit
all the right notes in our statements, but in practice its
application reaches only a select few. In many cases,
we have created orphans within our United Nations
family and an iron fence around some States. The
Peacebuilding Commission, for example, was
established to reach out to countries emerging from
conflict; however, only four countries have since
passed before its radar screen.

The ambiguity of the definition of human security
is linked and tied to the concept of responsibility to
protect, which is another concept that is under
discussion within the General Assembly. Human
security, as we have heard, is people-centred and about
protection and empowerment. Within this debate, being
the forty-third speaker, I have more questions than
answers. At the end of the day, for us it is about
poverty eradication, sustainable development and
global action to guarantee the survival of the most
vulnerable populations. Sustainable development for us
is the principle variable that should guarantee and

Many of today’s global issues are threat
multipliers, creating multidimensional humanitarian
threats within the context of climate change, food,
energy and financial crisis. However, systematic
solutions for correcting the international system —
including concluding the Doha Round, making
globalization work for all, getting a legally binding
agreement within the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change process, making
the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria available to all and halting the production of
weapons — are all left out as solutions.

10-37119

21

A/64/PV.89

My delegation wishes to note that this is the
second General Assembly debate on the matter since
2005. My delegation further notes that the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/64/701) does not address questions
raised at the last debate. For this reason, building a
consensus on the concept needs further discussion.
The report makes three recommendations: that
the added value of human security be taken into
account, that it be mainstreamed in United Nations
activities, and that the United Nations Trust Fund for
Human Security receive support. The report suggests
that there is growing recognition of an expanded
paradigm of security, which my delegation agrees with.
However, the report proposes a fragmented approach to
addressing global issues via country-based projects as
solutions. It attempts to create a false sense of security
and stability by addressing symptoms rather than
causes of problems.
The frequency and intensity of disasters is
growing so much that stability remains fragile in
vulnerable countries. The historical responsibilities of
those that trigger those problems are overlooked.
Global mechanisms for the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals, the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States, the Mauritius Strategy, the
Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 and climate
change programmes are not supported. If we are to take
corrective
measures,
commitments
to
these
mechanisms must be honoured.
Secondly, there needs to be a stronger
relationship between the United Nations and Member
States. A United Nations country presence is a must.
Distant relations are never the same as face-to-face
dialogue; they weaken multilateralism and go against
all our discussions on one United Nations system and
people-centred solutions. It is easier to say this from a
distance, but the challenge is to see it work. Solomon
Islands is managed by the United Nations remotely
from abroad.
In conclusion, seeking a common consensus on
human security means we need to look at solutions
holistically both at the global level and nationally.
Otherwise, we are accepting the argument and the
analogy, when discussing the 2005 World Summit
Outcome, that the United Nations system operates like

22

a fire truck, putting out fires all over the world without
doing anything about those that start the fires.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): Since
2005, when the concept of human security found its
way into the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution
60/1), there has been broad engagement among
Members of the United Nations and its various
agencies in exploration and discussion of this concept.
Continued debate within the General Assembly will be
conducive to further discussion of this concept and to
clarifying our thinking on it.
I wish to emphasize three points. First,
introduction of the concept of human security reflects
our concern for freedom, dignity and the protection of
rights. Human security pertains to many different fields
and at present remains an abstract and general concept,
on which there is no uniform international agreement.
Different countries, international organizations and
members of academia have differing interpretations of
the concept of human security; there is thus a need to
engage in further discussion of the connotations of the
concept so as to define it more clearly. We supportive
further work being undertaken by the United Nations
with a view to achieving consensus.
Secondly, national Governments bear primary
responsibility for protecting human security. The
international community and external actors can
provide constructive assistance. However, in doing so,
they ought to respect fully the will of the parties
concerned and act in conformity with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
And thirdly, human security actually pertains to
the question of development. The financial crisis, food
insecurity, the spread of infectious diseases, climate
change and violent conflicts, developing countries have
had a more severe and negative impact on developing
countries, which are the principal victims. Developing
countries face greater problems in guaranteeing that
their people are free from hunger, poverty, disease and
violations of their rights. Under the current
circumstances, the international community should step
up its attention to and investment in discussions and
efforts in the area of development. Developed countries
should strengthen their efforts to assist developing
countries, in particular the least developed countries
and African countries, and should help them to build
their capacity to achieve sustainable development.

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): It
would indeed be nice if we could expunge or bypass
our historical memory. However, we live through
history, and historical experiences linger in our minds.
History has not stopped; it is with us to this very
moment. It sounds extremely naive to forget the past
while it follows us into the future. Remembering our
bitter historical experiences, we are still confronting a
biased international system that is based on the
hegemony of the most powerful. In fact, the powerful
rule regardless of the extent to which the weak suffer.
The discussions and the way they are conducted in this
very building, for instance, leave very tenuous grounds
for putting one’s faith and trust in the current
international system and multilateral architecture.
What is of particular interest is the selectivity of
concerns — from last year’s responsibility to protect
(R2P) to this year’s human security.
It is far from true that some Member States are
supporters of human security and some are not. For
many, it is not a matter of either liking or disliking new
concepts; it is rather an overall lack of confidence in
the reliability of the current multilateral and
international system, which is characterized by a
persistent and huge deficit in the areas of fairness and
impartiality.
Resorting to selective approaches and double
standards is a common practice. Concepts are regularly
and cynically misinterpreted, taken out of their original
context or applied arbitrarily against the few, whenever
and however desired by the most powerful. At the same
time, subjects are not treated in accordance with their
merits for the well-being of humanity but with their
appeal to the few. Such cases are abundant.
The tendency to promote human security, as
currently understood, as a panacea for all the
misfortunes of humanity is an attempt to create a
mega-concept that bundles together three pillars of
United Nations activities: development, peace and
security, and human rights. Without clear demarcation
and definition, the concept is easily prone to
misinterpretation and misuse. Besides, the temptation
to overstretch its limits and coverage only amounts to
more uncertainty about the concept and its
implications.
Meanwhile, the current understanding of human
security tends to overlook the underlying causes of the
multifaceted and exacerbating crises facing humanity.

10-37119

Most of them are not created by a lack of human
security; nor will they be cured by human security
alone. The nature and genesis of several crises that we
the people of the world have faced in recent years —
such as the food, energy and financial crises — have
clearly been systemic in nature. And thus, their
solution should be mainly sought at that level.
Of course, the consequences of these crises are
having severe effects on the daily lives of individuals.
However, healing that suffering is impossible without
addressing first and foremost the long-standing
inequalities and persistent failures at the systemic
level. Indeed, the most urgent and immediate threat to
humanity emanates from a substantive lack of global
security as a result of the misconduct of a few, at the
cost of the suffering of the rest.
Referring to the report of the Secretary-General
(A/64/701), we would like to distinguish between the
report and the ongoing discussions among Member
States on human security and its definition, coverage
and scope, as part of implementing paragraph 143 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1).
While we contribute to such deliberations, we are still
unclear about the mandate of Secretary-General to
have produced the report. The practice of pushing
certain topics while deliberately overlooking the
substantiated concerns of several Member States
regarding those topics is not acceptable. Furthermore,
selectivity in concerns regarding the World Summit
Outcome or other important international issues harms
the credibility of the results.
Moreover, the report before us seems unfair and
partial with respect to the realities regarding
discussions on human security. For instance, it does not
reflect the sensitivities of and constant concerns raised
by so many Member States on human security. The
rosy picture in the introductory part of the report
totally ignores such concerns regarding the definition
and scope of the concept, its coverage, future
implications and so on. Such concerns remain and need
to be taken into account. The same imbalance was
evident again in the composition of the panel at
yesterday’s informal discussion.
The report, in its attempt to expand the paradigm
of security, attempts to define human security as a
notion independent of national security. They are not,
to our understanding, two distinctive subjects. The
overall welfare and security of citizens is an integral

23

A/64/PV.89

and indivisible part of each State’s national security.
Besides, the security of Governments and citizens are
not two different things, as implied in paragraph 21 of
the report.
The report tries to give the impression that human
security would address the root causes of human
challenges. But it hardly even touches the principal
root causes. It confines itself to the community and
national levels and almost fully neglects systemic
sources of human insecurity.
If, as the advocates claim, the concept intends to
address root causes, then perhaps it would be useful to
consider the following easy-to-obtain information on
the main sources of human insecurity in the economic,
social and political spheres: the top five countries to
have invaded and occupied the territories of others in
recent history; the top five countries with the highest
military expenditures; the top five countries with the
highest income from the arms trade; the top five
destinations for illicit financial outflows; the top five
destinations for victims of human trafficking; the top
five polluters of the environment and sources of
climate change; the top five countries paying the
greatest amounts to corrupt officials of other countries;
the top five countries which set the highest agricultural
subsidies at the expense of the livelihoods of poor
farmers in other countries; the top five countries whose
pharmaceutical companies exploit intellectual property
rights in order to deprive others of access to cheaper
medicines; and finally, the top five spenders on blood
diamonds and narcotic drugs.
The list, of course, goes on and on. However, the
point is that this concept should not be understood, as
the report attempts to understand it, as another attempt
to place the blame and responsibility for human
insecurity around the world on the shoulders of
national Governments in developing countries. The
part of the report which deals with applying the human
security concept to various United Nations priorities
reflects the same tendency. We are concerned that
future mainstreaming of the concept in United Nations
activities will follow the same path.
Moreover, the report is inconsistent in defining
the pillars of human security. In paragraph 23, for
instance, the concept is confined to enabling and
empowerment, while in paragraph 28 it recognizes two
pillars for human security, namely empowerment and
protection. The notion of protection alludes to the

24

concept of R2P, which the report in fact tries to
distinguish to some extent from human security in
paragraph 24. The report, however, fails to do so and
recognizes by implication the link between R2P and
human security. Human security as envisaged in the
report is nothing but the nicer face of R2P, which
prescribes intervention in the internal affairs of States.
We do not share this approach.
It is our understanding that the State’s primary
and inherent role in providing rule of law is not
conditional, as implied in paragraph 20 of the report.
Besides, we do not recognize any automatic role for
advocates of the human security concept to address the
vague so-called root causes of weaknesses in cases
where Governments are weak or under threat, as
suggested in the same paragraph. Such attempts — if
any — must be made upon the request of the national
Government concerned, with its full consent,
involvement, leadership and ownership.
Full respect for international law and the Charter
of the United Nations regarding principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in
internal affairs is an essential element for future
consideration of the concept at the international level.
It should also be recognized that, at the national level,
the State is and will remain the only authority with the
discretion and responsibility to secure the livelihood,
dignity and human rights of all people under its
jurisdiction.
In conclusion, we think there remain three main
questions in need of a shared and common
understanding by Member States: What are the root
causes of human insecurity? Who is responsible for
human insecurity around the world? And how can
sustained human security be ensured for all? It seems
that quite varied answers continue to be given to these
questions.
Mr. Khalid Mohammed Osman Sidahmed
Mohammed Ali (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to thank the President of the General
Assembly for having organized this important
discussion on human security.
The concept of human security has been a central
concern since the creation of humankind. Freedom
from want and freedom from fear are important in all
religions. In Islam, a special sura of the Koran is
dedicated to that topic. It describes summer and winter
journeys and a place where people were provided with

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

food and protected from fear. I am convinced that this
concept exists in other religions as well.
My delegation has attentively studied the report
of the Secretary-General on human security
(A/64/701). It is clear from the report that Member
States have not yet agreed on a clear definition of the
concept of human security upon which United Nations
efforts could be based. Yet, the United Nations Trust
Fund for Human Security has begun working on a
number of activities, which we welcome.
Paragraph 143 of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document (resolution 60/1) sets out a general
framework for this concept. It is important for Member
States to agree, within the General Assembly, on a
practical and specific definition of the concept on
which the United Nations could base its future work.
This definition should take into consideration the
following priorities: full respect for international law
and the principles and purposes of the United Nations
Charter regarding respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and non-interference in
their internal affairs; full respect for State ownership of
domestic human security issues, including the ways in
which they deal with threats and their causes; and
external assistance should be provided within the
framework of national ownership and consent by the
State concerned and in conformity with international
law, the United Nations Charter and national
legislation.
The statements we have heard yesterday and
today have noted that the definitions and priorities of
human security differ from one State and region to
another. Yet, certain threats to human security exist at
the international level. The United Nations, its organs
and its specialized agencies should undertake special
efforts in conformity with their respective mandates.
The report of the Secretary-General refers to some of
the challenges including: climate change; growing
poverty; armed conflict; high food and fuel prices; the
proliferation of small arms, nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction; the financial and
economic crisis; foreign occupation; and unilateral
sanctions.
Human security should not be focused upon for
political reasons or using double standards. Nor should
it be used as a means to create crises and promote war.
If we examine the map of today’s world we see many
ways for the United Nations to participate actively

10-37119

within the framework of achieving human security at
the national and regional levels. There are, of course,
certain regional threats to human security which
regional organizations attempt to address according to
their priorities. These require the support and
assistance of the United Nations and the international
community. At the national level, each country
attempts to deal with its own domestic issues and
requires regional support and the support of the United
Nations in those efforts. The United Nations retains an
important and pivotal role in its efforts to activate
preventive diplomacy, treat the root causes of crises,
achieve sustainable development and find solutions to
the international crises that threaten the human security
of a large segment of humankind.
Mr. Moktefi (Algeria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, the Algerian delegation wishes to thank the
President of the General Assembly, Mr. Ali
Abdussalam Treki, for organizing this important
meeting. We also extend our warmest thanks to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for introducing
yesterday his comprehensive report on human security
(A/64/701), prepared in accordance with resolution
60/1, which requested him to update the Assembly on
progress made since the 2005 World Summit on
defining and promoting human security.
The report before us, inter alia, takes stock of the
debates on the new notion of human security and its
various definitions. The document is extremely
interesting, provides food for thought and contains
important research and contributions by eminent
personalities. It outlines the interesting experiences of
a number of countries with respect to the issue and to
the implementation of development projects.
Recalling that today’s and yesterday’s discussions
follow up the thematic debate of the General Assembly
on 22 May 2008 on this same topic, Algeria believes
that any debate aimed at a future decision on human
security falls within the mandate of the General
Assembly. Therefore, all discussion among Member
States on this issue must conform to the fundamental
principles of the United Nations Charter, in particular
those concerning respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States, as well as respect for the right to selfdetermination of peoples under foreign occupation.
My delegation welcomes the noble and laudable
objectives attached to this new concept and notes that

25

A/64/PV.89

the responses to it have been formulated on the basis of
the criteria of ensuring the well-being of every
individual in an environment of peace and stability.
They represent an attempt to give clear expression to
paragraph 143 of the Outcome Document of the 2005
World Summit adopted by our heads of State and
Government.
Nevertheless, as we reflect on the meaning of the
concept of human security, major questions arise, in
particular when there is a risk of impinging on such
universally recognized principles as State sovereignty.
Concerns remain, in particular with respect to the
possibility that the concept of human security could be
used as a pretext for interfering in the internal affairs
of a State. My delegation therefore questions the true
meaning and scope of a phrase in the report according
to which “human security does not entail the use of
force against the sovereignty of States” (A/64/701,
para. 19).
Instead of reassurance, this assertion has the
opposite effect because it increases suspicion.
Paragraph 21 of the same report also raises doubts with
respect to the relationship between Governments and
citizens by asserting that human security “provides the
analytical framework for the creation of genuine
possibilities for partnership between Governments and
citizens”. In reality, that relationship is already
governed by various aspects of national legislation and
international law. Paragraphs 23 and 24 of the report
on the relationship between human security and the
responsibility to protect also require further
clarification, bearing in mind the sensitivity of that
issue.
The Algerian delegation believes that we should
be mindful to avoid confusion between human security
and attempts to use the responsibility to protect as a
pretext to interfere in the internal affairs of countries,
in particular between Governments and their citizens.
It is a fundamental principle that Governments have
the primary responsibility for ensuring the security of
their citizens. The responsibility of the international
community is complementary, to the extent that its role
is limited to the solicitation and consent of the State
requesting assistance in strengthening its capacities to
meet the challenges and threats it faces.
In the context of this debate, my delegation also
has questions on the relationship of the notion of
human security to the North-South issue.

26

In order to dispel confusion, my delegation seeks
to understand conclusively the basic difference
between human security and the previously enshrined
concepts of human development, the right to
development, sustainable development and social
development. In what way does human security differ
from the multidimensional security adopted by the
Organization of American States? There is reason to
fear that, from the analytical perspective, the
proliferation of concepts could hinder our
identification of real problems that we would be unable
to address because they had been misidentified. An
excessively broad definition would necessarily lead to
an absence of clarity and analytical rigour.
In view of those questions, the lesson we need to
draw at this stage is that there is as yet no consensual
and clear definition of the concept of human security.
My delegation is therefore convinced that it would be
premature at this stage to take any decision on how to
integrate or mainstream human security into the
activities of the United Nations system.
Miss Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation expresses its appreciation for the convening
of this meeting and thanks the Secretary-General for
preparing his report (A/64/701) and useful summary on
human security. We also thank the experts for their
participation in the interactive dialogue.
In light of the attention given by Governments,
regional
and
international
organizations,
non-governmental organizations and academia to the
concept of human security, it should be discussed
within the intergovernmental framework of the General
Assembly, particularly since it has not yet been given a
practical and agreed definition. This substantive
discussion is therefore of great importance.
It is no wonder that the concept of human
security has continued to develop and expand, although
its elements and characteristics are not new and are
enshrined in the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter. The focused and coordinated efforts
of the Assembly to define the concept over the past two
decades will add to its value. Hence, we welcome the
noble foundations and objectives of human security.
Our purpose is to free people from fear and want and to
guarantee their dignity.
Some
Governments
and
regional
and
international organizations have begun to discuss
multifaceted human security strategies, agendas and

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

visions. We stress the need for the application of the
concept of human security to be governed by rules that
conform to international law in order to avert any
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States and to ensure that the concept of national
security is not eliminated. We should also address the
underlying causes and challenges that threaten human
security, such as abject poverty and economic crises.
The Secretary-General’s report overlooks the
question of foreign occupation, despite its multifaceted
impacts. Misuse and double standards are among the
primary factors leading to the criticism of principles
that are supposed to be beyond criticism, such as the
principles of humanitarian intervention, human
security and the responsibility to protect.
Out of its belief that peaceful or preventive
solutions are more important and legitimate than the
use of force, the State of Qatar has made repeated
diplomatic efforts, in cooperation with the United
Nations and friendly States, to solve regional and
international problems and to protect those affected by
them.
Security, development and human rights are
interlinked. Human security does not differentiate
among civil, economic, social, political and cultural
rights. Thus, the wise policies of Qatar, led by His
Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani —
especially the Qatar National Vision 2030 project —
are centred on people and on promoting social and
economic development in order to safeguard the
security and well-being of individual and human rights,
which are all aspects of human security. At the
forefront of our national priorities is the right to
education, especially in times of crisis and armed
conflicts. Her Highness Sheikha Mozah Bint Nasser
Al Missned, Consort of the Emir of Qatar and a
UNESCO Special Envoy, has pointed out the
importance of the right to education, especially at the
international level.
In conclusion, we look forward to further reports
and more open discussion and dialogue to clarify the
concept of human security, its elements, objectives,
scope and means.
Mr. Jaber (Lebanon): I thank the President of the
General Assembly for having convened this discussion
on human security. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on this
topic (A/64/701) and to commend the efforts made by

10-37119

the Friends of Human Security, in particular Japan and
Mexico.
In his report, the Secretary-General mentions that
“human security underscores the universality and
primacy of a set of freedoms that are fundamental to
human life” (A/64/701, para. 26). Whether we choose
to interpret the concept of security in a narrow sense or
in a wider one, it is important to note the developments
the world has witnessed over recent decades. There has
been an increase in the interaction between peoples in
different sectors and among countries as a result of
globalization, which, in turn, has led to greater links
between the risks and security challenges faced by
individuals and societies. Civilians often end up paying
the heaviest price in modern conflicts, which are
mostly internal. These events, in turn, call for greater
efforts to protect them. Thus, the three pillars of the
United Nations — security, development and human
rights — are interconnected. This interconnectedness is
growing in today’s world.
Not only may a narrow understanding of security
omit serious legitimate concerns and the basic needs of
individuals, but it also has a direct impact on people’s
security and daily lives. Such grave risks include
hunger, poverty, infectious diseases, climate change,
armed conflicts, occupation, migration and others. On
the other hand, we may wonder whether these risks
will become easier to analyse theoretically when they
are included within a single concept. What is the
practical usefulness of human security? We believe it
important to explore what could come from developing
this concept in a practical manner — that is to say, the
practical impact it may have on the lives, security and
dignity of individuals all over the world.
We have built together in this Hall an integrated
international legal framework to protect human rights.
Nonetheless, flagrant violations of these rights remain
rampant, especially in situations of conflict and where
peoples live under occupation. We have also set for
ourselves a set of Millennium Development Goals,
which we hope to achieve by 2015. Nonetheless, we
see that millions upon millions of people in the world
still suffer from famine despite our production of a
food surplus of some 10 per cent more than we need.
For all of these reasons, as we endeavour to reach
an agreed definition of the concept of human security
that corresponds to the real needs of people and
societies and to the complementary activities of the

27

A/64/PV.89

United Nations, Lebanon reaffirms its support, without
compromise, for the rights of peoples and individuals
to be free from fear and from want, and to exercise
their right to live in freedom, with dignity, free from
despair and poverty. Thus, we need to keep an open
mind and continue our deliberations until we reach a
consensus on finding a practical definition of human
security.
Mr. Richardson (Saint Kitts and Nevis): Permit
me at the outset to express my delegation’s
appreciation for the convening of this important
debate. Human security is an issue that should concern
us all, and freedom from fear, along with freedom from
want, represent the core tenets of this very institution.
It is therefore necessary for the United Nations to take
a lead role in the coordination and implementation of
approaches to human security with the express support
and partnership of all States members of this body. In
furthering this discussion, my delegation would like to
highlight a few elements as we carry the process
forward.
The report of the Secretary General (A/64/701)
underscores the fact that human security is in response
to current and emerging threats, which can be multiple,
complex, interrelated and transnational. For Saint Kitts
and Nevis, there are several threats that fit into those
categories and that require a coordinated and effective
global response.
The report makes mention of the global economic
and financial crisis. Saint Kitts and Nevis is a small
island developing State. We are also a heavily indebted
middle-income country. Those characteristics have
placed us in a precarious position in that we are
extremely vulnerable to the external shocks brought on
by fluctuations in the international economy, while at
the same time we are beyond the periphery of urgent
attention. Too often we are given cursory
consideration. However, our vulnerabilities as well as
our high debt prove that we need to be involved in a
partnership with the international community to
alleviate the current threats to our people and offset
similar crises affecting our future generations. We see
one aspect of human security, therefore, as the need for
our people to be free from the fear of underdevelopment
and all that comes as a result of that underdevelopment
and that fear.
The linkages and the multidisciplinary nature of
human security can be seen when we consider the link

28

between the global economic and financial crisis and
the rising crime levels among our young people. The
crisis has resulted in limited options for development
and economic activity. Saint Kitts and Nevis is
dependent on donor countries and donor agencies, as
well as on international markets to stimulate our
economy. With the crisis we have experienced a
withering away of economic options, and with limited
economic options, our young people become
disaffected. This, my delegation believes, has been one
of the contributing factors to the rise in crime among
the young people of our societies, and we call for a
global response to address this problem.
It is also essential to view crime within the
framework of human security and to consider all of its
factors. Our societies are at risk. Crime among the
young people is a current and future challenge in all
societies of the international community, and we need
to examine the causes and impact of crime among our
young people within the debate on human security.
In terms of health-related threats, we are all
aware of the highly infectious diseases that require no
passport or visa to travel the world at a rapid pace.
These infectious diseases are indeed a threat to human
security and require much of our attention. However,
we also have the problem of non-communicable
diseases as a current and future threat to human wellbeing. My delegation applauds the recent decision by
the General Assembly to convene a high-level meeting,
with the participation of heads of State or Government,
to address the problems of non-communicable diseases,
and we recommend that any discussion on human
security take into account the challenges to our peoples
as a result of non-communicable diseases, as well as
infectious diseases.
Climate change is also one of the most significant
threats to human security. The international community
faces increased challenges as a result of climate
change. Saint Kitts and Nevis proposes a
comprehensive and multisectoral approach, and we
propose a participatory approach to stemming climate
change and its impact on the human security of the
entire international community. For Saint Kitts and
Nevis and other small island developing States, our
very livelihood and existence are threatened by climate
change. This problem has to be viewed within the
realm of human security as a current and future
challenge.

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

There are many different elements to human
security. Member States will view these phenomena in
terms that apply to them individually, regionally or
strategically. What we must ensure — and that is why
this debate is so timely — is that we look beyond our
national interests and maintain an international focus.
My delegation understands the importance of the
role of Government institutions, and we appreciate the
need of some Member States to emphasize the
sovereignty of States as well as the responsibility to
protect. This is where a true international partnership
in moving the process forward becomes necessary. The
objective of human security and of the United Nations
is to ensure freedom from fear, freedom from want and
freedom to live in dignity. Those are rights to be
delivered to the entire international community and not
just to a select few.
Finally, Saint Kitts and Nevis supports the idea of
the United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security and
we would like to see the Fund be used to address a
wide cross-section of threats to human security,
including those threats that were outlined in this
statement.
Mr. Jgenti (Georgia): At the outset, let me join
other delegations in expressing gratitude to the
President of the General Assembly for organizing this
important event and in commending the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts in preparation of the first report
on human security (A/64/701). It is indeed an
important document and will serve as a very timely
platform active discussion among Member States.
In these brief remarks, we would like to draw
attention to a problem which has already been
mentioned by a number of speakers yesterday and
today and which legitimately fits with the human
security concept. One of the key dimensions of the
concept focuses on the necessity to deal with the
humanitarian consequences of wars and military
conflicts. In that context, we would single out two
particular aspects, namely, the rights of displaced
populations to return and the human rights situation in
occupied territories.
While reversing the military and political
outcome of a foreign invasion and the consequent
occupation, something that our region, unfortunately,
has witnessed during recent years, might require many
years, addressing the human rights and humanitarian
needs of war-affected populations is a matter of

10-37119

urgency. Still, we see badly disguised attempts to use
the need for political settlements as a pretext not to
address the immediate human rights and humanitarian
needs of the most vulnerable.
There is a clearly defined need to make the
inadmissibility of linking human rights and
humanitarian problems with political or legal
settlements an integral part of the human security
concept. At the very heart of this concept we also see
the responsibility of occupying Powers and authorities
in effective control to allow unhindered humanitarian
access. The concept should be clear in providing
effective solutions to the practices of denying the right
to an education in one’s mother tongue, forced
conscription and ethnic-based harassment.
Let me conclude by expressing our strong hope
that the urgency of the issues underlined here will
eventually find its way into the deliberations of the
international community. The evolving concept of
human security is comprehensive. Its comprehensiveness
comes from its very important humanitarian and human
rights components.
Ms. Ochir (Mongolia): Let me join previous
speakers in commending the leadership of the
President of the General Assembly in convening this
formal debate on human security. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his submission to the
General Assembly of his first report on human security
(A/64/701).
My delegation views this important debate as a
substantive follow-up to paragraph 143 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), in which
heads of State and Government committed themselves
to discussing and defining the notion of human
security. A wealth of ideas for our debate was
presented yesterday by the panellists in the informal
discussion on “People-centered approaches: The added
value of human security”.
As our discussions reveal, the concept of human
security is still evolving. Yet if we take the widely
mentioned broad-based definition of human security as
encompassing freedom from want, freedom from fear
and freedom to live in dignity, with its people-centered
approach, it can provide us with an important policy
tool for effectively addressing the multifaceted threats
and challenges of today’s interconnected world.

29

A/64/PV.89

We believe that human security, as a new
approach in the conduct of international relations,
could become a powerful force for reforming the
United Nations and adapting it to the challenges of the
twenty-first century. At the same time, the United
Nations is the only universal organization able to
advance and practice this important concept. We
believe that human security will be best ensured if it is
considered as a cross-cutting theme within the United
Nations framework. In doing this, it would be
important to focus more on vulnerable groups of
countries that are the hardest hit by a multitude of
crises and pervasive threats, including climate change.
As a member of the Friends of Human Security
from its very inception, Mongolia is strongly
committed to ensuring human security and promoting
human-centered development. Mongolia’s 1994
national security concept identified the advancement of
human security as one of the fundamental pillars of
strengthening national security. Furthermore, our
national development strategies — including the 20012004 national programme for good governance for
human security, our Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) and our MDG-based national development
strategy for the period through 2021 — are all aimed at
ensuring the human security of Mongolians.
The Government has put the provision of highquality health care and education and decent job
opportunities for the people high on its agenda. In
order to address the negative impact of the global
economic and financial crisis, the Government is
proceeding with a policy of targeting social transfers
more effectively; strengthening public finances,
notably through the passage of a fiscal stability law;
and reforming the banking sector. Dealing with the
social aspects of the crisis is one of my Government’s
top priorities. Thus, in November last year, we set up a
human development fund designed to pool revenues
from the mining sector and implement targeted social
transfers to alleviate the burden on the poor and
vulnerable. Starting this year, tens of thousands of
eligible citizens have benefited from such transfers,
helping them sustain their livelihoods.
In addition to suffering from the negative effects
of the global financial and economic crisis, Mongolia
is highly susceptible to weather-related disasters,
including droughts in summer and zuds in winter. This
past winter we witnessed an extremely severe zud — a
complex natural disaster in which a summer drought is

30

followed by heavy snow coupled with gusty winds and
unusually low temperatures at times dropping to -45 or
-50 degrees Celsius, and then by a dangerous spring
thaw — which destroyed the livelihood of nearly 9,000
herder families who rely on their livestock for income,
food and fuel. More than 7.5 million head of livestock,
more than 17 per cent of the country’s total, have been
killed by the disaster. Fifteen of our 21 provinces,
home to about 800,000 people, have been declared
disaster zones, and another four provinces are seriously
affected.
Serious causes of concern are a spike of up to
40 per cent in under-five mortality in zud-affected
areas, increased acute and chronic malnutrition, micronutrient deficiencies among pregnant women, a lack of
access to health care, widespread food insecurity, the
loss of livelihoods and severe psychological trauma
among herders and their families. The Government is
taking a number of relief and assistance measures to
address short-term needs. Domestically, public and
private-sector organizations have organized nationwide
assistance campaigns for herders. The large scale and
severity of the disaster, however, prompted the
Government to launch last week, together with the
United Nations, a consolidated appeal in Geneva and
Ulaanbaatar for $18 million to build national capacity
for disaster preparedness and response in order to avert
shocks of comparable magnitude in future.
I would like to take this opportunity on behalf of
the Government of Mongolia to wholeheartedly thank
all our bilateral and multilateral partners for providing
valuable support and assistance to Mongolia in its
efforts to meet the formidable challenges of this natural
disaster. Here, I would also like to highlight the
importance of the work of the United Nations Human
Security Trust Fund, which has financed a number of
important projects in Mongolia aimed at improving the
provision of social services and promoting social
equality by fostering human security in remote rural
areas of the country.
In conclusion, my delegation remains hopeful
that this formal debate of the General Assembly will
further facilitate a focused exchange of views on the
multidimensional scope of human security and explore
ways to apply it within the framework of the United
Nations. In this respect, the idea of having more
country-specific and regional analysis of the perception
of human security threats and responses to them
deserves, in our view, closer consideration.

10-37119

A/64/PV.89

Mrs. Khoudaverdian (Armenia): Let me begin
by joining previous speakers in thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his report on human security (A/64/701),
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
60/1. We would also like to express our gratitude to the
President of the General Assembly for convening this
important plenary meeting and for his initiative in
organizing the panel discussion.
Armenia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered yesterday by the representative of Spain on
behalf of the European Union, and we would like to
make a few brief observations in our national capacity.
We appreciate the contributions made by the
Friends of Human Security in advancing the concept of
human security, as well as the support for the process
by various United Nations programmes and funds.
Providing an update on developments related to the
advancement of human security since the 2005 World
Summit, as we continue our discourse and advance key
initiatives relating to that concept, is indeed an
important and timely endeavour. Though this is not an
easy task, the noble goals of this evolving process,
such as the promotion of peace and stability and the
advancement of sustainable development and societal
change at the national, regional and international level,
require a full commitment from all of us.
The concept of security has traditionally been
tied to the security of States, and we believe that the
notion of human security, which encompasses the
political, economic and social needs of people, is a
fundamentally new way of approaching security. It is
also a more wholesome way of thinking. We appreciate
the report’s observations regarding the challenges
facing efforts to define human security, and we agree
with previous speakers who stressed the importance of
crucial areas and issues in thinking about human
security, such as the promotion of human rights,
economic development, social justice, the impact of
climate change and environmental protection.
In particular, in our capacity as Chair of the
Commission on the Status of Women, we would like to
stress the importance of the protection of women and
their empowerment in this context. The challenge of
gender inequality in the public and private spheres
continues to undermine the security of women around

10-37119

the world. More often than not, be it in armed conflict
or in the context of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, women
and children are the most vulnerable segments of the
population. Yet they receive the least support at the
national and international levels. Here, we must
continue to take concrete steps towards the
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcomes of the twentythird special session of the General Assembly. There is
a concern that promoting the concept of human
security may lead to overlapping and duplication of
efforts in these critical areas. There is thus a need to
define the concept of human security very precisely so
as not to create tension between it and other concepts
and development issues.
In this regard, we affirmatively note the
distinction made in the report between the concepts of
human security and the responsibility to protect. At the
same time, we continue to focus on decisive measures
to eliminate once and for all the very possibility of
recurrence of genocides, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity by addressing the root
causes of conflicts that give rise to such atrocities. It is
here that the concept of human security will play a role
based on an expanded understanding of security that
aims to integrate the goals of freedom from fear and
freedom to live in dignity through people-centered,
comprehensive strategies. Once properly defined, the
concept of human security will guide our efforts
towards the early prevention of the factors that lead to
conflict in the first place. We have to think about
further developing prevention mechanisms that
safeguard the most vulnerable groups, including
women, children and the displaced.
My delegation welcomes the report and supports
further discussions on this topic. Armenia believes that
the concept of human security will enhance and enrich
our understanding of security in the twenty-first
century and further complement the work of the United
Nations and Member States in this area, resulting in
more effective policymaking and strategies.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 48 and 114.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

31
