United Nations

A/RES/61/190

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 February 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 51 (d)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2006
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/61/420/Add.4)]

61/190. Commodities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 59/224 of 22 December 2004, and stressing the urgent
need to ensure its full implementation,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration adopted by Heads
of State and Government on 8 September 2000, 1 the 2005 World Summit Outcome
adopted on 16 September 2005 2 and its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006 on the
follow-up to the development outcome of the 2005 World Summit, including the
Millennium Development Goals, and the other internationally agreed development
goals,
Recalling further the International Conference on Financing for Development
and its outcome, 3
Recalling the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, 4
Recalling also the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for
the Decade 2001–2010 5 and the outcome of the high-level meeting of the sixty-first
session of the General Assembly on the midterm comprehensive global review of
the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the Decade 2001–2010, held in New York on 18 and 19 September 2006, 6 and
taking note of the Least Developed Countries Report, 2004, 7

_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
See resolution 60/1.
3
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18-22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
5
A/CONF.191/13, chap. II.
6
See resolution 61/1.
7
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.04.II.D.27.
2

06-50583

A/RES/61/190

Taking note of the Arusha Declaration and Plan of Action on African
Commodities adopted at the African Union Conference of Ministers of Trade on
Commodities, held in Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, from 21 to
23 November 2005, 8 and endorsed by the Executive Council of the African Union at
its eighth ordinary session, held in Khartoum from 16 to 21 January 2006, 9
Taking note also of the reports of the Trade and Development Board on its
fifty-third session, held in Geneva from 27 September to 2 October and on
10 October 2006, 10 and its twenty-third special session, held in Geneva from 8 to
11 May, from 12 to 15 June and from 3 to 10 October 2006, 11
Recognizing that many developing countries are highly dependent on primary
commodities as their principal source of export revenues, employment, incomegeneration and domestic savings, and as the driving force of investment, economic
growth and social development,
Deeply concerned that, despite the recent increase in some commodity prices,
the causes underlying the declining price trend in other commodities have not been
addressed, including supply capacity problems, difficulties with effective
participation in value chains and lack of diversification of their production and
export base, all of which prevent many developing countries from obtaining full
benefits from the current positive conditions,
Recognizing that trade in commodities is a fundamental component of
international trade,
Taking note of the targets set out in the Rome Declaration on World Food
Security and the Plan of Action of the World Food Summit 12 and the outcome
document of the World Food Summit: five years later, 13 which reaffirms the pledge
to end hunger and poverty,
1.
Reiterates the importance of maximizing the contribution of the
commodity sector to sustained economic growth and sustainable development, while
continuing with diversification efforts in commodity-dependent developing
countries;
Recalls the potential of regional integration and cooperation to improve
2.
the effectiveness of traditional commodity sectors and support diversification
efforts;
Recognizes that developed countries account for two thirds of non-fuel
3.
commodity imports, and expresses the urgent need for supportive international
policies and measures to improve the functioning of the commodity markets through
efficient and transparent mechanisms, including commodity exchanges;

_______________
8

African Union, document AU/Min/Com/Decl.Rev.1.
See A/60/693, annex II, decision EX.CL/Dec.253 (VIII).
10
A/61/15 (Part IV). For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session,
Supplement No. 15.
11
A/61/15 (Part III). For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session,
Supplement No. 15.
12
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit,
13-17 November 1996 (WFS 96/REP), part one, appendix.
13
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit: five years
later, 10-13 June 2002, part one, appendix; see also A/57/499, annex.
9

2

A/RES/61/190

4.
Reiterates the importance of expanded South-South trade and investment
in commodities;
5.
Emphasizes the need for efforts by the developing countries that are
heavily dependent on primary commodities to continue to promote a domestic
policy and an institutional environment that encourage diversification and
liberalization of the trade and export sectors and enhance competitiveness;
Reaffirms that each country has primary responsibility for its own
6.
economic and social development, and recognizes that an effective enabling
environment at the national and international levels entails, inter alia, a sound
macroeconomic framework, competitive markets, clearly defined property rights, an
attractive investment climate, good governance, the absence of corruption and welldesigned regulatory policies that protect the public interest and generate public
confidence in market operations;
Also reaffirms the commitments made in the Doha Ministerial
7.
Declaration, 14 the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration 15 and the decision of the
General Council of the World Trade Organization of 1 August 2004 16 to
meaningfully integrate the developing and the least developed countries into the
multilateral trading system, and calls for the successful and timely completion of the
Doha round of trade negotiations with the full realization of the development
dimensions of the Doha Work Programme;
Expresses concern over the suspension of the Doha round of trade
8.
negotiations, and calls for their early resumption and successful developmentoriented outcome adhering fully to the agreed mandate in the Doha Ministerial
Declaration, the Framework adopted by the General Council of the World Trade
Organization in its decision of 1 August 2004 and the Hong Kong Ministerial
Declaration;
Calls upon developed countries and developing countries declaring
9.
themselves in a position to do so to provide duty-free and quota-free market access
on a lasting basis for all products originating from all least developed countries,
consistent with the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration;
10. Encourages developing countries, with the necessary support of donor
countries and the international community, to formulate specific commodity policies
so as to contribute to the facilitation of trade expansion, the reduction of
vulnerability and the improvement of livelihood and food security, by:
(a) Creating an enabling environment that encourages the participation of
rural producers and small farmers;
(b) Continuing the diversification of the commodity sector and enhancing its
competitiveness in developing countries that are heavily dependent on commodities;
(c) Increasing technology development and improving information systems,
institutions and human resources;
11. Stresses that the adoption or enforcement of any measures necessary to
protect human, animal and plant life or health should not be applied in a manner that

_______________
14

See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(05)/DEC. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
16
World Trade Organization, document WT/L/579. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
15

3

A/RES/61/190

would constitute arbitrary or unjustifiable use of non-tariff measures, non-trade
barriers or other standards to unfairly restrict access of developing countries’
products, reaffirms in this regard that developing countries should play an
increasing role in the formulation of, inter alia, safety, environmental and health
standards, and recognizes the need to facilitate the increased and meaningful
participation of developing countries in the work of relevant international standardsetting organizations;
12. Calls for capacity-building support by the relevant international
organizations and by developed countries, encourages the private sector, in the
context of corporate responsibility and accountability as well as responsible
business practices, to enable developing countries to put in place measures that are
appropriate and necessary for meeting market requirements and standards, inter alia,
quality control standards, and invites the relevant intergovernmental organizations
to establish procedures for elaborating product and process standards that take into
account the interests and capabilities of developing countries without jeopardizing
the legitimate objective for developed as well as developing countries of protecting
human, animal and plant life or health consistent with the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade and the relevant agreements of the World Trade Organization;
13. Invites international financial organizations, other donors and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to revisit the operational modalities
of international commodity, as well as to consider finance and risk management
facilities and programmes;
14. Stresses that technical assistance and capacity-building aimed at
improving the competitiveness of commodity producers is particularly important,
and urges the donor community to increase resources for commodity-specific,
financial and technical assistance, in particular for human and institutional capacitybuilding, as well as infrastructure development of developing countries, with a view
to reducing their institutional bottlenecks and transaction costs and enhancing their
commodity trade and development in accordance with national development plans;
15. Emphasizes the importance of official development assistance for
agriculture and rural development, and in this regard calls upon the donor
community to reinforce its assistance in those sectors, and to increase its financial
and technical support for activities aimed at addressing commodity issues, in
particular the needs and problems of commodity-dependent developing countries;
16. Invites developing countries, in cooperation with developed countries
and relevant international organizations, to establish medium- and long-term
commodity development programmes geared towards enhancing research for
product diversification and improving the production, productivity, value addition
and competitiveness of developing countries’ commodities;
17. Underlines the need to strengthen the Common Fund for Commodities,
and encourages it, in cooperation with the International Trade Centre
UNCTAD/WTO, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
other relevant bodies, to continue to strengthen the activities covered by its Second
Account in developing countries with its supply chain concept of improving access
to markets and reliability of supply, enhancing diversification and addition of value,
improving the competitiveness of commodities, strengthening the market chain,
improving market structures, broadening the export base and ensuring the effective
participation of all stakeholders;

4

A/RES/61/190

18. Calls upon developed countries, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and other relevant international organizations to support training
and awareness-building programmes on the functioning of commodity exchanges
and their use, in a development-oriented manner, in supporting and enabling small
farmers and in supporting capacity-building programmes in developing countries in
accordance with national development plans;
19. Reiterates the role of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in addressing commodities issues in a comprehensive way in
accordance with relevant General Assembly resolutions and the provisions of the
São Paulo Consensus, adopted by the Conference at its eleventh session, 17 and in
this regard calls upon the donor community to provide the resources required to
enable the Conference to undertake these activities;
20. Expresses concern that the International Task Force on Commodities
launched at the eleventh session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development has not yet entered into force, and calls upon interested stakeholders
to provide voluntary financial support for the timely establishment of the Task
Force;
21. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with the Secretariat of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to submit a report with
recommendations on the implementation of the present resolution and to report on
world commodity trends and prospects to the General Assembly at its sixty-third
session;
22. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session,
under the item entitled “Macroeconomic policy questions”, the sub-item entitled
“Commodities”.
83rd plenary meeting
20 December 2006

_______________
17

TD/412, part II.

5
