A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/85
11 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 73
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/49/710)]
49/85.

Rationalization of the work and reform of
the agenda of the First Committee

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 47/54 G of 8 April 1993 and 48/87 of 16
December 1993,
Recalling its decision 48/499 of 14 September 1994,
Desiring to enhance the effectiveness of its First Committee to fulfil
its role and responsibility in the sphere of disarmament and international
security,
Stressing the need to organize the work of the First Committee in the
most rational and effective way possible,
Recognizing the need to allow adequate time, during the annual sessions,
to conduct intensive and focused consultations on the items under
consideration in the First Committee,
Encouraged by the thematic approach adopted by the First Committee in
the second phase of its work during the forty-ninth session,
1.
Decides to adopt for the proceedings of the First Committee,
pursuant to the thematic approach set out in paragraph 2 of General Assembly
resolution 48/87, a phased approach with respect to the items on the agenda of
the Committee, as follows:
(a)
General debate on all disarmament and international security
agenda items;
95-76099
/...

A/RES/49/85
Page 2

Informal thematic discussion of specific items under consideration
(b)
in the First Committee;
(c)
Consideration of all draft resolutions submitted under all
disarmament and international security agenda items;
(d)
Action on all draft resolutions submitted under all disarmament
and international security agenda items;
General debate, consideration of and action on draft resolutions
(e)
submitted under the item entitled "Question of Antarctica";
2.
Also decides that the number of meetings of the First Committee
during the regular session of the General Assembly shall be recommended by the
members of the Bureau of the First Committee after consultations with
delegations and the Secretariat;
3.
Requests the incoming Chairman of the First Committee to continue
consultations on the further rationalization of the work and effective
functioning of the Committee;
4.
Requests the First Committee to keep under review the programme of
work adopted under paragraph 1 of the present resolution;
5.
Urges the Secretary-General, from within existing resources, to
allocate appropriate support and a higher proportion of available conference
space to the First Committee during the fiftieth session to enable it
adequately to implement its work programme;
6.
Decides to review at its fiftieth session the question of further
rationalization and improvement of the work of the First Committee.
90th plenary meeting
15 December 1994
