S/PV.6964

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6964th meeting

Friday, 10 May 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Togo)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Maes
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

13-32960 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1332960*

S/PV.6964

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

and respect for human rights be complementary and
mutually reinforcing.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein,
Portugal and the Syrian Arab Republic to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At the outset, Ambassor Kim Sook will make a
joint statement on behalf of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1540 (2004), 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), and 1373 (2001), Following that joint
statement, the Council will hear briefings from the
Chairs of those three Committees.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Kim Sook.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): On behalf of the
Chair of the Security Council Committees established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), on
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, 1373
(2001), on counter-terrorism, and 1540 (2004) on the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
by non-State actors, I have the honour to update the
Council on the continuing cooperation among the three
Committees and their respective Groups of Experts, as
requested by the Council in its resolutions 2083 (2012),
1963 (2010), 1977 (2011) and earlier resolutions.
Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and
the risk of WMD proliferation among non-State actors
continue to pose a serious threat to international peace
and security. In dealing with that grave threat, the
Security Council has emphasized the importance of close
and effective cooperation and coordination among the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). An important consideration in
that regard is that effective counter-terrorism measures
2

Since the last update provided to the Security
Council (see S/PV.6862), the three Committees
continued to cooperate on outreach activities
conducted within their respective mandates, enhanced
their cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations, conducted joint training
programmes, increased the exchange of information,
participated in joint meetings and engaged in reciprocal
representation, as appropriate.
With respect to the challenges posed by the
exploitation of technological advances by terrorists and
non-State actors, including the use of the Internet as
an effective communication channel, together with the
rapid development in nuclear, chemical and biological
technology, which increases the potential for intangible
transfers, the Committees’ Groups of Experts can also
support States that seek assistance in building national
capacities to deal with those challenges.
I am pleased to report in more detail on the areas in
which cooperation has been increased.
With regard to outreach and country visits,
coordinated outreach activities and country visits are
important tools for the three Committees in facilitating
the implementation of their respective mandates. Since
November 2012, all three Groups of Experts were
represented at more than a dozen workshops and other
outreach events, and more meetings were attended by at
least two of the groups. For example, a regional workshop
for member States of the West African Economic and
Monetary Union, organized by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) with the
Intergovernmental Action Group against Money
Laundering in West Africa and with the participation
of the Monitoring Team, was held in Dakar from
11 to 13 December 2012. Designed for member States
of the West African Economic and Monetary Union,
the workshop provided an opportunity for participants
to discuss the legislative, institutional and operational
challenges their respective countries are facing and
to identify practical solutions, promote coordination
among domestic institutions involved in assetsfreezing, promote enhanced international and regional
cooperation with a view to ensuring swift responses to
foreign requests for assets-freezing, and enhance their
capacities through the exchange of experiences with
international and regional experts.

13-32960

S/PV.6964

From 13 to 15 March, CTED organized an event in
Rabat, Kingdom of Morocco, with the participation of
the Monitoring Team, on the issue of cooperation on
border control in the Sahel and the Maghreb. During
the three-day event, representatives of 11 States and
21 international, regional and subregional organizations
discussed how to enhance the capacities of States to
take border-control actions. In all, the Monitoring Team
has participated in 21 joint country visits with CTED.
I turn now to the subject of cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
The three Experts groups are all entities of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF). In this
regard, the CTITF continues to provide a platform for
enhanced cooperation by the three Experts groups, not
only among themselves, but also with over 30 United
Nations organizations, agencies and programmes
concerned with various aspects of counter-terrorism.
The Monitoring Team and CTED have also
continued their leading roles in their respective
CTITF working groups. The 1540 Committee Group
of Experts participated in the Working Group on
Border Management related to Counter-Terrorism and
the Working Group on Preventing and Responding to
Weapons of Mass Destruction Attacks.
The three Committees have close cooperation on
issues related to anti-money laundering and combating
terrorism financing. One example of this cooperation is
that, for the past three years, CTED and the Monitoring
Team have worked together on the CTITF project on
preventing terrorist financing abuse through non-profit
organizations. This global initiative, which was
launched at a ministerial meeting in London in January
2011 and involved five regional workshops, concluded
on 7 March with a briefing to all member States. While
CTED took the lead in organizing the initiative, the
Monitoring Team experts were able to provide the
initiative with concrete examples of the vulnerability of
non-profit organizations to terrorist financing from the
perspective of resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
and through their own work.
The three Committees, through their respective
experts, also coordinated their work in the margins
of and at meetings of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) plenary and working groups. A particularly
important aspect of their cooperation in the period
under review was their contribution to the agreement on
the new FATF standards and assessment methodology.
The joint attendance in the FATF plenary, such as in

February this year, and working group meetings helped
ensure that there is a unified and coordinated message
in the framework of their respective mandates.
Both the 1267 Monitoring Team and the 1540 experts
participated in the Counter-Terrorism Committee’s
special meeting on 20 November 2012 with Member
States and international, regional and subregional
organizations in New York to discuss measures
required to prevent and suppress terrorist financing.
Participants exchanged their respective experiences and
challenges and suggested possible measures to address
the prevention and suppression of terrorism financing,
highlighting in particular the importance and value
of international cooperation, joint capacity-building
initiatives, and targeted technical assistance delivery.
With respect to training, a key way in which the
three Committees cooperate is in staff training, which
reduces costs, maximizes the number of experts trained,
and facilitates staff development. CTED organized a
training session on the new FATF standards from 17 to
19 December 2012 and the experts from the Monitoring
Team and the 1540 Group of Experts participated. This
process offers an opportunity for visiting experts and
officials to meet all three Groups at once and allows the
experts to explore areas of potential joint cooperation
with the visiting representatives.
The exchange of information among the Experts
groups continues to be carried out on a regular basis.
CTED regularly shares with the other two groups the
monthly reports submitted by its Executive Director
to the CTC. In a new step, the three Experts groups
have shared their respective working calendars of
events and discussed ways of improving the efficiency
of country visits and training opportunities with a
view to improving value for money. The experts of
the 1540 Committee prepare information notes on the
Committee’s outreach events and post them on the
Committee’s website for the purpose of transparency
and information sharing.
As for joint meetings and reciprocal representation,
the three Experts groups continue to hold joint meetings
where appropriate, whether involving the heads of each
team or the expert teams, in order to prepare for relevant
outreach activities and to exchange information on
particular themes or activities in specific regions or
countries. In addition, the CTC extends invitations
to the other two Experts groups when arranging
briefings by visiting officials of intergovernmental
organizations or when organizing thematic briefings of

13-329603

S/PV.6964

mutual interest. On 7 February, both the 1540 Group
of Experts and the Monitoring Team participated, at
the invitation of the CTC, in a briefing by Mr. Aleksey
Kuzyura, Head of the Working Group of the Meeting
of Heads of Special Services, Security Agencies and
Law-Enforcement Organizations of Foreign States of
the Russian Federation.
I turn now to future additional steps. The work
of the three Committees, when considered together,
present opportunities for further synergies which, when
fully exploited, would result in a multiplier effect for
the delivery of results. It should be possible to achieve
these improved results while maintaining respect for
the independence of the respective Experts groups and
their mandates.
On the basis of current coordination and cooperation,
each of the three Committee’s staff and Experts groups
are committed to further joint cooperation in a number
of areas. These include, but are not limited to having
regular meetings between the three Committees at
the Committee level and/or between chair countries;
increasing engagement in on-site visits to States, at
their invitation, to facilitate the implementation of
each of the resolutions; coordinating on a common
regional approach to engage with Member States with
geographical and political similarities; coordinating
on key thematic areas that are of interest to all the
Committees in order to benefit from information- and
experience-sharing and effective practices; enhancing
coordination in implementing projects within the
CTITF framework, in particular through the various
thematic working groups; coordinating on approaches
to donor States and assistance providers and joint
evaluation of outcomes; considering developing joint
assistance packages for States, at their request, and
where appropriate; and enhancing joint interaction,
particularly with non-reporting States, in fulfilling their
reporting obligations under relevant resolutions. The
1540 Committee should consider sharing its summary
reports on outreach events with the other Committees.
This concludes my joint statement to the Security
Council. I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Chair of the 1540 Committee.
I take this opportunity to give an overview of the
main developments in the work of the 1540 Committee
since our last joint meeting on 14 November 2012 (see
S/PV.6862). At the outset, I should like to inform the
Council that the Committee’s Group of Experts is now

4

at its full complement of nine, as envisaged in resolution
2055 (2012).
On 27 December 2012, the 1540 Committee
transmitted to the Security Council the review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) for 2012.
Building on the status and experience of implementation,
the Committee set out a list of tasks in the “Looking
ahead” section of this review. I am pleased to report
that good progress has been made in fulfilling these
tasks. We will soon transmit to the Council our twelfth
programme of work, which is now under discussion
within the Committee. I believe that the programme
of work will optimize the efficiency of the Committee,
map out specific priorities to promote the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and set up the
guidance for the work of the Committee over the next
12 months. Guided by the principles of transparency,
equal treatment, cooperation and consistency in its
approach, the Committee has continued to focus its
attention on raising global awareness of resolution
1540 (2004) and facilitating assistance to States in
strengthening national capabilities to implement its
requirements and lay the foundation for improved
mechanisms for sharing effective practices for national
implementation and promoting collaboration with other
international organizations.
Resolution 1977 (2011) calls upon all States that
have not yet presented a first report to submit such a
report to the Committee without delay. There appears to
be a better understanding of the challenges of national
implementation and the development of tailored
strategies to facilitate assistance for overcoming
challenges, and assistance that also supports the
implementation of relevant international obligations
and national security and development priorities. In
that regard, the Committee has developed an approach
to the 24 non-reporting States in an effort to achieve
universal reporting, if possible, by the end of 2014,
which will be the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004).
In accordance with its mandate, the Committee
continued to further facilitate “matchmaking” between
assistance requests and offers. Since the previous
briefing, the Committee received an additional official
request for assistance from the Central American
Integration System (SICA) secretariat on 15 January,
which requested funding for the continuation of the
SICA 1540 programme of work, including the position
of the 1540 regional coordinator within the SICA

13-32960

S/PV.6964

secretariat to assist SICA member States. In accordance
with the established procedures, the Committee has
passed on the request to those States and international,
regional and subregional organizations that have
offered to provide assistance for their consideration,
and first responses have been received. The Group of
Experts is now working on identifying and analysing
assistance needs and continuing consultations with
officials from States, in facilitating existing and new
assistance requests.
Paragraph 8 of resolution 1977 (2011) encourages
all States to prepare on a voluntary basis national
implementation action plans, with the assistance of
the 1540 Committee, as appropriate, mapping out
their priorities and plans for implementing the key
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004), and to submit
those plans to the 1540 Committee. We are pleased to
report that, since our previous briefing, Kyrgyzstan
has submitted its national implementation action plan
to the Committee. We note that Kyrgyzstan’s plan also
contains a request for technical and financial assistance
for the implementation of the specific measures of the
plan. A good example is the national implementation
action plan drafting session held in April with
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s ministries
and agencies. According to the information received by
the Committee, a number of other States, supported by
the Group of Experts, are in the process of updating or
preparing their initial national action plans.
Paragraph 11 of resolution 1977 (2011) encourages
the 1540 Committee to actively engage in dialogue with
States on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
including through visits to States at their invitation.
From 17 to 19 April, I personally led a visit to Trinidad
and Tobago, accompanied by the members of the Group
of Experts. During the visit, I had an opportunity to
hear first hand from the acting Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of Trinidad and Tobago of their
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004). The
discussions demonstrated the high level of commitment
and determination by the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago towards the full and effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). That was the first visit to a State
of the Latin American and Caribbean region, and the
first one to be led by the Chair of the 1540 Committee.
Since the previous briefing, the 1540 Committee has
also received invitations to carry out similar visits from
Grenada, Mozambique and the Republic of Moldova.

In accordance with resolution 1977 (2011) and
within its mandate, the 1540 Committee has continued
to engage in various outreach activities to serve
its objectives. Since 14 November 2012, the 1540
Committee and its experts participated in 33 outreach
events organized by various international, regional and
subregional organizations in collaboration with various
Governments and, in many cases, with the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs.
From a thematic point of view, those outreach
events promoted the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) through direct action with States by Committee
members and the Group of Experts to help enhance
their national implementation arrangements. In
addition, visits were conducted specifically to review
particular issues such as export and border controls,
nuclear security, biosecurity, industry outreach and
proliferation financing. In the spirit of transparency
required by resolution 1977 (2011), information about
those outreach events is posted on the 1540 Committee
website. While some of those activities have been
conducted directly with States, we have found regional
organizations particularly helpful as key players in
the facilitation and the successful conduct of those
events. For example, to further cooperation between
the Committee and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), I will take part in the
meeting of the OSCE Forum for Security Cooperation
to be held in Vienna on 15 May.
Paragraphs 14 and 18 of resolution 1977 (2011)
call upon the relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations to designate and provide the
1540 Committee with a point of contact or coordinator
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
for assistance. I would like to note that, since the
prevous briefing, Gabon, the Republic of the Congo,
the United States of America, the Republic of Korea
and Austria have either submitted or updated their
point-of-contact information. For intergovernmental
organizations, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime has revised its point-of-contact information,
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons has designated its point of contact. That will
further facilitate cooperation with the Committee to
implement the resolution.
On February 27, the Committee sent out letters
requesting all Member States to submit information on
their 1540 implementation status, as well as on points of
contact. Such a living network of contacts could serve

13-329605

S/PV.6964

to improve communication and interaction with and
among States. I would take this opportunity to request
the cooperation of all Member States in that regard.
The Committee also continued its interaction
in that area with academic institutions, civil society
and representatives of industry, as appropriate. Let
me note that, in February, I had a meeting with
Ms. Mireille Ballesrazzi, President of the INTERPOL
Executive Committee, to discuss future cooperation.
INTERPOL indicated that the 1540 obligations could
be incorporated into its law enforcement capacitybuilding programmes. INTERPOL will also join the
list of potential assistance providers in that regard.
Transparency is an essential principle guiding the
work and activities of the Committee. In accordance
with resolution 1977 (2011), the Committee continued
to institute transparency measures and activities,
including by making the fullest possible use of
its website. The Committee’s working group on
transparency and media outreach is currently discussing
the future media strategy of the Committee, including
with regard to the upcoming tenth anniversary of the
resolution. From 22 to 24 April, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia organized a workshop in New York, focused on
the League of Arab States, on the theme “Preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors: the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) in the Arab World”. The event was a good
example of a State’s promotion of awareness of the
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) and of the
practical implementation of the resolution’s provisions
within the region. It was one of a series that also
included training for customs officials in collaboration
with the World Customs Organization.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). As we celebrate its tenth anniversary next
year, we will work at full throttle to fully consolidate
universal political will towards the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.
At the same time, the Committee will continue to
address all aspects of the resolution in order to leave
no stone unturned. In that regard, we particularly look
forward to closer and more practical cooperation with
the Committees, and to hearing new ideas to improve
our joint efforts to counter the scourge of terrorism. For
our part, we believe that closer cooperation among us
is vital and that, in particular, we should make every

6

effort to support one another’s outreach activities, as
consistent with our respective mandates.
The President (spoke in French):
Ambassador Kim Sook for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ambassador Quinlan.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): The threat posed by
Al-Qaida to international peace and security remains a
pressing aspect of a number of issues on the Council’s
agenda, not only in its deliberations on international
terrorism, but also across country situations, including
Somalia, Mali and Yemen. Since the most recent
report (see S/PV.6862) of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, Al-Qaida affiliates in the Maghreb have waged
a vicious insurgency in Mali, threatening the viability
of that State and security in the region. Al-Qaida in
the Arabian Peninsula continued to be a strong factor
affecting the ongoing security situation in Yemen, and
Al-Shabaab remained an ongoing threat to the security
environment in Somalia.
In today’s briefing I will focus on the principal
areas of work of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee
since the adoption of resolution 2083 (2012), last
December. The first is about effectively addressing
the evolving threat to international peace and security
posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates, with a particular
focus on the Committee’s work in addressing recent
challenges posed in Mali and the Sahel region by
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, the Mouvement pour
l’unification et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest and the
Ansar Eddine. The second area concerns ensuring that
regimes’ application remains relevant and effective,
and the third that the sanctions regime has clear and
effective procedures.
A more detailed version of this statement will be
distributed in hard copy today and made available on
the Committee’s website.
Since my predecessor’s last briefing, in December,
the threat to international peace and security from
Al-Qaida has continued to evolve as Al-Qaida affiliates
have exploited local grievances in order to further
Al-Qaida’s global agenda. In accordance with its
mandate under resolution 2083 (2012), the Committee
has been working to ensure that the regime remains
relevant and effective in response to that evolving
threat. In particular, since its most recent report to

13-32960

S/PV.6964

the Council, the Committee has sought to improve
the application of 1267 sanctions to address the threat
posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates in Mali and the
Sahel.
In resolutions 2100 (2013) and 2085 (2012), the
Council reiterated its readiness to sanction further
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities who do
not cut off all ties to Al-Qaida and associated groups.
In response, the Committee has applied the sanctions to
the Mouvement pour l’unification et le jihad en Afrique
de l’Ouest and to Ansar Eddine, entities closely linked
to the organization of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
as well as to the leaders of, and other individuals
associated with, those groups. The Committee’s efforts
to ensure that the Al-Qaida sanctions list reflects the
nature of the threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates
in Mali and the Sahel are part of a sustained drive to
make full use of the tools available in the context of
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime to counter the evolving
threat.
To that end, as directed by the Council in paragraph
62 of resolution 2083 (2012), the Committee held a
special meeting on 9 April to consider ways by which
the 1267 regime could improve its response to the
latest developments of Al-Qaida in the Sahel and Mali,
including outreach and technical-support activities to
the region on implementing and applying the sanctions
measures. The meeting brought together the Monitoring
Team, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, as well as other
relevant departments and offices of the United Nations.
It highlighted the need for continued monitoring of
the role of those groups in Mali and the Sahel, with
a more central role for capacity-building efforts in the
counter-terrorism realm. In that regard, the Committee
and the Monitoring Team look forward to constructive
engagement and cooperation with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, as requested by the Council in paragraph 31 of
resolution 2100 (2013).
The Committee is making every effort to ensure
that the sanctions framework is as effective a tool as
possible in preventing Al-Qaida and its affiliates from
threatening international peace and security. Part of
that effort requires that the Al-Qaida sanctions list
be as up-to-date and accurate as possible, to facilitate
the implementation of the measures. The Committee
considers it extremely important that individuals

confirmed to be deceased are removed from the list, while
ensuring that any assets forming part of the deceased’s
estate, if unfrozen, are not used in connection with
activities threatening international peace and security.
In that regard, the Committee de-listed Osama Bin
Laden on 21 February. In accordance with paragraph
32 of resolution 2083 (2012), the Committee will ensure
that assets frozen as a result of Osama Bin Laden’s
listing will not be transferred to listed individuals or
entities, or otherwise used for terrorist purposes, in line
with resolution 1373 (2001).
The Committee is pleased to inform the Council
that it has begun to implement the special agreement it
concluded with INTERPOL facilitating the exchange of
information between the Committee and INTERPOL
and streamlining the maintenance of joint United
Nations-INTERPOL special notices. That can be
expected to improve the quality of information on the
Al-Qaida sanctions list and enhance the implementation
of the measures via INTERPOL’s special-notice
distribution system.
The Committee has also continued its periodic
review of the sanctions list, focusing particular attention
on entries that lack identifiers necessary to ensure
effective implementation of the measures, entries of
entities that are reported or confirmed to have ceased to
exist, and entries that have not been reviewed in three
or more years. The responsiveness of Member States
remains crucial for the successful implementation of
those reviews.
Through the adoption of resolution 2083 (2012),
the Security Council has further enhanced the fairness
of the sanctions framework through the introduction
of provisions giving individuals and entities on
the sanctions list the ability to submit requests for
exemptions to the assets-freeze and travel-ban measures,
through the focal-point mechanism established in
resolution 1730 (2006), for the consideration of the
Sanctions Committee. The Council has also authorized
the Ombudsperson to request that the Committee
consider exemptions to the travel ban for the purpose
of allowing petitioners to travel to another State to be
interviewed by the Ombudsperson. The Committee has
introduced these changes into the guidelines for the
conduct of its work, setting forth clear procedures to be
followed by listed individuals and entities wishing to
avail themselves of those new provisions.
Furthermore, the Committee has implemented the
provisions of paragraph 12 of resolution 2083 (2012),

13-329607

S/PV.6964

which reverse the assumption that a State proposing an
individual or entity for listing wishes to have its status
as a designating State kept confidential, by dispatching
letters to all designating States on file to solicit their
views as to whether the Committee or Ombudsperson
may make their status as a designating State known.
The Office of the Ombudsperson continues to
fulfil a key role in supporting the Committee’s efforts
to ensure that the application of sanctions continues
to reflect the current threat posed by Al-Qaida and its
affiliates. Since the most recent briefing to the Council,
the Committee has delisted five individuals and
retained two listings on the basis of reports submitted
by the Ombudsperson. In addition, as of 9 May,
three comprehensive reports of the Ombudsperson
were under consideration by the Committee, and the
Ombudsperson had one case in the dialogue phase and
11 cases in the information gathering phase.
Since the most recent briefing to the Security
Council (see S/PV.6862), the Committee has also
provided reasons to petitioners, both in cases where
the Committee has acceded to or rejected delisting
requests, through the Ombudsperson. The provision of
reasoned decisions to the Ombudsperson for onward
transmittal to the petitioner is a significant indicator
that fair and clear procedures exist within the Al-Qaida
sanctions framework. The Committee will continue to
pay heed to due process principles to ensure that the
listing and delisting process is imbued with fairness
and transparency.
I now turn to my concluding observations. The
events of the past few months in Mali and the Sahel region
have illustrated the continued threat to international
peace and security posed by Al-Qaida and affiliated
groups. The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee’s efforts
to comprehensively address that issue included, for the
first time, a special meeting held pursuant to paragraph
62 of resolution 2083 (2012). That is a valuable forum,
which the Committee will use, as appropriate, in other
relevant contexts.
We should not forget, however, that the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime can only be as effective as the sum
of its parts, and a key element of that framework is the
application of the measures. The Committee endeavours
to keep the list as updated and accurate as possible
through specialized reviews, the success of which to
a large part depends upon Member State engagement.
I therefore call on all Member States to continue their
positive engagement with the Committee.
8

In concluding, I would also like to recognize the
efforts of the Monitoring Team, without which the
Committee simply would not be able to do its work.
The President (spoke in French):
Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ambassador Loulichki.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): It gives me great
pleasure to brief the Security Council today on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001). The most recent
briefing was held in November 2012 (see S/PV.6862).
The Committee continues to be guided in its work
by the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010),
and continues to play a critical role in promoting and
facilitating their implementation.
In accordance with its programme of work for 2013,
the Committee is organizing a special meeting, open to
the wider United Nations membership, and two other
special events focused on key aspects of the Committee’s
mandate. The first special event, to be held on 24 May,
will focus on countering terrorism through the use of
new communication and information technologies. In
organizing the event, the Committee seeks to explore
with Member States recent technological advances,
good practices and effective measures taken, in
particular, in the areas of the movement of persons,
mobile telecommunications and the Internet, within
the framework of implementing resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1624 (2005). The Committee looks forward to the
participation of all Member States in that interactive
discussion.
The Committee will also organize a special meeting
on enhancing cooperation and technical assistance to
States in the Sahel region to strengthen their capacity in
the global fight against terrorism. That special meeting
is expected to take place in the last quarter of 2013.
The Committee has agreed to hold a third special
event, on enhancing the capacity of States to counter
terrorism at their borders through technical assistance
and the sharing of good practices. The Committee will
further explore a possible link between that topic and
the one selected for the special meeting.
Furthermore, as part of its outreach efforts, the
Committee will continue to explore the possibility of
collaboration with the Inter-Parliamentary Union.

13-32960

S/PV.6964

In December 2013, the Committee will submit
to the Security Council a report on the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) for consideration by the Council as part of its
comprehensive review of the Executive Directorate.
In accordance with Security Council resolution
1963 (2010), the Committee will submit the report to
the Council prior to the expiration of the Executive
Directorate’s mandate, on 31 December.
Through CTED, the Committee has completed
the replacement of the preliminary implementation
assessment by the detailed implementation survey, and
the overview of implementation assessment. The new
diagnostic tools were the object of a briefing to Member
States that I had the pleasure to chair last week. They
will allow for an enhancement of the Committee’s work
in identifying challenges faced by Member States and
facilitate the delivery of targeted technical assistance
in that regard.
The Committee continues to focus on region-specific
discussions and on issues identified in the 2011 global
survey. The Committee also continues to organize and
participate in discussions and workshops on thematic
issues. Some of the major thematic issues considered
by the Committee during the past six months
include the facilitation of technical assistance by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and CTED, alternative
remittance systems and the Committee’s cooperation
and dialogue with the relevant international and
regional organizations, in particular the Terrorism
Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism.
CTED has also been active in conducting a number
of workshops on specific topics. Important workshops
organized during the period under review include
the initial global meeting on effective international
cooperation by central authorities, which took place in
Cartagena, Colombia, from 19 to 21 February; the fourth
seminar of the Counter-Terrorism Committee on the
theme “Bringing terrorists to justice: policy challenges
in the prosecution and prevention of terrorism”, which
took place in Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania, from 26 to
28 February; the final workshop led by CTED on behalf
of the Working Group on Tackling the Financing of
Terrorism of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF), aimed at protecting non-profit
organizations from terrorist financing abuse, which
took place on 5 and 6 March; the conference on border

control cooperation in the Sahel and the Maghreb,
which took place in Rabat from 13 to 15 March; the
sixth regional workshop for police officers, prosecutors
and judges in South Asia on effectively countering
terrorism, which took place in Kathmandu from 18 to
20 March; and, lastly, the first regional workshop for
law enforcement officers and prosecutors in East
Africa on effectively countering terrorism and bringing
terrorists to justice, which took place in Kampala from
7 to 9 May.
Upcoming workshops that CTED is active
organizing or co-organizing in the coming weeks include
the joint Council of Europe, Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and CTED workshop on
special investigative techniques, which will take place
in Strasbourg, France, on 14 and 15 May; the regional
workshop on controlling the cross-border movement of
cash and bearer-negotiable instruments, to take place
in Pretoria on 27 and 28 May; the East Africa regional
workshop on assets-freezing requirements of resolution
1373 (2001), which will take place in Dar-es-Salaam
from 4 to 6 June; and the second regional workshop on
international joint investigations, which will take place
in Langkawi, Malaysia, also from 4 to 6 June.
In addition, the Committee and CTED continue to
enhance their ongoing dialogue with Member States,
donors and beneficiaries on the facilitation of technical
assistance for capacity-building at the national and
subregional levels. Since the most recent briefing to the
Security Council (see S/PV.6862), CTED, on behalf of
the Committee, has conducted four assessment missions
to Member States: Qatar, Morocco and Serbia, as well
as a fact-finding mission to Angola.
I would like to emphasize that the Committee and
CTED have continued and will continue to pay close
attention to the question of respect for human rights and
the rule of law in the counter-terrorism measures taken
by States, in accordance with the relevant mandates
conferred by the Security Council.
The Committee and CTED continue to work
closely with the relevant working groups of the CTITF,
United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism and the
Global Counter Terrorism Forum in order to support,
coordinate and complement one another’s counterterrorism endeavours.
The Committee will continue to play a critical role
in the global fight against terrorism, and will strive to
do so in a more strategic and transparent manner so that

13-329609

S/PV.6964

it can more effectively contribute to the global counterterrorism effort within the scope of its mandate. I
would like to conclude by expressing my sincere
appreciation and consideration to Mr. Mike Smith,
Executive Director of CTED, and to his able team for
their excellent work on the Committee’s behalf, and to
thank the Secretariat for its valuable support.
The President (spoke in French):
Ambassador Loulichki for his briefing.

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Two years after the death of Osama Bin Laden, we are
reminded that terrorism remains one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security. Though
Al-Qaida’s core is now weaker, the recent attacks in
Boston and Mogadishu, Baghdad and Karachi remind
us that, although we have made progress, the struggle
to combat terrorism endures. We must continue to
work together to adapt to evolving threats and terrorist
tactics.
We know the key components of a comprehensive
United Nations approach to countering terrorism.
Those include preventing the resurgence of Al-Qaida,
building State capacity to counter terrorist threats, and
making sure terrorists do not acquire the most dangerous
weapons. The work of the Security Council’s three
counter-terrorism Committees reflects this integrated
approach. We commend the Committees and their
expert groups for their outstanding work. We express
particular gratitude to the new Chairs — Australia,
Morocco and the Republic of Korea — for their
leadership since January.
The Al-Qaida sanctions regime remains one of
the Council’s most effective tools for countering the
growth of Al-Qaida and its affiliated groups. As a
signal of the international community’s resolve, those
sanctions identify the most dangerous individuals and
entities affiliated with Al-Qaida. They also help stop
attacks by limiting terrorists ability to travel, acquire
weapons and finance their operations. Yet those
sanctions work only if we implement them effectively.
We therefore encourage States to propose listings to the
Committee and to improve their capacities to enforce
those measures.
We would like to welcome Alexander Evans to his
new role as Coordinator of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team. We encourage him and his

10

Team, in collaboration with the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, to
focus on implementation challenges, particularly in
those States where sanctioned individuals and entities
are located. The Committee’s recent meeting on
terrorist threats in Mali is a great example of how we
can best focus our attention on areas of key concern.
Finally, we remain committed to ensuring that
the Committee’s procedures are fair and we commend
Ombudsperson Kimberley Prost for her vital work.
The success of our counter-terrorism efforts will
depend on States’ abilities to take effective action
domestically. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) continue to help States to build
those capacities. We commend the leadership of its
Executive Director, Mike Smith, to whom we are
grateful for his service over the past five years. The
United States remains committed to supporting these
capacity-building initiatives, including those focused
on training police, judges, prosecutors and border
security officials at the regional and subregional levels.
We are pleased with the increased emphasis that
CTED is placing on the promotion of the rule of law in
its work and on the essential role of civil society. We
are gratified by the growing number of joint projects
involving both CTED and the Terrorism Prevention
Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, thereby leveraging each entity’s comparative
advantages. We hope that collaboration can be replicated
within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
as we continue to promote strategic coordination among
the United Nations counter-terrorism entities.
The appointment of a United Nations counterterrorism coordinator, as proposed by the SecretaryGeneral, would further strengthen and focus our
collective counter-terrorism efforts. The United Nations
should also continue to work with multilateral entities,
such as the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum. Such
collaboration can help build increased international
capacity to bring terrorists to justice within a rule of
law framework, counter violent extremism and prevent
kidnapping for ransom. We also look forward to the
United Nations developing a close partnership with the
new International Center of Excellence on Countering
Violent Extremism in Abu Dhabi.

13-32960

S/PV.6964

The risk that non-State actors will gain access
to weapons of mass destruction remains one of the
greatest threats to international security. For nine
years, the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) has been dealing with that threat. During
that time, many countries have strengthened their
laws, procedures and capabilities to deter and counter
that threat. Many countries have improved the ability
to stop the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, as well as their delivery systems.
States have also bolstered their ability to stop the illicit
spread of related materials to non-State actors. While
that progress is welcome, the United States continues
to urge all countries needing assistance in that field
to request it. We also encourage those countries and
other bodies capable of providing such assistance to
offer it. We have donated a total of $4.5 million to the
United Nations Trust Fund for Global and Regional
Disarmament Activities to help implement resolution
1540 (2004), and we encourage others to contribute as
well.
We look forward to the development of the 1540
Committee’s twelfth programme of work. With a more
robust Group of Experts and a mandate extending to
2021, the Committee has an opportunity to develop
a strategic approach to meeting the goals set out in
resolution 1540 (2004) for the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. The full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term process that
requires engagement with regional, subregional and
intergovernmental organizations, civil society and
industry. The celebration of the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) next April will
present an opportunity to expand outreach and focus on
efforts needed to further implementation.
We encourage the Council’s counter-terrorism
Committees to guide and reinforce States’ actions to
respond to that threat. Under the capable leadership
of the Chairs, we think that the Committees have
great potential to accelerate their contribution to our
collective efforts to counter terrorism, as well as the
violent ideology that underpins it.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Permanent Representatives
of the Republic of Korea, Australia and Morocco for
their detailed reports on the Committees they chair. We
take note of their fruitful work in the context of their
chairmanships.

Terrorism, despite all of the efforts of the
international community, remains one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security. That
is evidenced by the ongoing terrorist attacks in various
areas of the world, to which innocent people, including
children, daily fall victim. It is clear that terrorism adapts
itself to new realities at breakneck speed, becoming
ever more serious and acquiring new dimensions. More
often than not, terrorist attacks are occurring in regions
of the world where this phenomenon had never before
been seen.
Of most serious concern today are the developments
in Syria and the region. Almost daily, the region
is witnessing terrorist attacks, the uncontrolled
proliferation of weapons and infiltration by combatants.
We condemn in the strongest terms terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, by whomsoever committed.
We expect other countries to take the same unwavering
stance in combating this global scourge.
Double standards, the categorization of terrorists
as good or bad, and any attempts to justify barbaric
activities are absolutely inadmissible. Against that
backdrop, the activities of the three counter-terrorism
Committees and the strengthening of their cooperation
play a key role in increasing the effectiveness of the
Security Council in the fight against terrorism.
We believe that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) is the cornerstone and the foundation of the United
Nations counter-terrorism architecture. Recently the
Chair of the CTC, Mr. Loulichki, briefed Member States
on the updated format of the basic documents for the
review of the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
and improvements to the rules for its work with respect
to the outcome of country visits. We are convinced that
those reforms and the continuation of the practice of
country visits will allow the CTC to more effectively
carry out its mandate, complementing the process of the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the work being done in this area
by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
Given the growing instability in various
regions of the world, we must prevent any further
radicalization of populations and the triggering of
sectarian or inter-religious clashes. In that regard, we
deem of fundamental importance the implementation
of resolution 1624 (2005), focusing on preventing
terrorism, limiting the range of terrorist activities,
combating the spread of terrorist ideology and violent

13-3296011

S/PV.6964

extremism and the use of media and the Internet for
terrorist purposes.
Of particular importance here is the strengthening
of the CTC’s contacts with organizations in the
international arena in order to expand the network
of counter-terrorism cooperation under the auspices
of the United Nations. In that regard, we note the
contacts of the CTC, as well as the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), with the Meeting of Heads of Special Services,
Security Agencies and Law-Enforcement Organizations
on terrorism-related issues, which was conducted by
the Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation.
In our view, the briefing to the CTC by representatives
of the Meeting have proved to be valuable.
We continue to value the role of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
in providing assistance to the CTC. We should like
to express our gratitude to the outgoing Executive
Director, Mr. Smith, for his contribution to resolving
the daunting challenges before the CTED under its
mandate, as set out in resolution 1963 (2010).
The 1267 and 1989 Committee remains one of the
most effective mechanisms in the Security Council’s
counter-terrorism efforts. Its sanctions list should
adequately reflect the Al-Qaida threat, which, as recent
events in the Arab world and in Africa show, remains
significant. We support the proposal to include new
entries on the list. We believe also that the Committee
must swiftly respond to existing threats without
excessive bureaucratic red tape and consider States’
listing requests, guided by its mandate to combat
terrorism.
However, the practice of the adoption of sanctions
against individuals and entities involved in terrorist
activities must continue to be based on a case-by-case
approach, in line with the relevant procedures.
The mandate of the Ombudsman on delisting and
the procedure for considering requests for exclusion
from the list set forth in resolution 2083 (2012) ensures
optimal transparency in the work of the Committee.
However, a more important task is enhancing the
effectiveness of sanctions mechanisms, which is
dependent on the implementation by Member States of
their international obligations in that area.
Unfortunately, as practice has shown, unresolved
issues remain. These include, running counter to
12

paragraph 4 of resolution 2083 (2012), the Kavkaz
Center website, an information portal for the terrorist
organization Emarat Kavkaz, which in July 2011 was
included on the sanctions list. That site continues to
promote terrorism and religious intolerance.
Preventing weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery from falling into the hands of
terrorists remains one of the most important challenges
for the international community. A key instrument for
doing so is resolution 1540 (2004), which provides, inter
alia, for the implementation by Member States of the
measures necessary to strengthen national systems for
monitoring and control in the field of non-proliferation.
Russia continues to support the implementation of that
resolution by all countries, fully taking into account the
complex and long-term nature of its requirements.
We support the efforts of Ambassador Kim Sook to
ensure the effective functioning of the 1540 Committee
on a regular and predictable basis. The work of the
Group of Experts has made a significant contribution
to the Committee.
In the context of the Committee’s activities during
the past six months, we would highlight the report
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In
addition to being a review, it takes note of the progress
made and charts a course for the future work of the
Committee.
With respect to future work, we suggest that the
Committee attach greater importance to the issue
of the provision of assistance to States in carrying
out the tasks set out in resolution 1540 (2004). The
Committee’s coordinating role in the relevant efforts
of the international community is crucial. For its part,
Russia will continue to actively participate in those
activities, including in the context of our cooperation
with the States members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Let me thank
the Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004), Ambassadors Quinlan, Loulichki and
Kim Sook, for their comprehensive briefings today and
for the effective manner in which they have taken on
leadership of those Committees.
Terrorism continues to pose a grave threat to
international peace and security. No Member State can
adequately respond to the challenges of terrorism by
13-32960

S/PV.6964

acting alone. Only through continued cooperation will
the international community be able to tackle a problem
that transcends geographical borders.
The United Nations has an important role to play. It
is crucial that the States Members of the United Nations
strive to work together in an ever more collaborative
and comprehensive manner. True collaboration requires
breadth and depth of cooperation. A comprehensive
approach requires making full use of all the tools
available to us.
The three Committees under discussion today are
powerful tools. We fail in our responsibilities if we do
not use them effectively, thoroughly and creatively to
combat the threat of terrorism.
Al-Qaida sanctions play an important role in the
fight against terrorism by imposing targeted financial
sanctions on Al-Qaida operatives, denying them arms
and restricting their travel, in other words, limiting
their ability to carry out terrorist acts.
The United Kingdom welcomes the recent
unanimous adoption of resolution 2083 (2012), which,
inter alia, extended the mandates of the Office of the
Ombudsperson and the Monitoring Team. The United
Kingdom would like to pay tribute both to Kimberley
Prost and to the Monitoring Team for their continuing
exemplary work. We will continue to work with members
of the Sanctions Committee, the Ombudsperson and
other interested parties to embed the changes agreed
under the new resolution to further enhance the
Committee’s important work. For the regime to be
effective, sanctions must be diligently implemented.
We welcome recent work by the Committee under
Ambassador Quinlan’s leadership to focus on
implementation, including through consideration of
outreach and technical support activities.
The threat that chemical, biological or nuclear
materials may proliferate to terrorists has been a
growing concern to the international community
over the past decade. The year 2014 will mark the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004), the only
international instrument designed to prevent terrorists
from acquiring those weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs). But the resolution will only ever be as
effective as the will of the States Members of the
United Nations to implement its measures. For that
reason, the United Kingdom urges States that have yet
to meet their reporting obligations to do so. We call on

all States to design and execute national action plans to
fight trafficking in WMDs.
We realize that the immense scale of the challenge
means that Governments and civil society must act in
concert to fight the threat. We therefore urge States
requiring support for implementation to approach the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for assistance. Our goal must be universal
implementation of the resolution by 2014, and to
achieve that the Committee and its Group of Experts,
whose work we commend, must also play their part in
continuing to seek opportunities to form partnerships
with international organizations and regional agencies
that have the resources to match those requests for
assistance, including by using the consolidated list of
assistance requests as soon as possible.
The United Kingdom continues to welcome the
recognition by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) of the need for States to pursue
a cooperative approach to defeat terrorism. We wish
to mark our deep appreciation of Mr. Michael Smith’s
very effective leadership of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate as he nears the
completion of his term.
Acts of terrorism and the threat of such acts touch on
much of the work of the United Nations. It is important
that all the relevant components of the United Nations
system work together to counter terrorist challenges
while avoiding duplication across its infrastructure.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
are key tools to that end.
Today, in particular, the United Kingdom urges
the three Committees whose reports we have heard to
continue to intensify their collaborative efforts. We are
grateful to Ambassador Kim Sook for his briefing on
the joint work of the Committees and encourage further
collaboration along those lines.
The United Nations must also strive to work
effectively as much as possible with other multinational
organizations working on countering terrorism. For
instance, we look forward to increased cooperation as
a result of the regular European Union-United Nations
counter-terrorism dialogue. The United Kingdom also
recognizes the important contribution that the Global
Counterterrorism Forum can make to tackling the
terrorist threat and encourages the United Nations to
continue its work with that body.

13-3296013

S/PV.6964

The international community has a collective
responsibility for tackling terrorism. Only through
continued cooperation and recognition of the need to
strengthen collaborative efforts will States be able to
effectively counter terrorism.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me, first of all, express my thanks to the Permanent
Representatives of the Republic of Korea, Morocco and
Australia for their informative briefings and for the
work they are doing at the head of the subsidiary bodies
that they are chairing. I wish to express the gratitude of
our delegation for the way in which they are conducting
the work of the three Committees.
Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
is a threat to human life and dignity, to peaceful
coexistence and to international peace and security.
In saying that, I also say that my country, Argentina,
fully believes that the United Nations has a central role
to play in the multilateral action being undertaken. We
therefore believe that the General Assembly and the
Security Council and its relevant bodies are the most
appropriate forums for efficient action to prevent and
eradicate terrorism.
The work carried out by the three Committees we
are considering today on combating terrorism is vital to
ensuring effective action on the part of the international
community in that regard. Therefore, continued
cooperation among the Committees and its Groups
of Experts will undoubtedly make a contribution to
bolstering coordination and consistency across United
Nations counter-terrorism activities. We also believe
that holding open briefings is a very useful outreach
tool to spread information about the work of the
Committees and for maintaining an ongoing dialogue
with all Member States, so much so that we must
continue to stress that greater participation by Member
States in open meetings of the Security Council is a
goal worth achieving.
A major challenge for the international community
in combating terrorism is that of avoiding any chance
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and their
delivery systems falling into the hands of terrorists. In
that regard, resolution 1540 (2004) and its Committee
is a key instrument in that it urges States to adopt or
strengthen their national monitoring systems in order
to prevent the proliferation of such weapons.
Argentina is firmly committed to the non-proliferation
of WMDs and their delivery systems, while it develops

14

and implements dual-use technologies for peaceful
purposes to further economic growth, scientific and
technological innovation and sustainable development.
In that respect, I wish to recall the fact that Argentina
is the only Latin American country to be a part of the
five export-control regimes. Furthermore, pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent resolutions, my
country has submitted its national reports and updates
highlighting the domestic legislation that has been
adopted to comply with our international obligations
and which is under constant discussion and review.
In addition, Argentina is one of the six countries that,
pursuant to resolution 1977 (2011), have submitted
national action plans defining our priorities and plans
in implementation of the fundamental provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004).
Beyond our national endeavours, we believe that
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) must be
carried out through a regional approach adapted to the
specificities of each instance, as the effective control
of technologies and dual-use materials is possible only
possible by means of real harmonization of operational
and legislative efforts in each region. The Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) therefore
carries out extremely important work in providing
international assistance and cooperation, which, we
believe, must be maintained and strengthened, thus
building States’ capacities to implement the resolution.
As we approach the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004) next year, Argentina, like
others, believes that it is important for the Committee
to adopt a creative approach, keeping in mind the
specificities of each State to ensure the universal
implementation of the resolution and submission of
reports.
The efficacy of international efforts to combat
terrorism is contingent upon the ability of each State
to adopt and implement national measures within the
framework of the specific features of each region. In
that regard, the Counter-Terrorism Committee plays an
essential role in making the international community’s
efforts more effective. We believe that the new diagnostic
and assessment tools for implementation adopted by the
Committee, the implementation assessment summary
and the detailed implementation study will make it
possible to improve the Committee’s work still further
and will contribute to the fulfilment of its mandate
as it completes the efforts of the United Nations in
implementing its Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy

13-32960

S/PV.6964

and the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force.
We emphasize the importance of the special
meeting held this year on strengthening cooperation
and technical assistance to States of the Sahel region, as
well as the special events on the use of new information
and communications technologies in combatting
terrorism and the strengthening of States’ capacities
to fight terrorism on their borders. I also highlight the
important work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate in assisting the Committee and
in strengthening the capacities of States. I note in
particular its work with respect to human rights as a
cross-cutting element in the fight against terrorism.
Argentina reaffirms that terrorism must be fought
in the framework of the rule of law and respect for
fundamental guarantees. In that context, I thank the
Executive Directorate and the Committee for their visit
to the Argentine Republic in 2012. We believe that
visits to States are a very useful tool for monitoring the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) in the context
of the circumstances of each country and the nature of
the potential terrorist threats it faces.
Finally, I refer to the work of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
concerning which we highlight the improvements
made in the consideration of requests for exclusion,
and in particular the work of the Ombudsman. On
the basis of the independence that it has developed its
work, we believe that proposals should be considered
to strengthen its mandate and replicate its experience
in other Sanctions Committees. We understand that
the Security Council should continue to ensure that
sanctions enforcement bodies become ever more
efficient and transparent, and that they are endowed
with appropriate mechanisms to follow up and review
the measures taken.
I reiterate our support for all initiatives that
contribute to strengthening coordination and
cooperation among the three Committees and their
expert groups, including through information briefings
like today’s. That will undoubtedly improve the
Security Council’s contribution to the fight against
terrorism, as it will encourage greater cooperation and
commitment among Member States in improving the
implementation of the relevant resolutions.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like first to thank the Ambassadors of Australia,

Morocco and the Republic of Korea for their informative
briefings and for the great skill and dedication with
which they lead the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council under their respective responsibility.
These joint meetings are very useful for examining
terrorist threats from a wider perspective. They also
contribute to strengthening the coordination and
coherence of the activities of the system.
With last year’s adoption of resolution 2083 (2012),
we have helped to improve the effectiveness of the United
Nations sanctions regime as a tool to combat terrorism
and to strengthen the Organization’s legitimacy.
However, this is an ongoing objective; much remains
to be done and we are confident we will find a way to
harmonize the political processes with the law. We look
forward with interest to the forthcoming negotiations
on renewing the mandate of the Committee established
to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), which will
offer an opportunity to improve and strengthen the
credibility of the sanctions regime.
The process of including and removing names on
the list should be guided by the same set of principles:
fairness, credibility and transparency. Only thus can
we ensure that sanctions lists are truly effective. We
hope that as we move forward, we will keep this crucial
requirement in mind above all.
It is essential that all sanctions regimes established
by the Security Council be fair and transparent in
their operation. They must ensure due process in their
working procedures and decision-making. Important
steps to tat end include enhancing the powers of the
Ombudsperson and reforms of the delisting procedures.
The Ombudsperson is now better positioned to play an
important role in helping people in the consideration
of their cases. We must ensure that this is done in a
way that strengthens our ability to combat terrorism,
and that it has no impact on the functioning of other
sanctions regimes. Of particular interest to us would be
extend the mandating of the Ombudsperson to cover all
Sanctions Committees. I congratulate Kimberly Prost
for the independence, professionalism and courage with
which she performs your job.
We commend the role of the Monitoring Team of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) at a time when the nature of the threat is
evolving, and we recommend seeking ways to update
the sanctions provided for in resolution 1267 (1999).
This regime of sanctions is one of the most important

13-3296015

S/PV.6964

multilateral tools for combating terrorism available to
the international community. Mr. Evans and his team
have our full support in the effective discharge of its
mandate.
In regard to the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), the terrorist attacks
that have occurred recently are another sad reminder to
us all that we must stay the course towards achieving
the goals we have set in order to combat and ultimately
eliminate terrorism. This work began with the adoption
of resolution 1373 (2001). We note that the United
Nations has made significant progress in the fight
against terrorism since the adoption of that resolution.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate deserves special mention for its contribution
to helping States keep up with the evolution of the risks
and threats posed by terrorism. The close interaction of
the Executive with Member States is a prerequisite for
the effectiveness of the work of the Committee and the
full implementation of the commitments made in the
fight against terrorism.
We also commend the hard work of the Executive
Directorate at the conclusion of the review of
instruments for the assessment of the implementation
of the resolution. The revised evaluation process not
only ensures transparency, consistency and objectivity
in the summaries of the Committee, but also extends
many areas of cooperation between the Committee and
Member States.
We encourage to the Executive Directorate to
pursue its activities in capacity-building and offering
technical assistance to countries that request it. Of
particular importance is the need for greater emphasis
on the conditions conducive to the existence and spread
of terrorism. We believe that the effectiveness of our
efforts in the fight against terrorism is related to our
ability to successfully meet the economic, social and
political that often feed this phenomenon.
Finally, we support the initiatives of the CounterTerrorism Committee aimed at promoting the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). We commend the Committee for defining such
thematic issues as the role of central authorities in
improving international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. We look forward to the scheduled events in
2013.
Finally, regarding the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), there is no doubt that
16

resolution 1540 (2004) is an important complementary
tool for preventing weapons of mass destruction, their
delivery systems and related materials from falling into
the hands of non-State actors, in particular terrorists.
The Council recognizes the value of the Committee
and the importance of its work, as demonstrated by the
renewal of its mandate until 2021 through resolution
1977 (2011), which also defines the role of the Security
Council in these areas and creates conditions for
promoting related multilateral efforts.
The 1540 Committee plays a key role in coordinating
and increasing the effectiveness of these efforts. As the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004) approaches, we believe that its chairmanship is
leading the Committee down the right track, inter alia,
by exploring ways to improve the implementation of
the resolution and the number of reports by Member
States. Likewise, it is important that the Committee and
its Group of Experts continue to promote furthering
intensification by the international community of its
activities to combat proliferation risks and threats. In
particular, we believe that cooperation between the
Committee and international organizations, including
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
must be continued and deepened.
The 1540 Committee is furthermore an indispensible
mechanism for the support and assistance it provides to
Member States in strengthening and developing their
capacities to tackle those threats. Guatemala recognizes
and welcomes that work and we urge the Committee
to continue seeking means to facilitate communication
between donors and States that request assistance.
We accord the highest importance to the work of
the Group of Experts established by resolution 1977
(2011). In that context, we welcome that the Group’s
new experts have already taken up their duties, as noted
in the previous briefing. Without the support provided
by those experts to Member States, and to developing
countries in particular, it would be very difficult for us
to establish action plans, produce national reports or
make progress on measures to implement the provisions
of resolution 1540 (2004).
Furthermore, the Group of Experts provides
significant support to the Committee’s working groups.
We reiterate that it would be useful to diversify the
13-32960

S/PV.6964

Group of Experts, in particular by incorporating experts
from developing countries. Such a decision would be
very helpful in promoting ever greater understanding
and application regarding these important issues among
a great number of Member States.
We reaffirm our unequivocal commitment to
achieving the goals of a safer world, free of weapons of
mass destruction and nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons. We therefore attach great importance to this
Committee and have, since the beginning of the year,
been honoured to coordinate the working group on
monitoring and national implementation, in which we
hope to make a constructive contribution to the work of
the Committee.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Let me join others
in thanking Ambassadors Kim Sook of the Republic
of Korea, Gary Quinlan of Australia and Mohammed
Loulichki of Morocco for their respective statements. I
take this opportunity to commend their efforts and the
activities undertaken by their respective Committees
under their able leadership.
We welcome the holding of this briefing today,
which we believe is timely, ahead of the debate on the
challenges of the debate on the challenges of the fight
against terrorism against Africa to be presided over
on Monday by His Excellency Mr. Faure Gnassingbé,
President of Togo. We believe that the focus on this topic
in the month of May demonstrates the commitment of
Togo and African countries to combat terrorism on the
continent and in every corner of the world.
My delegation welcomes the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s initiative to organize a special event this
year focusing on a key aspect for the Committee’s
mandate. We welcome in particular the topics chosen
for the special events — the use of communication and
information technologies, technical assistance to States
in the Sahel and enhancing the capacity of States to
counter terrorism. Indeed, those topics address the main
concerns of the moment in the fight against terrorism.
In the same vein, we express our continued
engagement with international and regional partners,
both bilaterally and multilaterally, to contribute to
enhanced coordination of international efforts to
prevent and combat terrorism.
We applaud the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011), concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, for its continued contribution to the fight

against terrorism. We commend the transparent work
of the Ombudsperson and support the regular review of
the Al-Qaida sanctions list as an essential element for
maintaining accuracy and responding to the changing
nature of the threat. We therefore urge designated
States to cooperate and share information with the
Ombudsperson in order to better serve justice.
We further welcome the listing of Malian terrorist
groups, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western
Africa and Ansar Dine, for their close ties with Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, as well as other individuals
associated with those groups.
We are alarmed by the scourge of terrorism in
Mali and the African continent, and we hope that
the 1267-1989 Committee will plan an important
role in that regard, in full cooperation with national
Governments and with peacekeeping missions, such as
the newly established United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. We encourage
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate to support
and coordinate with the African Centre for Studies
and Research on Terrorism, whose mission is to
strengthen among between African countries in order
to prevent and combat terrorism and to assist in the full
implementation of international conventions relating to
terrorism.
Rwanda is firmly committed to the non-proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, as they
continue to threaten international peace and security.
We are deeply concerned by information on the use of
chemical weapons in the Syrian conflict, and we hope
that investigations will continue to be carried out in
an independent manner to shed light on this serious
development in the Syrian conflict.
Rwanda is committed to the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and we are encouraged by the
fact that ever more countries are submitting national
reports. We call on the remaining countries to submit
their reports, and we hope that they will continue to
benefit form the support of the Committee and the
Group of Experts in order to ensure that all countries
are on-board by the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004), in April next year.
We take this opportunity to commend the efforts of
the 1540 Committee in raising global awareness about
the resolution, in strengthening the capacity of States,
in improving mechanisms for sharing best practices

13-3296017

S/PV.6964

and in promoting synergy with other international
organizations and United Nations institutions, in
particular the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs.
We emphasize the need to collaborate with regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union. In that regard, we believe that the practice of
holding workshops on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) specifically organized for African States
must be pursued, as the remaining countries are mainly
on the African continent.
It is encouraging that the three Committees are
closely cooperating on key thematic areas of interest
to all by coordinating on the implementation of
projects, regularly exchanging information and best
practices, as well as improving collaboration with
regional and subregional organizations. We encourage
them to strengthen that cooperation, in particular by
implementing the specific recommendations that
Ambassador Kim Sook presented in his joint statement
on behalf of the three Chairs.
In conclusion, we once again commend the efforts
of the three Committees to enhancing the visibility of
United Nations counterterrorism activities, the fight
against weapons of mass destruction and cooperation
with global and regional organizations with a view to
making the world a safer place.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank
Ambassadors Kim, Quinlan and Loulichki, Chairs,
respectively, of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, the
Counterterrorism Committee and the 1540 Committee,
for their briefings today. We appreciate the efforts
made by the three Committees to promote greater
transparency and dialogue with Member States.
Pakistan’s comprehensive approach to counterterrorism is based on three “Ds”, namely, deterrence,
development and dialogue. Deterrence is necessary to
impede, impair, isolate and incapacitate the terrorist
threat. Development helps to meet basic human needs,
build community resilience and prevent terrorism.
Dialogue is equally important: those who are willing to
renounce violence should be brought back to national
and societal mainstreams.
Terrorism continues to mutate into new and more
sinister forms. Terrorists use new information and
communication technologies, as well as the Internet,
for recruitment and incitement and for planning and
financing their activities. We should address the root
18

causes of terrorism; deprivation, marginalization,
exclusion and stereotyping often create the conditions
for a drift towards terrorism. That drift should be
halted. Our collective and national measures to counter
all forms of financing of terrorism, including through
the proceeds of organized crime and illicit narcotics
trafficking, should be made more effective. Counterterrorism efforts must adapt to such challenges and
develop strategies for real-time quick responses.
We agree with the Chair of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities that
Al-Qaida still poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. The experiment of focusing the
1989 Committee’s work on Africa is timely. Today, the
traditional Al-Qaida organization is a shadow of its
former self. The nature of the threat, even if diffused,
is much more complex. Al-Qaida has splintered into
disparate cells. Its affiliates thrive on local grievances;
many do not have a global agenda. Moreover, the
phenomenon of individuals radicalized by extremist
websites is not always based on their formal association
with or membership of Al-Qaida or other terrorist
groups. In many instances, terrorists do not require
elaborate financing arrangements or visits to training
camps and safe havens. All that is needed is electronic
safe havens and some websites providing inspiration
and training materials.
We hope that while addressing traditional issues,
such as travel bans and assets-freezes, in an effective
manner, the Committee will also pay attention to
the changing forms of the threat posed by Al-Qaida
affiliates and self-radicalized individuals or lone
wolves. We appreciate the recent efforts to introduce
fair and clear procedures into the Al-Qaida Committee
and to strengthen the role of the Ombudsperson. It
remains to be seen whether those changes will satisfy
courts around the world, since the legal community
is more likely to require verifiable evidence that is
acceptable in a court of law. The questions of due
process and effective remedy are at the heart of courts’
deliberations. We hope that the Ombudsperson’s
positive contribution will have an exemplary effect on
other sanctions regimes. We support the work of the
Monitoring Team on updating narrative summaries
of reasons for listing, and welcome its new head,
Mr. Alexander Evans.
We support the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to build States’ capacities to implement

13-32960

S/PV.6964

resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We appreciate
the Committee’s focus on the use of new communication
technologies and technical assistance in the Sahel
region in its planned special events later this year. We
commend Mr. Mike Smith for his outstanding leadership
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). CTED has done substantial
work in updating the format of the preliminary
implementation assessment. Even if all questions of the
newly introduced detailed implementation survey are
not strictly based on resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), we are confident that it will prove to be a useful
diagnostic tool for facilitating technical assistance to
Member States. The CTED seminars on specific teams
and various regions have been useful. We are planning
to hold our regional seminar on counter-terrorism for
police officers, prosecutors and judges in South Asia in
Islamabad in the near future.
Pakistan has made considerable progress in
countering terrorist financing and controlling borders.
We have deployed 150,000 troops on the PakistanAfghanistan border, and set up 822 posts in order to
intercept Al-Qaida and Taliban members. Pakistan
has become a party to the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, and
has enacted a landmark anti-money-laundering law. A
financial monitoring unit has been established in the
State Bank of Pakistan to track suspicious financial
transactions. Hundreds of bank accounts have been
frozen. We are implementing the recommendations
of the Financial Action Task Force. Pakistan is an
active member of the Asia/Pacific Group on Money
Laundering. Since the most recent briefing to the
Council (S/PV.6862), Pakistan’s Parliament has passed
two new laws on counter-terrorism and a national
counter-terrorism authority.
The full and effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) by all States remains one of the key tools
for preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors. The Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004)
and its Group of Experts play an important and
complementary role in relation to the treaty-based
regimes and international organizations in the field of
non-proliferation. We support the efforts undertaken
by the 1540 Committee and its experts in areas such
as awareness-raising, outreach implementation and
assistance in capacity-building. We commend the Group
of Experts’ valuable assistance to the Committee, and

particularly recognize the professional contribution of
Mr. Terence Taylor and his able associates.
In our view, the long-term impact and success
of the 1540 Committee will depend on the role
it can play in mobilizing assistance to Member
States. Assistance in capacity-building should be
the Committee’s cornerstone for ensuring effective
national implementation by States. We support efforts
to promote cooperation and coordination among the
subsidiary bodies of the Council. That objective is best
served when such joint activities are consistent with the
mandate, independence and nature of the work of each
subsidiary body and group of experts.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Ambassadors Kim Sook, Quinlan
and Loulichki for their briefings. I appreciate their
leadership roles as the Chairs of, respectively, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC).
China appreciates the efforts of the 1540 Committee
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We support it in its steady and reliable work in raising
Member States’ awareness of resolution 1540 (2004),
as well as in promoting the exchange of experiences
and assistance among them and their achievement of
various resolution goals in a comprehensive, balanced
and effective manner. We hope they will smoothly
complete the annual renewal of their programmes
of work. China is ready to work together with all in
participating in the Committee’s work and advancing
the international non-proliferation process.
The Al-Qaida Committee remains an important
mechanism for counter-terrorism at the Security
Council’s disposal. In accordance with resolutions 1989
(2011) and 2083 (2012), it recently updated its guidelines,
improved its exemptions procedures, strengthened its
review of listing and delisting requests and updated its
sanctions list, while maintaining good cooperation with
the Ombudsperson and the Monitoring Team. China
appreciates all these efforts. We support the Committee
as it continues to work in a cautious, objective and
organized fashion, and we hope that Member States
will continue to support and cooperate with its work in
order to protect the authority and effectiveness of the
sanctions regime.

13-3296019

S/PV.6964

China appreciates the efforts of the CTC in
comprehensively implementing resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). We support its work, carried
out with the help of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, in improving the preliminary
implementation assessment and related work, promoting
the exchange of information and experiences, and
providing technical assistance through workshops and
other activities, such as the special events on enhancing
cooperation and technical assistance to States in the
Sahel region to strengthen their capacity in the global
fight against terrorism and on enhancing the capacity
of States to counter terrorism at their borders through
technical assistance the sharing of good practices. We
hope the Committee will continue its dialogue with
Member States, strengthen its cooperation with other
United Nations agencies and help Member States,
especially developing countries, in capacity-building
in the fight against terrorism.
China rejects terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. China rejects any double standard in
dealing with counter-terrorism. We support the United
Nations and the Security Council in the international
cooperative effort against terrorism. We hope that the
international community will continue to cooperate in
the common effort to prevent and combat terrorism.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to begin
by thanking Ambassadors Kim Sook, Gary Quinlan
and Mohammed Loulichki for their briefings and
extensive updates on actions taken over the past six
months. We are grateful for their excellent work and
leadership of the Security Council Committees with
counter-terrorism mandates.
Although the international community has
achieved remarkable progress in countering terrorism,
more should be done to prevent and combat that
scourge. Terrorism continues to pose a serious threat
to international peace and security and to the political
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and social and economic development of all States.
Azerbaijan has consistently and continually taken
measures to implement its respective international
obligations and to contribute to international counterterrorism efforts.
We know all about the scourge of terrorism, and
not from hearsay. My country has repeatedly been
a target of terrorist attacks that have claimed the
lives of thousands of our citizens. It was therefore
no coincidence that Azerbaijan decided to focus
20

on strengthening international cooperation in the
implementation of counter-terrorism obligations as a
central theme of its presidency of the Security Council
in 2012. As an important outcome of that, a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2012/17) was adopted.
On 18 and 19 March, we hosted an international
conference on strengthening cooperation in preventing
terrorism, which was jointly organized by the
Government of Azerbaijan, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the Islamic Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, and attended
by representatives of over 50 States and international
organizations, including the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). The
objective of the conference was to focus on cooperation
in developing and undertaking measures to address
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism,
dialogue, understanding and countering stereotypes
and the appeal of terrorism, and the role of international
partners in building State capacity to prevent and
combat terrorism.
The role and work of all three Committees in the
prevention and response to terrorist threats remain
vitally important. Azerbaijan strongly supports the
close cooperation and effective coordination among the
Committees and their groups of experts.
During the reporting period, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) continued
to successfully implement its mandate by supporting
and assisting Member States in preventing terrorist
acts, both within their respective territories and across
regions. We commend CTED for its close interaction
with Member States, including country visits, which
continue to contribute to the effectiveness of both
the Committee’s work and the full implementation of
counter-terrorism commitments. Azerbaijan supported
the proposed subjects for the special meeting and two
other special events that covered emerging issues of
international concern, and we are confident that they
will help to raise awareness and reveal the shortcomings
in the fight against terrorism.
The revision of documents and procedures related
to the assessment of Member States’ implementation
of the Security Council’s counter-terrorism resolutions
was an important milestone in the Committee’s work
during the reporting period. We agree with the Chair of
the Committee that the revised documents will facilitate
the identification of challenges faced by Member States
13-32960

S/PV.6964

and the delivery of targeted technical assistance in that
regard.
Significant steps were taken during the reporting
period to reinforce the procedures of the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime. We note some important changes
introduced by the adoption of resolution 2083 (2012),
in particular the extension of the mandate of the
Monitoring Team and the Office of the Ombudsperson,
which will contribute to strengthening due process and
transparency. We reiterate the importance of the Office
of the Ombudsperson as an essential element of fairness
in the application of the sanctions regime.
The work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) remains of vital importance.
We take positive note of a number of important events
held during the reporting period in various countries,
focused on promoting the goals of resolution 1540
(2004) and on capacity-building and assistance. I take
this opportunity to express our gratitude to the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia for having organized, last month, a
high-level event on preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors and
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in the
Arab world.
Areas of armed conflict, especially territories under
foreign military occupation, often create conditions
conducive to exploitation by terrorist, separatist and
other non-State actors. The accumulation of a great
number of armaments and munitions in places beyond
the reach of international control and the risk of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and related
materials to non-State actors pose a serious threat
to international peace and security that requires the
diligent implementation by all States of their respective
commitments and strengthened cooperation among
them in order to effectively address such challenges.
Last but not least, the war on terrorism should
not be used to target any particular religion or
culture. That principle must be part and parcel of any
counter-terrorism strategy. We stress the vital need
for joint efforts and dialogue to counter defamatory
manifestations and misconceptions, in particular within
the framework of such initiatives as the culture of peace
and the Alliance of Civilizations.
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): I naturally align myself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to thank Ambassadors Kim, Quinlan
and Loulichki for their briefings. We note in particular
that in the joint briefing, the opportunities for synergies
between the Committees was highlighted.
With respect to the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), we
highlight once again the extent to which the threat from
Al-Qaida, in various forms and degrees, continues to
affect every Member State. The most visible and the
most worrying manifestation are spreading to cover
entire regions. TheAl-Qaida Sanctions Committee
plays an indispensable role in addressing that threat.
Its decisions, which must be implemented by all, are
an essential tool. If this system is to continue to be
effective, several elements are, in our view, crucial.
First, the list of persons and entities subject to
sanctions should follow the evolution of the threat, and
the adoption of resolution 2089 (2012) in December
2012, by extending the criteria for listing, has
contributed to that. The regular updating of the list is
essential. To that end, we encourage all Member States
to continue to submit to the Committee requests for
inclusions on the list, so that the list can best reflect
the state of the threat. It is indeed in that spirit that
the Security Council has called for the adoption of
sanctions against groups linked to Al-Qaida operating
in Mali, including the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
Western Africa and Ansar Dine. In that regard, I would
like to commend the initiative taken by the Australian
presidency to organize thematic meetings on those
groups.
If the list is to be credible, the mechanism and
procedures for delisting must respect the fundamental
freedoms of people on the list. By creating and then
strengthening the mandate of the Ombudsperson, recent
resolutions have allowed for progress to be made towards
that goal by improving safeguards. The adoption of
resolution 2089 (2013) has strengthened the institution
of the Ombudsperson by making it sustainable and by
improving support and increasing the transparency of
its procedures. The work of Ms. Prost remains essential
for us.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), France attaches particular
importance to its work in promoting the exchange
of experiences. The presentation made yesterday by
Saudi Arabia from the Prince Mohammed Bin Nayef
Centre for Counselling and Care is an example of that.

13-3296021

S/PV.6964

We also welcome the initiative taken by the Moroccan
Chair to organize special meetings on specific themes.
Capacity-building in the fight against terrorism in the
Sahel States and the prevention of terrorism through
new technologies are excellent topics that will give
added value to our work.
I further wish to acknowledge the work done
by Mike Smith and the entire Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate in helping the Committee to
revise the procedures by which States report on their
implementation of the resolutions to the Committee. I
note in particular the meeting on 2 May that introduced
new evaluation documents, which was an excellent
initiative. The large number of participants are a
testament to the relevance of that tool.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), like others I underscore the
fact that the possibility that radiological, biological,
chemical or nuclear weapons could fall into the hands
of non-State actors or terrorists is a real danger that
concerns us all. Resolution 1540 (2004) plays a key
role in the prevention of those risks. In that regard, we
welcome the progress achieved in the implementation
of the resolution since its adoption in 2004.
Today, a large majority of States have taken
steps to implement the provisions of that resolution.
Universality seems achievable. We commend the
efforts of the South Korean chairmanship to bring us
as close as possible to universality on the occasion of
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the resolution
in 2014. Now fully staffed, the Group of Experts will be
all the more able to assist the Committee in its outreach
work. Country visits allow for privileged dialogue on
the implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004). In that connection, we welcome the recent trip
of Ambassador Kim Sook and that of several experts to
Trinidad and Tobago.
The Committee plays a key role in assisting the
implementation of the provisions of the resolution. In
that regard, we note the request of the Central American
Integration System, and we hope that it will be dealt
with and responded to as soon as possible.
Certainly, much remains to be done. We must
continue to strengthen cooperation of the 1540
Committee with other international actors, particularly
in the area of assistance. One of the areas of dialogue
that we believe should be strengthened and continued

22

is that with the Group of Eight Global Partnership on
that topic.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Like
previous speakers, I wish to thank the three Chairs of
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004) — Ambassadors Gary Quinlan, Mohammed
Loulichki and Kim Sook, respectively — for their
detailed briefings and for the efficiency and commitment
with which they steer the work of the Committees. I
thank Ambassador Kim Sook for his joint briefing,
which clearly illustrated the increasing cooperation
among the three Committees.
It is important to remember why the Council
regularly organizes these information meetings. The
news unfortunately shows that terrorism remains a
major threat to peace and international security. The
three Committees under discussion are at the forefront
of the efforts of the United Nations to fight that threat.
However, the Committees’ work is effective only if
all Member States take the measures necessary to
uphold their obligations. Today’s open briefings are
therefore important because they allow the Council to
transparently demonstrate to all Member States what
its subsidiary bodies are doing in the fight against
terrorism and to listen to the concerns of Member
States in that area.
I associate myself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.
In that regard, I wish to underscore that the fight
against terrorism must be guided by fundamental
democratic values ​​
and respect for the principle of
the rule of law. We commend the measures taken by
the Security Council in recent years to ensure the
implementation of clear, fair and transparent procedures
in the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities. Resolution 2083 (2012) brought
significant changes to the sanctions regime, making it
more efficient and transparent. We must continue to
improve those procedures within the Council.
Luxembourg fully supports the Office of the
Ombudsperson created in December 2009, whose
mandate was enhanced and extended in December 2012
for a period of 30 months, until June 2015. We thank
Ms. Kimberly Prost for the exemplary manner in which
she carries out her mandate. We call on all Member

13-32960

S/PV.6964

States to continue to fully cooperate with the Office of
the Ombudsman in all cases.
The events of recent months in Mali and the Sahel
have demonstrated the evolution of the terrorist threat
and the need for ongoing updating of the sanctions list
in order to maintain the relevance and effectiveness
of the regime established by resolution 1267 (1999).
Given the threat of Al-Qaida and its affiliated groups
in Africa, the Security Council has adapted its response
to effectively fight the terrorist scourge, making
use of all the tools at its disposal. In its resolutions
2085 (2012) and 2100 (2013), the Council reaffirmed
its determination to punish individuals, groups,
enterprises or entities that will not break their ties with
Al-Qaida and its affiliated groups, such as Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb. The 1267 Committee applied
Al-Qaida sanctions to the Mouvement pour l’unicité
et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest and Ansar Dine, as
well as to the leaders of those groups and individuals
associated with it. We also encourage cooperation
between the 1267 Committee and the Monitoring Team
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, pursuant to paragraph 31
of resolution 2100 (2013).
Luxembourg also attaches great importance to the
work of the 1373 Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), particularly
to their outreach role. Given the current state of the
terrorist threat, it is necessary to strengthen programmes
for capacity-building of the Sahel States. In that
context, we welcome the Rabat conference on bordercontrol cooperation in the Sahel and the Maghreb,
jointly organized by CTED, the United Nations Centre
for Counter-Terrorism and the Government of Morocco,
which was held from 13 to 15 March. We also welcome
the fact that the Committee will organize again this
year a special meeting on cooperation and technical
assistance to States in the Sahel region in order to
strengthen their capacity in the fight against terrorism.
I would also like to underscore the important
in-depth analysis work done by the Executive Directorate
with regard to Member States’ implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions. Work reviewing
the assessment tools has been under way for several
months to improve the quality and the clarity of the
analyses provided by CTED. We note with satisfaction
that the Executive Directorate has introduced a new
mechanism, which was presented to Member States
at an open meeting of the Committee on 2 May. We

are confident that it will further improve the work of
the Committee by better identifying the problems
faced by Member States and thereby better targeting
technical assistance to help Member States in solving
their problems. I take this opportunity to express our
sincere thanks to the Executive Director, Mr. Mike
Smith, whose term ends on 30 June, for his work at the
head of CTED.
The risk of the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security; no State can
solve that problem alone. The possibility of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) falling into the hands
of non-State actors or terrorists is a real danger that
concerns us all. With the presence of chemical weapons
in Syria being confirmed, we are extremely concerned
about the security of those stockpiles and about the risk
of uncontrolled proliferation, which would be disastrous
for the stability of the region. In that regard, it is urgent
that the commission of inquiry set up by the SecretaryGeneral travel to Syria and that it be provided with
full access so as to enable it to investigate all credible
allegations of the use of chemical weapons.
Resolution 1540 (2004) plays a key role in preventing
the risk of proliferation, but its effective implementation
requires the commitment and cooperation of all States.
In that respect, the work of the 1540 Committee is of
particular importance. We urge all Member States to
report to the Committee on their efforts. We support the
objective of the Chair of the Committee to achieve by
next year, if possible, the universality of reports, so as
to mark the tenth anniversary of the 1540 Committee.
Cooperation, the exchange of information and
outreach and support activities all are important factors
in building the capacities necessary to counter the risk
of the proliferation of WMDs. The Committee, with the
support of its new panel of experts, is in a good position
to provide assistance and technical advice.
In concluding, Mr. President, I should like to
congratulate your country, Togo, on having taken the
initiative to convene on Monday a debate on the com,bat
against terrorism in Africa. The threat of terrorism
should indeed be a matter of priority for the Council.
While we have seen significant progress in the fight
against that scourge, we must remain vigilant. We must
continue our collective efforts so as to better combat
and eventually eradicate the terrorist threat, which is
constantly evolving.

13-3296023

S/PV.6964

The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Togo.
I would like at the outset to thank most warmly
the Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004), the Ambassadors of Australia,
Morocco and the Republic of Korea, for their briefings
on the activities of their Committees and for their
commitment to ensure the effective discharge of the
mandates that the Council has entrusted to those three
subsidiary bodies.
I should like also to express our gratitude to the
Ombudsperson and to the expert panels of the various
Committees for their work.
In my statement, I will address the cooperation
among the three Committees and stress the importance
of assisting and strengthening States’ capacities,
particularly in the case of those with the scarcest
resources, where the need is most acute.
Cooperation remains the most appropriate way of
ensuring efficient and effective action against terrorism.
That cooperation, which is being developed among the
various counter-terrorist bodies, among States and
between States and those bodies, must be bolstered
as concerns the discharge by the subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council of their respective mandates.
That cooperation is even more important inasmuch
as it makes it possible to rationalize the efforts of the
various stakeholders and to avoid any duplication of
effort or wasting of energy.
In that regard, Togo wishes to welcome the
multifaceted cooperation that has been institutionalized
among the Committees, particularly as concerns
outreach and country visits and cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
Those mechanisms provide opportunities for the three
Committees to remind all parties concerned of their
obligations under the various relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
It goes without saying that the convening of
meetings and information exchange make it possible
to achieve the goal of zero tolerance for terrorism,
preventing it and combating it in all its forms and
manifestations by means, inter alia, of the creation of
formal networks of counter-terrorism professionals.
Technical assistance and capacity-building
are another key element of the mechanisms for the

24

combating of terrorism. Recent developments in the
activities of terrorist groups, particularly in the Sahel
region and in Mali, have shown that the capacities and
the military and security abilities of States may on
occasion be outdistanced by the ability of terrorists
to adapt and to mobilize considerable military and
financial resources.
Against that backdrop, States must express their
needs in the areas associated with the fight against
terrorism. The shortcomings and difficulties faced by
States in implementing their obligations, which are
often identified in the reports that they submit pursuant
to the implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1540
(2004) and 1373 (2001), could be used to determine
their requirements in terms of capacity-building and
support. In cases where reports are not submitted,
the States concerned should be induced to produce
them by making available to them the expertise of the
Committees and their panels.
Hence my country deems necessary the repeated
requests to States to appoint national focal points to
the various Committees. It also supports the carrying
out of country visits by the Committees, and the
maintenance of ongoing relations with the Permanent
Missions in New York and Geneva so as to ensure a
liaison with capitals. That could contribute to giving
new impetus to cooperation among the Committees on
the one hand and among the Committees, States and
regional cooperation on the other.
The combat against terrorism must be based on,
inter alia, the collection and exploitation of information
in order to detect and identify actors that pose a threat,
identify their facilities and understand their strategies.
Such work requires many skills and considerable
resources and cannot be carried out in isolation. There
must therefore be participation by all States. National
action must therefore be supported by that of other
countries and take place within the framework of
bilateral, regional and international cooperation, which
must be based on the exchange of experiences and
expertise.
Moreover, we believe that the improvement of
documents, the preliminary implementation assessment
and the detailed implementation survey reflect the
commitment of the 1373 Committee to learn more
about the challenges facing States and their needs in
order to respond appropriately thereto.

13-32960

S/PV.6964

In that respect, we congratulate the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate on all of
the activities undertaken to that end, in particular the
workshops and meetings it has convened with a view to
helping certain States with respect to specific issues in
order to help them better understand the phenomenon
of terrorism and the means available to them to combat
it.
In that connection, the workshop held in December
2012 for the countries of the West African Economic
and Monetary Union, which Togo is currently chairing,
deserves special praise. The various workshops,
which were announced by the three Chairs, represent
ways of building the capacities of States and regional
organizations.
In conclusion, I would like to note that the tenth
anniversary of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) will soon be upon us. With only a few months
left until that event, which will permit us to take stock
of the road travelled, it is relevant to note that the spike
in terrorist activities and the proliferation of criminal
groups highlight the need to give new momentum to
United Nations action. That is how the international
community will be able to avert the danger posed by
terrorist and criminal groups, as well as non-State
actors, which adapt easily to all measures to counter
them and which have at their disposal considerable
technological capacity and are able to acquire
weapons of mass destruction and precursors for their
manufacture.
Togo is especially pleased that this meeting is taking
place on the eve of the Council’s high-level debate on
Monday on the issue of terrorism in Africa, over which
Togo’s President will have the honour to preside.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would like to congratulate
you, Ambassador Menan, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month,
as well as to thank you for convening this important
meeting. I would also like to express my appreciation
to the Chairs of the Committees for their informative
briefings earlier and for their professional work.
Israel remains under constant threat from terrorist
organizations. Rockets rain down on our towns and
cities, launched by Hamas in the south. On our northern

border, Hizbullah is exploiting the crisis in Syria to
further undermine regional stability.
Israel has confronted terrorism since well before
its founding. For years, terrorism was an abstract
concept for many in the international community. They
believed acts of terror were a limited problem best
dealt with locally. Today we know that terrorism can
strike anywhere at any time. It is a growth industry
working around the clock to expand into new markets.
Its mission is to undermine democracies, and its vision
is to instil fear through violence.
Like an industry, terrorism has a business
development arm devoted to money laundering and
fundraising. Terrorist organizations frequently have a
foot in the global narcotics market, operating networks
that span from West Africa to the Middle East to Latin
America.
Terrorism has a human resources division that
actively recruits new members. Across the Middle East,
terrorism and martyrdom are being glorified through
incitement that is disseminated in schools, mosques and
media outlets.
Terrorist organizations also have a well-funded
marketing arm. It uses the Internet to promote every
branch of the industry, from recruitment to instruction
and from financing to public relations.
And of course, there is the operations division
that equips followers with hateful ideology and deadly
weapons.
It takes an industry to defeat an industry. Israel
is working closely with many States and regional
organizations to advance counterterrorism cooperation.
That reflects our belief that terrorism can be effectively
confronted only through international cooperation. No
State should stand alone in that mission.
The counter-terrorism Committees are essential
to global efforts to isolate terrorists. Israel appreciates
their dedicated work, as well as that of other relevant
United Nations agencies. We support all four pillars of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which should be treated as a whole.
Israel commends the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) for its ongoing contributions to
coordinate action against terrorism. I want to thank
CTED’s departing Executive Director, Mike Smith, for
his many years of excellent service and leadership. We

13-3296025

S/PV.6964

also extend congratulations to CTED for concluding
its review of Member States’ implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Israel supports
every effort to make the dialogue between CTED and
Member States more simple, transparent and effective.
Israel closely followed CTED’s March briefing
on protecting non-profit organizations from terrorist
financiers. We are painfully familiar with the
exploitation of seemingly charitable funds by terrorist
groups. Hamas manages a wide array of groups that
claim to be social services organizations. I suppose
that if one considers laundering money to be a way of
cleaning up the neighborhood, then that is accurate.
Israel fully supports resolution 1540 (2004) and
the renewal of its mandate. Export-control systems and
appropriate national counter-terrorism legislation are
critical to preventing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and dual-use items.
Finally, we welcome the recent extension of
the mandate of the Ombudsperson of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee and are encouraged by the recent
improvements introduced in resolution 2083 (2012).
Israel is committed to sharing the knowledge
and experience that comes from years of combating
terrorism. Through our ongoing technical cooperation
and capacity-building projects, we seek to further
contribute to the international community’s counterterrorism efforts. Each year, Israel invites counterterrorism specialists from other nations to learn about
the latest technological advances and operational tactics
in combating terrorism. Those efforts establish strong
ties between responsible law enforcement agencies
worldwide. Countering violent extremist groups
requires ongoing collaboration among all of us.
In too many corners of the planet, all of the elements
are in place for extremists to grow the next generation
of terrorists. In this very Council, many States offer
justification for certain terrorists while condemning
others.
In Gaza, Iran is funding, training and arming
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and other terrorists. Iran has
helped Hizbullah build its arsenal to unprecedented
levels in Lebanon, amassing 50,000 deadly missiles.
Iranian agents have been involved in attacks from
Azerbaijan to India and from Thailand to Kenya. Earlier
this week, a Kenyan court sentenced two Iranians to
life in prison on terror-related charges.

26

Now we face the frightening possibility — and I
would like to emphasize this very clearly — that Hizbullah
could soon get its hands on Syria’s vast stockpiles
of chemical weapons. The threat of game-changing
weapons reaching Hizbullah is substantiated by
Nasrallah himself, who yesterday said “Syria will give
the resistance special weapons it never had before”.
The Council must act today, not tomorrow. We will not
allow Hizbullah to test our resolve. Numerous judicial
findings from around the world attest to the magnitude
and gravity of Hizbullah’s global reach. Yet, that still
isn’t enough for some European Union members to call
Hizbullah what it is: a terrorist organization. It operates
with impunity on European soil, yet some European
lawmakers continue to insist that it is a social-services
organization.
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
sets out the Security Council’s powers to maintain
peace. There is no greater threat to international
stability than those who use fundamentalism to advance
their personal ideologies and agendas. It is time for the
international community to unite and put terrorism out
of business. The Security Council must further utilize
Chapter VII to force terrorist groups to file for Chapter
7 bankruptcy. The failure to do so would be nothing
less than moral bankruptcy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Let me thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor in order to
speak on behalf of the group of like-minded States on
targeted sanctions, namely, Austria, Belgium, Costa
Rica, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein,
the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland.
As is well known, our group aims to support efforts
by the Security Council to enhance the fairness and
transparency of its various sanctions regimes, thereby
contributing to their credibility and effectiveness.
We commend the concrete actions taken by the
Security Council so far to address serious due-process
concerns regarding the Al-Qaida sanctions regime.
In particular, the Council has done the right thing
by establishing and subsequently strengthening the
Ombudsperson process. We would like to reiterate
our full support for the work of the Ombudsperson,
Ms. Kimberly Prost. She continues to fulfil her mandate
with remarkable integrity and commitment and has
made a substantial contribution to the fairness and

13-32960

S/PV.6964

effectiveness of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. The
fact that the Sanctions Committee has so far resolved
27 cases on the basis of her recommendations, and that
16 new cases are pending, speaks volumes about the
quality of her work. The Ombudsperson process and
the improved listing and de-listing procedures have
significantly contributed to the accuracy and fairness
of the Al-Qaida sanctions list. That has already been
noted by relevant actors, such as the Advocate-General
of the Court of Justice of the European Union. In his
opinion on the Kadi II case, he recently considered that
“the listing and delisting procedures within the
[Al-Qaida] Sanctions Committee provide sufficient
guarantees … to presume that the decisions taken
by that body are justified”.
We look forward to the European Court of Justice’s
final ruling in that case.
The Ombudsperson process is a success story.
Within a few years, it has gone from being a necessary
initiative to a well-established safeguard for due
process. But there is an inevitable next question: what
about other sanctions regimes? How can we explain
that fair and clear procedures are available to persons
who have been found to be associated with the terrorist
group Al-Qaida, but not to other individuals and
entities who may find themselves, rightly or wrongly,
on other sanctions lists? How can we explain a situation
where a person delisted from the Al-Qaida list appears
on another list, is subject to the sanctions of that other
regime, yet deprived of any meaningful recourse to
verify the rightful inclusion on that particular list?
We believe that the time has come for the Security
Council to consider these questions and to improve the
remedies available to individuals and entities targeted by
other sanctions regimes, addressing them on a case-bycase basis. The urgent attention given to the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime was justified in the light of the nature
and size of its list, and in the light of numerous judicial
challenges. But such challenges are also under way with
respect to other sanctions regimes. More important, the
underlying principles should apply across the board:
every individual or entity put on a Security Council
sanctions list should have the right to be informed of
the reasons for listing, the right to be heard and the
right to an effective remedy. Security Council sanctions
regimes that grant fair and clear review procedures will
benefit from improved credibility and effectiveness.

The good news is that we do not need to re-invent
the wheel. We believe that the Ombudsperson
process should, on a case-by-case basis, be gradually
extended to other appropriate sanctions regimes, in
particular those with broad criteria for listing. We are
of course fully aware that each sanctions regime and
its underlying political situation is unique, and that
some sanctions regimes are more suitable for such an
extension than others. The renewals of the Somalia
and Eritrea sanctions regime in August 2013 and of
the Liberia sanctions regime in December 2013 could
provide useful opportunities to make such progress.
We therefore respectfully call on Council members to
consider that step.
In making that request, we would like to emphasize
that the Ombudsperson process is ultimately a
mechanism to ensure the proper implementation of
Security Council decisions. Extending the mandate
would not allow the Ombudsperson to question the way
in which the Council designs sanctions regimes, nor
to overturn the criteria for listing established by the
Council. Quite to the contrary, extending the mandate
would help ensure that listings under other sanctions
regimes are in full conformity with the respective
criteria established by the Council itself, while
addressing due-process concerns that may hamper
implementation by States Members of the United
Nations.
The group of like-minded States would be glad
to provide any assistance necessary to consider such
steps, in the interest of strengthening fair and clear
procedures, and in the interest of effective sanctions
implementation. We look forward to a constructive
engagement with the Security Council in that regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): I take this
opportunity to congratulate you and your country, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.
(spoke in English)
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,

13-3296027

S/PV.6964

Iceland and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
Thank you very much, Mr. President, for having
organized this timely and important briefing.
Let me begin by expressing our appreciation to the
Committees’ Chairs for their extensive updates and
summaries of actions and initiatives taken during the
past six months.
The recent attacks in Boston, Iraq and Libya are
dreadful evidence of the fact that terrorism remains one
of the major global threats. Those were unjustifiable
acts of terror that serve as yet another grim reminder
that the terrorist threat remains real. That is why the
fight against international terrorism shall remain one
of our highest priorities, just as it should continue to
be a priority for the United Nations. The work of all
three Committees is therefore of vital importance, as
it contributes to the prevention of and the response to
terrorist threats.
We are committed to the idea that the scourge of
terrorism can be overcome only by democratic measures
that remain in compliance with the rule of law. Terrorism
needs to be fought as a crime by the law and within the
law, with full respect to due process and fundamental
rights. We welcome the fact that the Security Council
has taken significant steps to further reinforce fair and
clear procedures in the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. We
take this opportunity to commend the Ombudsperson’s
work and reiterate our support for her unwavering
efforts. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2083
(2012), which introduced some additional important
changes to the Al-Qaida sanctions regime, in particular
extending the mandate of the Monitoring Team and the
Ombudsperson and making their work more effective
and transparent. We reiterate our call on all Member
States to extend full cooperation to the Office of the
Ombudsperson in each and every case.
We welcome the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), in particular the vast
array of counter-terrorism endeavours and activities.
In the period under consideration, we participated
with great interest in a number of events focused on
countering the financing of terrorism — for instance,
in the special meeting focused on strategies regarding
preventing and suppressing terrorist financing, held in
November 2012 here in New York. In the same area, we

28

also participated in a briefing on preventing abuse of the
non-profit sector for the purposes of terrorist financing,
in March 2013, followed by an event one week later
focused on protecting non-profit organizations from
being exploited by those seeking to finance terrorism
were of great importance.
With regard to State capacity-building, which is
another crucial aspect of the fight against terrorism, we
welcome the conference on border-control cooperation
in the Sahel and the Maghreb that took place in Rabat
in March and was organized by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the Government
of Morocco. We participated actively in that important
and successful event.
As mentioned previously, we stress that all
counter-terrorism efforts must comply with the rule
of law, including international human rights, refugee
and humanitarian law. We therefore welcome efforts
aimed at underpinning that precept — for example, the
event on combating terrorism and the pursuit of justice
through cooperation organized by the Committee on
5 April.
Last but not least, we thank the Committee
and CTED for last week’s briefing on the revised
documents and procedures related to the assessment
of Member States’ implementation of Security Council
resolutions relating to counter-terrorism. It was a very
useful presentation of the improvements that have been
made to the organization of reports so as to render them
clearer, more transparent and more useful. Like others,
I wish to thank Mr. Mike Smith in particular for the
positive and useful work he has been doing as head of
CTED.
I would now like to share a few comments regarding
the regime of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). The risk of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors remains
a significant threat to international peace and security.
We should spare no effort to increase our capacity for
preventing proliferation. To that end, the work of the
1540 Committee remains of vital importance. That
goal requires a truly multi-stakeholder approach. We
therefore commend events such as the 1540 civil society
forum on opportunities for engagement held in Austria
from 8 to 10 January, as well as the Committee’s conduct
of 1540 workshops engaging civil society organized in
Pretoria and Bangkok.

13-32960

S/PV.6964

We would also like to highlight additional events
organized by the Committee around the world in
recent months, which include workshops in Riyadh and
Minsk as well as numerous events related to chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear defence, among
others, in Washington, D.C., Tokyo, Hong Kong and
Rome.
Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to
thank the delegation of Saudi Arabia for organizing last
month’s comprehensive high-level event on preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
to non-State actors and on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in the Arab world, in which we
had the pleasure to participate.
I would like to conclude my statement by
underlining that our resolve to defeat terrorism must
never weaken or falter. All acts of terrorism are
criminal and reprehensible, wherever they take place
and whoever commits them. The active promotion of
counter-terrorism policies and actions must therefore
remain a priority for the United Nations and its States
Members, as it will for us.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your leadership of the Council this month, and to
thank you for convening this important meeting. I
would also like to thank the Chairs of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the CounterTerrorism Committee for their efforts and their
briefings. I also thank the various Groups of Experts
for their work in the past few months.
Recent events have demonstrated the relevance
of maintaining a constant alertness, in this case the
appearance on Syrian territory of armed terrorist
groups, some of them linked to Al-Qaida, and most
of whom are transnational extremists or foreign
mercenaries fighting wars for others and targeting
Syria generally. Such factors hardly serve the interests
of the Syrian people, who, whether they are loyalists
or opponents, are proud and hope to maintain their
country’s stability. Terrorism — the destruction of
hospitals, educational institutions, schools, universities,
mosques, churches, civil aircraft and diplomatic

missions, as well as the looting of factories, the
kidnapping of Muslim and Christian religious leaders,
the pillaging of archeological sites and cemeteries,
the abduction of peacekeepers working for the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force — how does
that serve the interests of Syria and the Syrian people?
Two months ago, my country’s Government
submitted an official request for the Al-Nusra Front
organization, responsible for hundreds of terrorist
operations and suicide bombings in Syria, to be included
on the Al-Qaida Committee’s consolidated list of
individuals and entities associated with Al-Qaida. We
are still waiting for the inclusion of that organization,
whose terrorist nature has moreover been recognized
by some Security Council members. It has admitted on
its website that it executed 600 people in Syria over the
past year — a single year.
We all know now that the spread of terrorism and
extremism in Syria is happening with the blessing,
and even the support, of some Council members, and
is welcomed and supported by Salafist, Wahhabi and
Taqfiri organizations. Some individuals claim to be
leaders of counter-terrorism efforts, and there have
even been nine attempts by some members of the
Council to issue press statements condemning terrorist
attacks that have resulted in hundreds of civilian
victims in Syria. It is bizarre that no mention has been
made of the fact that the Chair of the 1267 Committee,
His Excellency the Ambassador of Australia, neglected
to say anything in his briefing about the activities of
Al-Qaida in Syria — terrorist activities of which all of
us here are aware.
While over the past two years we have addressed
more than 160 letters to the Security Council on the
spread of terrorism in my country in order to notify
members of barbarous terrorist attacks and suicide
bombings in Syria — and in spite of statements and
reports from the United Nations, States and Western
research institutions, as well as prestigious media
organizations, which have all underscored the existence
of a spike in terrorist activities in Syria, and affirmed
that terrorists from around the world have been flowing
into Syria — to this day we have seen no practical
action from the Counter-Terrorism Committee aimed
at implementing measures to combat terrorism and the
necessity of stemming its financing in Syria or to request
accountability from States that openly support such
individuals. It seems that today Syria is condemned to

13-3296029

S/PV.6964

be the only entity implementing resolution 1373 (2001)
in a first line of defence against terrorism.
The Group of Experts of the 1373 (2001) Committee
underscores in its current programme of work that
it is seeking to attach greater importance to the
implementation by Member States of resolution 1624
(2005) and of strategies to counter incitement to terrorist
acts, wherever they may originate. In that respect, we
call on the Committee to enhance the effectiveness of
its work through the following measures.
First, it must put an end to the destructive role of
media, supported by the Governments of certain States,
in inciting to terrorism, spreading extremist ideology
and deepening the secular, religious and sectarian
divisions that may exacerbate the crisis in Syria and
other States of the region. Secondly, it must fight the
exploitation of the Internet and social networks to
incite terrorism and to mislead large numbers of young
people, including Americans. Thirdly, it must dry up
the sources of financing for terrorist groups.
The Council, in its presidential statement of
15 January 2013 (S/PRST/2013/1), reiterated the need
for Member States to refrain from providing any form
of direct or indirect support to entities or individuals
participating in or in any way linked to terrorist attacks,
by, for instance, preventing the recruitment of members
into terrorist groups and prohibiting the provision of
weapons to terrorists.
In that respect, I would refer to the final report of
the Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1973 (2011), published as the annex to document
S/2013/99, on the participation of Arab and regional
States in transferring weapons and mercenaries from
Libya to Syria. I call on the Security Council to take
all necessary measures in that respect without delay.
States that arm, finance, train or facilitate the travel
of elements from armed terrorist groups to Syria
or provide them with safe haven are accomplices to
terrorist attacks and responsible for bloodshed in
Syria. Their actions not only fly in the face of Security
Council resolutions on counter-terrorism, but directly
negate resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) and
the Geneva communiqué, which all affirm the need
to achieve a peaceful settlement to the Syrian crisis
through a Syrian-led political process.
Member States have always affirmed the need
to ensure that weapons of mass destruction do not
fall into the hands of terrorists, and have tasked the

30

1540 Committee with monitoring and coordinating
related efforts to ensure that States uphold the provisions
of the resolution by refraining from supporting
terrorists or possessing or producing weapons of mass
destruction.
It is striking that some Member States, including
permanent members of the Council and members of the
Committee, are attempting to hinder follow-up to the
Syrian Government’s request to send a neutral technical
mission under the auspices of the Secretary-General
to investigate cases of the use by terrorist groups of
chemical substances against civilians and military in
the Khan al-Assal area of Syria. I would also like to
reiterate the Syrian Government’s willingness to host
a technical commission of inquiry on the incident at
Khan al-Assal, pursuant to the memorandum conveyed
in the letter dated 3 April, addressed to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs.
Concerning the issue of Israel, on Sunday,
5 May, military and civilian positions were targeted in
Damascus in yet another demonstration of the direct
link existing between the terrorist policies of Israel and
the activity of terrorist groups and foreign mercenaries,
who targeted several military positions simultaneously
with the Israeli incursions. The statements issued by
several countries encouraged Israel to launch that
aggression. The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility to condemn that incident and to ensure
that States that support terrorists are held accountable for
their attacks on Syria, cease their destructive practices
and uphold their agreements under international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.
I will provide the Council with the full text of my
statement.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation for the dedicated efforts of each of the
Chairs of the Council’s three counter-terrorism-related
Committees in preparing their respective briefings.
Through many measures taken by the relevant
agencies, the fight against terrorism has made steady
progress at the United Nations. However, it remains
deeply troubling that terrorist attacks persist, some of
which have taken place recently in areas such as South
Asia, the Middle East, North Africa and the Sahel.

13-32960

S/PV.6964

The terrorist attack in In Amenas, Algeria, and
the latest tragedy at the Boston marathon have shown
us the necessity of increasing efforts to promote the
fight against terrorism. In that regard, Japan expects
the three committees to coordinate and cooperate
closely with Member States and conduct constructive
discussions and effective and efficient activities on
counter-terrorism measures.

strengthen regional and global efforts to better regulate
the export and border control of WMD-related materials.
Japan invited the 1540 Committee expert group to the
regional initiatives it has taken, namely, the twentieth
export control seminar of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, held from 26 to 28 February, and the
ninth Asian senior-level talks on non-proliferation, held
on 14 March.

Ten Japanese citizens were killed by the attack in
In Amenas. There is no excuse for violence against
innocent people. We condemn such abject terrorism.
In reaction to the incident, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Japan, Fumio Kishida, announced three areas
of focus for our foreign policy. Japan will strengthen
international counter-terrorism measures; support
the stabilization of the regions of the Sahel, North
Africa and the Middle East; and promote dialogue and
exchanges with Islamic and Arab States. On the basis of
that policy, we will take various measures.

Such collaboration with the 1540 Committee has
provided an important opportunity to participants in the
region. They were able not only to exchange information
on effective ways to implement relevant Security
Council resolutions on WMD non-proliferation, but
also to understand the recent trend in the illicit transfer
of goods and technologies now emerging throughout
the world. Japan will continue to actively support other
Member States in their efforts.

Japan will take active part in the international
efforts to counter terrorism, not only in the framework
of the United Nations but also through the Group of
Eight and the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum. We
hope that the visit to Japan planned by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
led by its Executive Director, will further deepen the
existing cooperation between CTED and Japan.
In order to ensure the legitimacy and credibility
of United Nations counter-terrorism measures,
unceasing efforts in that regard must be made by all
three Committees. For example, it is important to keep
updating the sanction lists to reflect the current status
of individuals and entities. Japan will continue to work
closely with the Ombudsperson and the Monitoring
Team with that objective in mind.
With respect to the United Nations counterterrorism coordinator, Japan understands the need to
establish that post in order to ensure consistency and
integrity in the field of counter-terrorism at the United
Nations. We should make every effort to pursue true
effectiveness and efficiency in counter-terrorism
measures at the United Nations through the creation of
that position.
Japan continues to attach great importance to
preventing the proliferation of goods and technologies
related to weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).
We have been working closely with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to

Turning our attention to the work of the 1540
Committee itself, we welcome the strong emphasis
placed by the Chair on outreach and partnership with
relevant stakeholders. We commend the Chair’s efforts
to strengthen the Committee’s work by the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the resolution next
year. We support the focus placed by the four working
groups under the Committee, and we understand that
respective groups are making efforts to produce tangible
outcomes. Japan strongly hopes that their activities will
become more visible to all Member States, as they need
to have a strong sense of ownership in advancing the
objectives set forth in the resolution.
As a way of nurturing the ties between the Member
States and the 1540 Committee in order to tackle the
challenge of WMD non-proliferation, the Permanent
Mission of Japan will organize the fifth seminar on
non-proliferation and disarmament in New York on
10 June, partnering with the Missions of Poland and
Turkey. Japan will continue to cooperate positively
in order to ensure that the three Committees can
continuously and fully carry out their roles.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moura (Portugal): I congratulate you, Sir,
and your country on your presidency of the Security
Council this month.
I thank the Chairs of the Security Council’s
subsidiary committees on counter-terrorism for their
comprehensive briefings. I am also pleased to address a

13-3296031

S/PV.6964

special word to Mike Smith, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
and to wish him all the best in the future.
We naturally associate ourselves with the statement
delivered a few minutes ago by the observer of the
European Union. I should, however, like to add a few
comments.
First, preventing and countering terrorism continues
to be one of the main and more pressing challenges to the
international community as a whole, and to the United
Nations in particular. Solid international cooperation,
on the one hand, and the full implementation of the
United Nations counter-terrorism international legal
instruments, on the other, are indeed crucial elements of
a harmonized and effective response of the international
community to the scourge of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
The United Nations is singularly well placed to
play the key role of coordinating, supporting and
pushing forward the global international efforts in this
endeavour to address the threats and actions of terrorism
through the Security Council and its subsidiary bodies,
the General Assembly and its relevant bodies, and other
United Nations entities, at both the Headquarters and
field levels. Surely, much has been done already, as
we should recognize, but in our opinion there is room
for improvement on specific elements of the counterterrorism strategies as they stand now.
As Portugal has consistently stated in previous
briefings of the Security Council, more attention
should be given, first, to enhancing the United Nations
preventive counter-terrorism approaches and agenda;
secondly, to improving and more efficiently articulating
all relevant United Nations system tools, both in New

32

York and at the field level; and, finally, to addressing the
need to reinforce the compliance of national, regional
and international counter-terrorism efforts with human
rights and rule of law standards. Those, among others,
are key aspects that we believe should to be solidly
implemented in order to address the evolving nature of
the terrorist threat, its ability to spread into different
areas of the world, its intertwinement and increasing
connection with forms of transnational organized
crime, and its capacity to promote radicalization and
recruitment in a global context.
At the local and regional levels, we believe that
further preventive action should be considered namely
in regions such as West, Central and East Africa, where
emerging or potentially emerging challenges should be
further addressed, for example, through more and better
United Nations information sharing and assessment
survey capabilities.
I conclude by commending once again the work
of the Ombudsperson’s Office within the framework
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011). The Ombudsperson’s very valuable
contribution to implementing fair and clear procedures
for delisting with respect to that Committee should, in
our opinion, also be made available in the framework of
other relevant Security Council sanctions Committees,
thereby opening the way to an even more credible,
transparent and fair management of their respective
sanctions lists.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more speakers inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

13-32960
