Resolutions adopted on the reports oC the Fourth Committee

197573 and endorses its conclusion that measures should
be taken to enable all Saharans originating in the Territory to decide on their future in complete freedom
and in an atmosphere of peace and security, in accordance with resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Expresses its thanks to the Government of Spain
and the Govemments of Morocco, Algeria and Mauritania for the co-operation and assistance wbich they
extended to the Visiting Mission;
7. Requests the Government of Spain, as the administering Power, in accordance with the observations
and conclusions of the Visiting Mission and in accordance with the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, to take immediately all necessary
measures, in consultation with ali the parties concemed
and interested, so that all Saharans originating in the
Territory may exercise fully and freely, under United
Nations supervision, their inalienable right to selfdetermination;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Government of Spain, as the adrninistering
Power, and the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, to make the necessary arrangements
for the supervision of the act of self-determination
referred to in paragraph 7 above;
9. Urges ali the parties concerned and interested to
exercise restraint and to desist from any unilateral or
other action outside the decisions of the General Assembly on the Territory;
1O. Requests the Special Committee to follow the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
on the question to the General Assembly at its thirtyfirst session.
2435th plenary meeting
1O December 1975
B
The General, Assembly,
Reatfirming its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Reaf/irming its resolutions 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965 and
all other relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular General Assembly resolution 3292 (XXIX) of
13 December 1974,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in 1975,74
Taking note of the advisory opinion of the Intemational Court of Justice of 16 October 1975 conceming
Western Sabara, 75
Considering Security Council resolutions 377 (1975)
of 22 October 1975, 379 (1975) of 2 November 1975
and 380 (1975) of 6 November 1975,
l. Takes note of the tripartite agreement concluded
at Madrid on 14 November 1975 by the Governments
of Mauritania, Morocco and Spain, the text of which
was transmitted to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations on 18 November 1975;76
73 Otficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.l), chap. XIII, annex.
74 /bid.
i6 Western Sahura, Advisory Opinion, J.C./. Reports 1975,
p. 12. For the note of transmittal to the members of the
General Assembly, see A/10300.
76 Otficial Records of tlze Security Council, Tfzirtieth Y ear,
Supplement for October, November and December 1975,
document S/11880, annex 111.

117

2. Reaf/irms the inalienable right to self-determination, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV), of ·all the Saharan populations originating
in the Territory;
3. Requests the parties to the Madrid agreement of
14 November 1975 to ensure respect for the freely
expressed aspirations of the Saharan populations;
4. Requests the interim administration to take all
necessary steps to ensure that all the Saharan populations originating in the Territory wil1 be able to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination through
free consultations organized with the assistance of a
representative of the United Nations appointed by the
Secretary-General.
2435th plenary meeting
JO December 1975
3480 (XXX). Question of French Somaliland

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of so-called French
Somaliland (Djibouti),
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,71
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also its resolutions 2228 (XXI) of 20
December 1966 and 2356 (XXII) of 19 December
1967 on so-called French Somaliland (Djibouti),
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of the Front de libération de la Cote des Somalis and
the Mouvement de libération de Djibouti,78
Having also heard the statement of the refresentative of the "Ligue populaire africaine pour I indépendance", 79
Taking note, in this connexion, of the numerous
resolutions adopted by the Organization of African
Unity on so-called French Somaliland (Djibouti), in
particular the resolution adopted by the Council of
Ministers at its twenty-fifth ordinary session, held at
Kampala from 18 to 25 July 1975, 8º as well as the
resolution adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government at its twelfth ordinary session, held
at Kampala from 28 July to 1 August 1975,81 by
which the neighbouring countries were called upon to
renounce all territorial claims on so-called French
Somaliland (Djibouti),
Taking note also of the resolution ado:pted by the
Conference of Ministers for Foreign Afiairs of NonAligned Countries, held in Lima from 25 to 30 August
1975,82
Bearing in mind the statements made by the re:present~tives of So~alia83 and Ethiopia, 84 the two ne1ghbounng countnes of so-called French Somaliland
(Djibouti), in respect of the independence of the Ter77 Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.1 ), chap. XVI.
78 !bid., Thirtieth Session, Fourtlz Committee, 2168th meeting
7 A ]bid.
•
80 A/10297, annex I, resolution CM/Res.431/Rev.l (XXV).
8 1 /bid., annex 11, resolution AHG/Res.74 (XII).
82 A/10217 and Corr.1, annex I, resolution I.
.
83 Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2170th meeting.
B4Jbid., 2172nd meeting.

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

H8

ritory and of their non-involvement in its intemal
affairs,
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power,85 in particular its intention to respond positively
to the aspirations of the people for genuine independence,
Regretting that the administering Power has failed
to co-operate with the United Nations in the implementation of resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly,
1. Reaffirms its unqualified support of the right of
the people of so-called French Somaliland (Djibouti) to
immediate and unconditional independence m accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Considers that the situation in the Territory
could become a threat to peace and stability in the
region and might affect adversely international peace
and security unless an urgent solution to it is found;
3. Calls upon the administering Power to create
the necessary conditions in order to accelerate the
process of independence of the people of so-called
French Somaliland (Djibouti) by effecting in particular
the release of political prisoners and the return of the
representatives of the liberation movements recognized
by the Organization of African Unity and of all refugees, in accordance with the Convention of the Organization of African Unity Governing the Specific Aspects
of Refugee Problems in Africa, 1969;
4. Calls once again upon the Government of France
to grant immediate and unconditional independence to
the people of so-called French Somaliland (Djibouti)
a_nd to withdraw ali its military forces from the Terntory;
?· Cal/s upon all States, particularly the administenng Power and the neighbouring States, to refrain
from any .action, unilateral or otherwise, which might
alter the mdependence and the territorial integrity of
so-called French Somaliland (Djibouti);
6. Calls upon all States to renounce forthwith any
and all claims to the Territory and to declare null and
void any and all acts asserting such claims;
1. Urges ali Member States, the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system, in co-operation with the administering Power, to
render all possible moral and material assistance to
the people of the Territory;
8. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to keep the situation in the Territory
under active consideration, including the dispatch of a
visiting mission to the Territory, and to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975

3485 (XXX). Question of Timor
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of ali peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the U nited N ations and
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
85 Jbid., 2168th meeting.

Having examined the cbapter of ·the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples reIating to the question of Timor,86
H aving heard the statements of the rerresentatives
of Portugal, as. the administering Power,8 concerning
develo:pments in Portuguese Timor and the implementation wtth regard to that Territory of the relevant provisions of the Charter and the Declaration, as well as
those of General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) of
15 December 1960,
Bearing in mind the responsibility of the administering Power to undertake ali efforts to create conditions
enabling the people of Portuguese Timor to exercise
freely their rigbt to self-determination, freedom and
independence and to determine their future political
status in accordance with the principles of the Charter
and the Declaration, in an atmosphere of peace and
~~

.

Mindful that ali States should, in conformity with
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, refrain in their
intemational relatlons from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or national independence
of any State, or from taking any action inconsistent
with the purposes and principies of the Charter,
Deeply conctrned at the critical situation resulting
from the military intervention of the armed forces of
Indonesia in Portuguese Timor,
1. Calls upon ali States to respect the inalienable
right of the people of Portuguese Timor to self-determination, freedom and independence and to determine
t~eir future political status in acc~rdance with the princ1ples of the Charter of the Umted Nations and the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Calls upon the administering Power to continue
to make every effort to find a solution by peaceful
means through talles between the Government of Portugal and the political parties representing the people of
Portuguese Timor;
3. Appe~~ to ali the parties in Portuguese Timor to
respond pos1t1vely to efforts to find a peaceful solution
through talks between them and the Government of
Portugal in the hope that such talks will bring an end
to the strife in that Territory and lead towards the
orderly exercise of the right of self-determination by
the people of Portuguese Timor;
4. Strongly deplores the military intervention of the
armed forces of Indonesia in Portuguese Timor;
5. Calls upon the Govemment of Indonesia to
desist from f~er violation ~f the terr~torial integrity
of Portuguese Timor and to w1thdraw w1thout delay its
armed forces from the Territory in order to enable the
people of the Territory freely to exercise their right to
self-determination and independence;
6. Draws the attention of the Security Council in
conformity with Article 11, paragraph 3, of the Cbarter
t~ the critical situation in the Territory of Portugues~
Timor and recommends that it take urgent action to
protect the territorial integrity of Portuguese Timor
an~ the inalienable right of its people to self-determinatlon;
86 /bid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev.l ), chap. VIII.
87 lbid., Thirtieth Session, Fourt/r Committee, 2178th 2184th
and 2185th meetings.
'
