UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
FORTIETH

COUNCIL

RECOIZDS
YEAR

2578’”

MEETINC9MAY

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda WAgendal2S78). . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 6 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17156) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

SIPV.?578

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents
are composed of capital
bined with figures. Mention
of such a symbol indicates a reference
Nations document.

letters comto a United

Documents
of the Security
Council (symbol SI . . . ) are normally
published in
quarterly
Supplements
of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document
indicates
the supplement
in which it appears
or in which
information
about it is given.
The resolutions
of the Security
Council.
numbered
in accordance
with a
system adopted
in 1964. are published
in yearly volumes
of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively
to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2578th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
f’rc.si&,nr:

Mr.

Birabhongsc

KASEMSRI

(Thailand)

Prt~nr:
The representatives
of the following
States:
Australia.
Burkina
Faso. China,
Denmark,
Egypt.
France, In&.
ivladagascar.
Peru, Thailand,
Trinidad
and Tobago,
Ukrainian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic.
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
United Kingdom
of&eat
Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of
America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/25781
I.

Adoption

2.

Lcuer dated 6 May I985 from the Permanent
Reprcsenlative
of Nicaragua
10 the United
Nations
addressed IO the President of the Security Council
Wl7156)
The meetkg

of the agenda

was culled

lo order

UI 4 p.m.

Adoptlon of the agenda
The ugendu

wus udopted.

Letterdated 6 May 198s from the Permanent Reprssea(athe of Nicaragua to the United Nations addthe President of the &u&y Couoell(8/17lS6)

to

I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken al the 2577th meeting, I invite the rrpresentative of Nicaranua 10 take a place at the Council cable;
I invite the repr&entaGves
of Algeria, Brazil, Ecuador.
Ethiopia. Mexico.
the United Republic of Tanzania and
Yugoslavia
IO take the places reserved
for them at the
side of the Council chamber.
AI the invirurion
of the President,
Mr. Chamorro
Mora INicarupuu~
took a olace at /he Council fable;
Mr. Djoudi IA?ge/ia).
Mr. ‘Mabel
(Brazil).
Mr. Alborno: (EciradorJ.
Mr. Dinka (Erhiooia).
Mr. Mu6oz Lpdo
IMexico).
Mr. Lweno (United
kepublic
of Tanzanian
und Mr. GJoh I Yugoslavia)
tank /he places resewed
for them a~ the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like lo inform members
of the Council that I have received
letters from the
representatives
of Bolivia.
Colombia.
Cuba. CYPNS.
the Dominican
Republic.
Guatemala.
the lslamic
Republic of Iran. Mongolia.
Poland and Zimbabwe
in
which they request to be invited IO participate
in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In con-

9 May 1985, at 3 p.m.

formity
with the usual practice.
I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
IO participate in Ihe discussion without the right to vote.
in accordance
with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
At the invitution
of the President>
Mr. Gumucio
Grunier
(Bolivia).
Mr. Albdn-Holguin
(Colombia),
Mr. Oramas Olivu (Cuba). Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus).
Mr. Knipping
Victoriu (fiominicun
Republic),
Mr. F&
jardo-Maldonado(Guatemaka).
Mr. Raiaie-Khorassani
iIslamic
Republic of Iran). Mr. Nyamaoo
(Mongolia),
Mr. Nowak
(Poland)
and Mr. Manzou
(Zimbabwe)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
The Securily Council will now
resume its consideration of the item on its agenda.

4. Mr. KRISHNAN (India): I( is my pleasant duty
first of all to convey to YOU. Sir, the greetings and
felicitations of my beleg&on and my& on your
assumption of the hi
O&X of President of the
Securiiy Council. Our Cwo countries are linked together
by age-old ties of culture and tradition and have close
and cordial relations. We admire your diplomatic
acumen and notable personal qualities. I( is Iherefore a
pleasure to see you guiding our work. We should litre to
pledge to you the assurance of our fullest cooperation
in helping you disebarge your onerous respoasibiliti-o.
I should also like (0 pay a tribute to Mr. Javier Arit,
Stella of Peru, who conducted Ihe business of the Cauncil last month with his culltomafy d&&y and eompetence. Hi! wy a difficult presidency tiwbwy
~~respons’b*ues
mth commec&bL
5. ThisistheeiuhthoccasioninaPeriodofaliiover
two years on which Nicamgua h& felt compelled to
have recourse 10 the 8ecurily Council. That f&et alone
is indicative of the gravity of the steadily detiorating
situation that obtains in Central America sod of the
sense of insecurity that the Nicamguan Government
und&st&dingandsupp&forandsolidaritywithiheir
cause the world over. in spite of the valii etlbrts of
the Contadora Group to find a political solution to the
problems of Central America-efforts which reached
positive culmination in 8eptemkr of last year-the
situation in the region continues 10 be marked by instability. exacerbated constantly by acts ofexternal interference and pressure which are hardly conducive to the
promotion

of a political

settlement.

6. Two years ago the Council reaffirmed the right of
Nicaragua and of all the other countries of the area to
live in peace and security free from outside interference. Resolution 530 (1983)of 19 May 1983,to which
I refer. appealedurgently to the interested States to cooperate fully with the Contadora Group through a frank
and constructive dialogue so as to resolve their differences and urged the Contadora Group to spare no
effort to find solutions to the problems of the regionand
to keen the Securitv Council informed of the results of
these &forts. That-resolution also recalled all the relevant nrincinles of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly ihose concerning the obligations of States
to settle their disputes exclusively by peacefulmeans,
not to resort to the threat or use of force and to respect
the self-determination of peoples and the sovereign
independenceof all States.

‘*The Bureau . . . recalled the . . . communique
of the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau, held at Managuain January 1983.
in which the Ministers had condemned the use of
pressures and economic sanctions against Nicaragua, as well as the final communiqueof the Meeting
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Heads of Delegation of Non-Aligned Countries to the thirty-ninth
session of the United Nations General Assembly,
held in New York in October 1984, in which the
Ministers renewed their strong condemnationof the
use of economic measures as a means of exerting
political and economic coercion against non-aligned
countries in violation of their sovereign rights and
decisions.
“In this regard, the Bureau strongly condemned
the embargo and other coercive economic measures
recently adoptedagainst Nicaragua. The Bureau believes that these new acts of political and economic
coercion, in addition to the military action, are to
be seen in the context of a larger plan to destabilize
and topple the Government of Nicaragua and that
they further endanger peace and security in the
region.

7. Regrettably, that important Security Council resolution-as indeed the equally significant resolution
adopted in its wake by the General Assembly. resolution 38/10-remains to be implemented.Military action
of various types against Nicaraguahas intensified. Acts
of interference and intervention. direct and indirect.
against Nicaragua have continued. Statements have
beanmadewhich fly directly in the face of the concept
of the sovereignty and independenceof States. The
process of dialoguebetween two of the States directly
concernedhas beeninterrupted. New forms of pressure
and coercion have been brought into play. As a result,
the neonleof Nicamnua have been subjected to nreat
hardshib and distress, and the economy-of the co&try
has suffered considerabledisruption and damage.The
only silver lining is the fact that the ContadoraGroup
continues resolutely to pursue its objectives-that too
in spite of serious road-blocks and attempts to undermine its endeavours.

“The Bureau also believes that the aforesaid
measures are contrary to the norms that govern the
international legaland economic order and that they
undermine the efforts carried out by the Contadora
Group in the quest for a political and negotiated
solution to the serious problems afflicting the Central
American region. In this context, the Bureau once
again emphasised the need for political and negotiated solutions to the problems of the region. It
reiterated its full support for the efforts of the Contadora Group and called on it, in the light of the
recently adopted coercive economic measures, to
analyse the situation and to accelerate its process
of consultations and negotiations with a view to
expedithsga political solution. In ttis regard, it also
called uponthe United States Government to resume
the process of bilateral discussions with the Government of Nicaragua towards reaching #*oncrete
accords basedon mutualrespect and the right of selfdetermination.

8. In Ms statement yesterday 12577thnteeflng] the
representative of Nicaragua explained with clarity the
developments that have compelled Nicaragua once
againto seek redress by the Council ofthe latest measures taken againstthat country. The General Assembly
has’mBfln& the principle that no State may use or
encoumgethe use of economic, political or any other
type of measures to coerce another State in order to
obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its
sovereign rights and to secure from it advantagesof any
klttd.

“The Bureau reiterated its firm solidarity with
Nicaragua and called for an immediate end to all
threats, attacks, hostile acts and coercive economic
measures againstthe peopleand Government of that
country.”

9. it is relevant to recall that the Coordinating Bureau
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has been
asked by the SeventhConference of the Heads of State
or Gov&nrnent of Non-Aligned Countries to monitor
closely the events in ik Chin+
Anmtiticanstttnsyun.
Accordingly, the Bureau met in urgent se*sion two days
ago to hear a statement by the representative of Nicaraguaand to consider the situation arising out of the
latestdevelopments in the Central American context. It
issued a communique in this regard which has since
been circulated in document Sil7163. Allow me to
quote from it the following excerpts:

IO. The elements I have just read out represent the
ei~i~ OfiL ~Siil~i *~ken ‘iji ihe non-ru’l~iedcoiintries with respect to the trade embargo andother coercive measures adopted against Nicaragua. 1 can add
little to this clear and unequivocal pronouncement on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
I I. The Government of India has been following the
developments in Central America with serious con2

tern. As we have had occasion to point out on more
than one occasion in the past, it is our belief that the
cause of the tensions in the region lies in historical
factors which have resulted in deep-rooted
economic
and social ills suffered by the countries of the region. It
is the conviction
of the Government
of India that the
tensions and disputes in the Central American
region
can be resolved only peacefully
and through
negotiations among all concerned.
My Government
has welcomed and expressed
support for the efforts of the
Contadora
Group.
I should like to reiterate
on this
occasion that support. We regret that the revised version of the Contadora
Act on Peace and Co-operation
in
Central America [S/16775, annex] which had emerged
as a result of these efforts could not be concretized
and
formalized
because of new difficulties
and obstacles
that had arisen. Nevertheless,
we hope that, buttressed
by the solidarity and support of the entire international
community
and with the good will and co-operation
of
all the States concerned,
the Contadora
Group will be
able to reinvigorate
its efforts so that these differences
can be amicably settled to common satisfaction
and the
obstacles impeding progress removed.
In this context,
we look forward
to a constructive
conclusion
of the
meeting to be held at Panama City next week with
the participation
of all the Contadora
Group
States
and the five Central American
countries.

ligence and ability, we are convinced
that the Council
will be able to achieve positive and fruitful results.
IS. We are meetina here at the request of the representative of Nicaragua
for the purpose of “consideiittg
the extremely
serious
situation
which the Central
American
region is facing at the present time”
[see
S//7/56].
At this time, as has been stated by the representutive
of Nicaraaua.
his coutttrv
has been subjected to unilateral me&tres
of economic coercion and
discrimination
which might affect fundamental
principles of international
law and further aggravate the fragile stability that exists in Central America.
16. My delegation
that Peru’s position
normative,
political
now spell out.

wishes to state in this comtectlon
is based on considerations
of a
and regional nature which 1 shall

17. First. the Charter
of the Ormmiaation
enshrines,
among other principles,
that of setidetermlnation,
nonintervention
in the internal affairs of other States, respect for obligations
entered into under international
treaties and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. The
Organization
of American
States, for its part, in article I9 of its charter,
prohibits
the use of coercive
measures to force the sovereign
will of another State.

12. 1 should like to take this opportunity
to reaftirm
the solidarity
of my Government
and people with the
Government
and people of Nicaragua,
a friendly
and
fellow non-aligned
country.
We respect the right of
Nicaragua.
as indeed of every State, to be master of its
own destiny. We note the will of the Nicaraguan
people
to mould a new future for their nation, and we support
their efforts to build a new society on the basis of their
popular revolution,
free from all foreign interference
or
pressure. We atXrm the sovereign right of every country to pursue its own political
and social economic
system.

IS. These principles
constitute
the fundamental
basis
of Peru’s foreign policy. On the international
scene that
policy is also regulated
by the doctrine
of non-alignment which req&es.
in&r &I,
respect for the s&rereignty,
territorial
integrity
and security ofall oatioas
and their right to think and act independently.
19. The trade embargo decreed by the United Statea
Government
against NicaraguaatTects
these principles
andalso ignorestheimportantprogrcssa&ievedbytbc
international
community
throughout
the long Fmeaas
towards
harmonization
of inter-State
&tiona..
This
is the case of the Declaratioa
oa Pritmiples
of lnterc
national Law concerning
Friendly
Relations
and Co-

13. It is our profound
conviction
that Peace in Central
America cannot rest on the foundation
of policies of
intervention,
interference
and intimidation,
or of the
threat or use of force, nor of coercive measures of any
kind whatsoever.
For any peace to be enduring,
it must
be based on an acceptance of the principles
of political
and so&-economic
pluralism
by States not only for
themselves.
but also for the region as a whole; on
scrupulous
observance
of the principles
of non-interference and non-intervention
in the internal affairs of
States; and on a positive appreciation
of the endemic
problems of this troubled part of the world and a constructive and co-operative
approach to their resolution.
It is incumbent
upon the Security
Council and all its
members to grasp this reality and to shape our actions
accordingly.

operation among StatesL eccordaaccwiththccharter of the United Nations,
adopted at the twenty4ftb
session of the General
Assemblv
bv rcsdutiott
m(XXV);
the Charter of &onomic~Rl&ts
and Duties of
States, in Assembly
resolution
3281 fX%lX];
and the
General Agreement
on TaritTs and Trade, whose mata
principle,
the most-favoured-nation
clause,
is thus
being infringed.
We must also mention our coneem at
the failure faithfully
to abii
by the rpecihc uroeedures
provided
for in a bilateral instrument
in for&
between
the United States and Nicaragua.
20. Therefore.
and against the backgmtmd
1 have
given, the Government
of Peru believes that the measures adopted run counter
to principles
and norms of
international
law and constitute
a major error and an
action that isout of proportion
in relations between two
States, thus evincing
the lack of symmetry
and the
imbata;.ce that characterize
political and economic relations within the American
continent,
whereexcessive

14. Mr. ARIAS STELLA
(Peru) ~interprerotionfiom
Spanish): Mr. President.
may I begin by extending
to
you my delegation’s
sincerest congratulations
on your
assumption
of the stewardship
of our deliberations
for
the month of May. Knowing.
as we do, your intel3

power is concentrated on one side, with but meagreand
fragmentedpower on the other.
21. The situation we are facing seems to have
emergedfrom an improper assessment of the political
oriorities on the continent. The conflict in Central
America is worsening by virtue of an obvious error of
perceptionwith respect to the nature of Latin American
problems and of what contemporary relations within
the hemisphereshould belike. There is an insistenceon
attributing the conflicts that overwhelm Central America today solely to the East-West confrontation, to the
detriment of a more realistic view of the hemisphere
that could enablea proper assessment of the obstacles
in the way of the developmentof the Central American
peoplesand open the way to a responsibility and a task
shared by the inter-American community.
22. There seems to be insufficient recognition that
today Latin America is goingthrough an extraordinary
economic and social crisis, perhaps the greatest in its
history. It is overwhelmed by the burden of a foreign
deb, that is paralysing its productive capacity, to the
detriment of the basic needs of its population. The
satisfaction of those needs is its first priority and will
determine the solidity of the democratic process in
Latin America. This profound economicimbalancehas
a corollary in the political arena, in the instability generated by the progressive accumulation of unsatisfied
needsand the flood of demandsby tl! population upon
the State institutions. Latin American democracy is
of international indifference.
23. Nevertheless, Latin America is striving to do
away with the political vices that had associated it for
too long with arbitrariness and submission; it is gradually and steadfastly building a regional home for
democracy and socialjustice. Thus today it is taking up
the challengesof an international plan for which it has
acquired considerable experience and maturity.

peaceplaninthatconvulsed
region.TheContadora
Act
is the mostseriouseffort at Latin Americanregional
politicalinteractioninrecenttimes.Colombia,
Mexico.
Panama
andVenezuelahaveshouldered
the responsibilityof helpingthe CentralAmericanrepublics
determinetheir ownindependent
andsovereign
course.
Contadoraistruly thesolerealisticalternativeto war.
Ourconcern,in the contextof thisdebate,isbasedon
thefact thatbehindthehistoricallackof understanding
that characterizes
the unbalanced
North-Southrelationshipin the Americanhemisphere
andthe threat
fromthefinancialcommunitytodayto thesurvivalof
democracyin LatinAmerica-lies.
despitethepositivesounding
rhetoric,a tacit blockadeof LatinAmerican
diplomacy.
26. Ifthat isallowedto happen,weshallbeembarking
onapathofnoretum.Togivetangibleformtothetrend
towardspostponing
sinedie theContadora
framework
for a peacefulsettlement-whichenvisages
anoverall
setof possible
solutionsto the security,politicaland
socio-economic
questions
affectingCentralAmericawouldonly leaddirectlyto theforcedisolationof Nicaraguaor the erosionof its Government.It is in that
contextthat wemustview theeconomic
measures
recentlytakenand,consequently,
ourrejectionof them.
My Governmentbelievesthat theyarea seriousmistakeandthatthey serveonly to confirmthestructural
lack of understanding
from whichthe politicallife of
thiscontmentsufferssoacutely.
27. A fewweeksagoourcompatriot,thewriterMario
VargasLlosa.drew the conclusion
in an essaythat
Nicaraguais still engagedin the searchfor final
answers,that it is far from beingthe satelliteof any
Powerandthatthat country,understrictStatecontrol.
still hasa pluralisticsociety.
28. Nicaraaua’s
isolationconfrontsit witha cold-war
option,whichin ouropinionisneitherunavoidable
nor
desiredby Nicaragua’s
leaders.It isthehistoricalduty
of Latin hmeri&to preventsucha process.sothat
Nicaragua
maymovefromtheoutdatedEast-West
context into a new,inter-American
agenda.

24. * As an example of this conceptual and political
autonomy and as a basic requirement for grasping the
problems of Latin America, we must understand the
29. Nicaraguais today at perhapsthe mostcrucial
efYorts made by the Contadora Group, efforts which
are clearlv at&&d by themeasures
wearediscussing momentof its history.Its Governmenthasexpressed
its will to strengthen
andimproveNicaraguan
demotoday. C&tadora, createdasthe productof the dig
lomaticimaginationand politicalwill of four Latin craticinstitutions.Every democracy
is a systemanda
As such,it isinaconstantstateof renewaland
Americancountries,interpretsregionaltraditionand process.
feelingthroughthesearch
for apeacefulandnegotiated isconstantlyfacedwith newchallenges
andobstacles,
settlement
d the CentralAm&an problem,In this whichmustbeovercome
withoutoutsidepressures
that
of thatautonomous
questto which
connection,theGovernment
of Perureiteratesits sup- candistortthesense
d
yvn. C,..Y. ‘h. c F,.....,.(us
,,,6-“*.Y :r:r:nr:..n
.I,..IY.I.C*,.d.:rl.
“...V‘. ;.
.a ,I,...” ..-.,a
.“”
everypeoplebus2: inheres!righ!.
viablediplomaticoptionfor dealmgwith the serious
tensions
a%ctingthe regionandfor bringingabouta 30. My delegation
deeplywishes
thishopeof America
notto bedistortedbythepresentadverse
andobsessive
genuinedemocratic
orderin the wholeisthmus.
circumstances.
Hence,wecallontheUnitedStatesand
25. Peru’ssupportfor Contadora
isnota merereflex Nicaragua,abidingby the principleson whichthis
actionnor mereloyal adherence
to the intenseand worldOrganizationis basedandby the tenetsof the
compkxeflortsof four friendlycountriesthat today ContadoraAct, to reacha comprehensive
anddefinsymbolize
theLatinAmericanwill to carry out itsown itive solutionto the situationin CentralAmerica.

31. Mr. SORZANO
(United
States of America):
Mr. President, as this is the first time the Council has
met in formal session since you assumed the Chair,
I should like to express the great satisfaction
it gives my
Government,
and me personally,
to see you presiding
over the Council. This is of course a historic occasion
for Thailand,
as this is the first time Thailand has ever
served as President ofthe Security Council. The United
States and Thailand have enjoyed the closest of relations for over a century,
and the affection
and high
regard in which the American
people hold Thailand are
considerable.
My countrymen
have a high esteem for
the achievements
of Thai culture, and they respect the
political
independence.
and the independent-mindedness, of Thailand.
Thailand was one of the few countries which escaped the wave of imperial expansion that
swept over the world in the latter half of the nineteenth
century-in
no small part because of the effectiveness
of its diplomacy.
That legacy of diplomatic
skill has a
thoroughly
worthy
practitioner
in you, Mr. President.
I think it no understatement
to say that your diplomatic
talents, your knowledge
of this institution
and your
political judgement
are much admired in these halls.
The Council is indeed privileged
to conduct its work
this month under your leadership.
32. I should also like to express the gratitude
of my
delegation for the professional,
judicious
and fair manner in which your predecessor,
the representative
of
Peru, Mr. Javier Arias Stella, conducted his presidency
of the Council.
33. As the members of the Security
Council are well
aware, the Central American question has been before
the Council for just over three years. During that brief
time the Government
of Nicaragua has come before the
Council
no less than nine times. Today’s
meeting,
therefore,
should be seen as an extension
of the situation in Central America.
In that light it is useful to
recapitulate
briefly the main themes which have recurred throughout
this three-year-long
debate, in order
to assess which ones have been borne out by the events
in the region and which ones have not. That determination will, in turn. help us in appraising the credibility
of
the new Nicaraguan
charges.
34. The nine Nicaraguan
requests
to convene
the
Securtty Council have manifested
a tedious regularity
and a transparency
of purpose. On every occasion that
Nicaragua
has appeared
before the Council,
it has
sought either to forestall the progress of the Contadora
process or to interfere
in the internal affairs of the
United States by seeking to influence
our domestic
political
debate
about
Central
America.
In either case
a..
ntcaragua
bas deiiberaieiy
misused ihe Councii and
converted
it into a mini-General-Assembly
and a propaganda forum precisely at a time when the Secretary
Gmeral.
the members of the Council and other concerned United Nations Members
have been seeking ways
to strengthen
the functioning
of the United Nations
organ principally
responsible
for inte national peace
and security.
These repeated
abuses of the Security

Council have naturally
resulted in a widespread
critical
appraisal of the effects on the United Nations of Nicaragua’s multilateral
diplomacy.
Despite these feelings,
the Council has once again been convened
at Nicaragua’s request to hear yet another
version of its old
accusation
lhat Nicaragua
is the victim of American
aggression and/or that it is in imminent
danger of being
invaded by the United States.
35. This often-repeated
charge ought to be thoroughly
discredited
bv now. The Sandinists
have made it a
number of times-and
I would merely mention these
dates: 25 March 1982.2 April 1982. IS November
1982.
9 May 1983. 30 March
1984. 2 April 1984. 2 October
1984.25 October 1984,9 November
1984, and soon and
so forth-but
on none of those occasions
was the
charge made by more prominent
a f@rre than Comandante Ortega, the most authoritative
Sandinist spokesman, during the thirty-ninth
session of the General
Assembly
last year; nor was any accusation
so detinitively refuted.
It will be remembered
that on that
occasion [16fh merriug]
Comandante
Ortega not only
predicted an American
invasion of Nicaragua
but was
so bold as to specify 15 October
1984 as the actual date
for that supposed invasion. As we all know, 15 October
came and went and the “invasion”
failed to materialixe. Despite this embarrassment,
and despite our
patient and repeated denials, Nicaragua
still persists in
its claim that the United States ispreparlngan
invasion.
So let me reiterate
here that the United States is not
preparing
to invade Nicaragua.
36. The prediction
of an imminent
United States invasion was not, of course, the only Sandinist
claim to
prove groundless.
There have been many others. Their
accumulation
suggests that, much as in economics,
where inflation
devalues
the currency,
the inflated
claims ofthe Sandinists have hopelessly devalued their
credibility,
to the point that today they are not worth
much more than the cord&a.
the Nicamguan
cumncy,
which has also experienced
a dramatk
devahtation
under the Sandinist
r&me.
37. Duringtbissameperiod.beforethisvuyCouncil
and in response to the Sandhdst allegations
previously
mentioned.
the United States itas stated its views about
the situation in Central America.
We hope we may be
forgiven,
if at the risk of seeming to be immodest,
we
point out that our own statement~concerning
the situation in Central America,
and more specifiiy
in Nicaragua, have beut borne out by subsequent
develop
ments. Let me now proceed to review them.
38. We have often stated our belief that the peopks of
Centtal America have democratic
aspirations
which. if
noi arbitrariiy
repressed,
wili
produce
poptdkrly
elected Governments
even in the face of diffllult
economic, social and political
obstacles.
We expressed
that view four years ago during the region’s darkest
moment. when it seemed imprudent
just to hope for a
small amelioration
of the political
conditions
in the
region. We were aware, of course, that our views were
not universally
shared and that legions of sceptics

doubted the possibility of holdinghonest and fair elections, of establishing popularly elected Governments
and of maintainingageneralrespect for humanrights in
the region. But our faith in the strength of the democratic impulse has been vindicated, and the sceptics
have been proved wrong by the peoples of Central
America which in a number of separate instances have
demonstrated their desire, their willingness and their
capacity IO govern themselves under democratically
constituted Governments.
39. During that same period, however, the United
States was pointing out to this Council that not all
countries in the region were headedin the samedemocratic direction and that there were increasingly strong
signals that the Sandinists were not the idealisticdemocratic reformers that they were commonly assumed to
be. Indeed. earlv in this debate we described the accumulatingindicaGonsof the anti-democratic style, spirit
and behaviour of the Sandinists. We highlightedtheir
disregard for humanand political rights, their denialof
pluralism. their contempt for elections and their rehance on violence and -naked power to sustain their
rdgime. We suggested that, given their penchant for
military uniforms and symbolism, WC:were witnessing
the rebirth-in a transmuted form, to be sure-of the
traditional military dictatorship which we all hadhoped
Nicaragua had finally transcended.
40. Regrettably-for let me be clear that we take no
comfort in the accuracy of our predictions-those early
predictions have been substantiated not only by such
antidemocratic statements as those that I cited during
the last GeneralAssembly session, articulatedby Commander Bayardo Arce, but by the Nicamguan people
themselves who, on the basis of their comparative
experience of Somoza and the Sandinists. have conchtded that rl Frente y Somoza son la mlstna cosa,
which,roughlytranslated,means
“the SandinistFront
andSomoxaarethe samethlnn”. It is truethat todav

tionandsubversion
of theirneighbours.
Theevidence
behindthisstatement
issomassive
asto beimpossible
to overlook.WhentheSandinists
cameinto powerin
1979.andlongbeforethe inceptionof internalarmed
opposition,Nicaragualauncheda military buildup
withoutprecedent
in CentralAmerica.In lessthansix
yearstheSandinists
havedeveloped
a militarymachine
with fire-powerandmobilityunmatched
in theregion.
By early 1985their active-dutyforce hadmorethan
62.000troops,and their total-strength,includingall
regular, reserve,militia and security forces, now
exceedsIl9.000.not countinnthethousands
of Cuban
andSoviet-blocmilitaryandsecurityadvisersalready
in Nicaragua.They alsohaveat least340tanksand
armoured-vehicles;
morethan70long-range
howitzers
androcketlaunchers
and30helicopters,
includinghalf
a dozenfast, well-armed
attackhelicopters.
Sinceall
thesemilitaryforcesandequipment
aredisproportionate to the country’spopulation,economyandlegitimatedefenceneeds,their realpurpose
canonly beto
intimidateandcoerceNicaragua’s
neighbours,
7’ .east
oneof whichdoesnot evenhaveanarmy.
42. Nicaragua’s
effortsto destabilize
andsubvertits
neighbours
alsostartedsoonaftertheSandinists
came
to power,andthey continueunabatedto thisday. In
fact, overa periodof almostsix years,thepoliciesand
actionsof the Nicaraguan
Government
havenot moderated but have becomeincreasinglyaggressive,
heightening
thethreatto neighbouring
countries.I need
not nowrecitethe longlist of Nicaragua’s
subversive
effortsagainstitsneighbours
butwill confinemyselfto
themostrecentone.whenjusta coupleof weeksago
sevenagentsof the Nicaraguan
securityservicewere
that thiswastheirthirdclandestine
trip &six months
in
whichthey hadtransportedarmsfrom Nicaraguato
Honduranguenillas.whomthey alsoassisted
in recruitingandtraining.

theSandinists.
Yet evenin thosequartersnobnehere 43. Allowmeto fill in thepictureI havebeendrawing
overthelastfewyears bv
attempts
to defendthefarcical“ele&on” heldlastyear of thereaionaldevelopments
to thenegotiating
effortsof
bv UteSandlnists
or to claimthat the Sandlnists
are devoting$& afewremarks
Group.The UnitedStateshas,fromthe
d&crats, or eventhat tbeyhavedemocratic
inclina- theContadora
process,
supported
it astbe
tions. As a matterof fact, basedon both the overt inceptionof theConiadora
andpeacefulregionalsolubehaviourandthedeclarations
oftbe Sandinists
them- besthopefor a negotiated
selves,the conchtsion
is no longeravoidablethat the tion for CentralAmerica.We still do. But candour
Sandinists
arecommittedMarxist-Leninists
intenton requiresthat we expressour continuingscepticism
commitment
to theletter andspirit
convertingNicaragua
intoanothertotalitariansatellite aboutNicaragua’s
21objectives.Wewonderhowothers
of theSovietUnion.Onthismattertooourearlyappre- of Contadora’s
in theSandinists’
claimthattheyaccept
hensions
havebeenborneout, andfor that reasonwe canacquiesce
objectiveswhileNicaragua
continues
to
donotbelievetbatit wassimplyagross
tacticalmistake theContadora
continuesto
for Commander
Grtegato havegoneto Moscow.In subvertand destabilixeits neighbours.
its war-making
potential,
fact,thevisitcanberegarredasaninadvertentmistake increasedisproportionately
only by thosewho havebeeninattentiveto both the continuesto rejectali attemptsat internalreconciliato developantidemocratic
govemmenbehaviourandthepublicstatements
of theSandinists. tion,continues
If wetakethoseaspects
into consideration,
then,the tal structures,continuesto imposepresscensorship
to drift furtherawayfromnon-alignment.
visitwasbutal@cal extension
ofthevery welldefined andcontinues
WeurgetheContadora
Groupto continuein itsefforts.
trajectoryof recentmonths.
and we call on the Sandinists
to demonstrate
their
41, Overthelastfour yearswehaveoftenstatedthat acceptance
of Contadora’s
21objectivesby fakingcontowardstheir implementation.
theSandinists
arebentontheintimidation,destabiliza- cretemeasures
6

44. To sum up what I havejust said, on the one hand
we believe our version of the political, military and
diplomaticdevelopmentsin the regionover the past few
years to be compellingboth in its generalthrust and in
the evidence that can be brought to bear in its support,
On the other hand. the Sandinist allegationsof American intentions to overthrow their regimeor to mount a
military invasion of Nicaragua not only lack tangible
evidencebut have beendisproved by the mere passing
of the specific dates when the supposed invasions were
to take place.
45. Let me now turn to the most recent allegationby
Nicaraaua.to the effect that our recently imposedtrade
embargoconstitutes anact ofaggression anda violation
of the Charter of the United Nations, the charter of the
Organization of American States. the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the United States-Nicaragua Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation.’ Frankly, we regard these as astonishingcharges.
Let me elaborate.
46. Customary international law does not oblige a
State to trade with any other State. Common sense
suggests, and international practice confirms, that in
general a State is free to choose its own trading partners. In this particular case before the Council there are
a number of agreementswhich set forth rules relevant
to continued trade. All of these agreements, without
exception, permit a Stateto exercise its customary law
rights and restrict trade in the interest of its own national security. In fact, it would be very surprising if a
State were compelled to put its commercial interests
ahead of its national security interest. It is hard to
believe that many States would accept such a limitation. The United States does not, and the measures we
have taken are taken solely under our own sovereign
prerogatives. They are carefully tailored so as not to
affect third countries or raise questions of extralerritoriality.
47. Our action does not violate the United StatesNicaraguan Friendship, Commerce and Navigation
Treaty. Neither does it violate the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade. The Friendship. Commerce and
Navigation Treaty contains a provision exempting
either party’s actions taken in pursuance of “its essential security inlerests”. In article XXI (1) we read:

the General Agreement to impose a boycott on trade
with Portugal because of that country’s policies in
Angola. The then Ghanaianrepresentative noted:
“Under this article each contracting party was the
sole judge of what was necessary in its essential
security interest. There could, therefore, be no
objectionto Ghanaregardingthe boycott of goods as
justified by security interests. It might be observed
that a country’s security interests might be threatened by a potential as well as an actual danger. The
GhanaianGovernment’s view was 1:at the situation
in Angola was a constant threat to the peaceof the
African continent and that any action which, by
brinftinn
- -: pressure to bear on the Portuguese Govemment, m&t lead to a lessening of thh danger, was
therefore justified in the essential security interests
of Ghana.”
49. Our actions with regard to Nicaraguan trade,
therefore. are not without precedent. As a matter of
fact, economic measures of this type are commonly
rec&nized and frequently used as ;riegitimate foreG
policy instrument. Indeed. as I look around the Council
i note that there is hardly a member that is not using,
has not used, or has not expressed a willingness to use
similar measures. Thus. for instance, a number of our
Council colleagues who were non-belligerents during
the Falklands/Malvinas conflict imposed strict economic sanctions a8ainst Argentina. We cannot believe
that they are now rcadv to condemntheir own measures
as a violation of the- Charter and as an iRe8ithntue
attempt to interfere in the internal afTairsof other cottntries. Neither can we believethat other membersof the
restrictions on commercial air ttafIic with, and imbargoes on trade with South Africa are ready to declare
that those policies are iRe8aJand contrary to the Charter’s provisions. Nor can we believe that a number of
other countries that routinely demandthe imposition of
economic and trade sanctions against selected nations
are now willing to concede that those requests are
illegaland contrary to the Charter.

Similarly. article XXI of the General Agreement
expressly permits measures a party “considers necessary for the protection of its essential security interest
. . taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations.”

50. But that is not all. More pertinent to the case at
hand, let me remind the Council that in the exercise of
their sovereign rights a numberof countries-including
members of Contadora-impose now. and have
imposed in the past, economic measures against other
countries. Finally. let me recall that in 1979the Sandinists themselves did not object, but, on the contrary,
encouraged the imposition of economic sanctions
against the Somoza r&ime, and that. according to a
R<uters repon of I8 July 1979, the foreign ministers
of the five Andean Group countries-Ecuador. Peru,
Bolivia, Colombia and Venezuela-threatened to press
for an oil embargo against Nicaragua if the Sandinists
were not allow&J tocome to power. Other regional
Powers, including another present member of Contadora. took similar measures.

48. We are not the first to invoke this provision. In
1961the Government
ofGhana relied on article XXI of

51. I have made the preceding points not with an
accusatory intent, but, rather, to ask for the Council’s

“The present Treaty shall not precludethe application of measures . . . necessary to fulfil the obliptions of a Party for the maintenanceor restoration of
international peace and security. or necessary to
protect its essential security interests”.

understanding that the United States actions with regard to trade with Nicaragua are not dissimilar to the
actions that most, if not all, of the Council’s members
havetaken at one timeor another. On the faceof this, to
condemnor, dependingon formulations, to deplore or
to regret the American embargo of trade with Nicaraguais to set aside truth and fairness and to embrace
the double standard.

57. If we are to operate in a world where there is no
distinction between aggression and self-defence, between subversion andresponses theret-direction
in
which the resolution 1 have been citing would push
us-then we shall have totally defeatedthe great purposes of the Charter of the United Nations andthe great
principles upor: which this institution stands. If we
permit Nicaragua, which has flagrantly
violated
not only principles of non-intervention and non-use of
force but also the self-determinationand humanrights
provisions of the Charter-a Government which has
refused to implement the provisions of the extraordinary Organizationof American States resolution which
gave it legitimacy-if we permit such a Government to
cover over its aggressive conduct by characterizing
United States trade actions taken in response as illegal,
then, surely, we are seriously damagingthe very foundations of this institution.

52. Let me now turn to the draft resolution that has
been circulating informally among Council members.
The draft resolution, if adopted,would stand both law
and logicon its head. It would condemna United States
embargo on American trade with Nicaragua as somehow violative of “the principle of non-interference in
the internal affairs of States”, while standing mute
in the face of actualmassive Nicaraguanintervention in
the internal affairs of its neighbouring States in supporting Marxist insurgencies. Those interventions,
which we have already catalogued-though, to be sure,
not exhaustively-in our earlier presentations before
the Security Council. are in violation not only of the
principle ofnon-intervention but of the principie of the
prohibition of the use of force, directly or indirectly,
against the territorial integrity or political independenceof Member States.

58. Finally, allow me to express what the United
StatesGovernment andthe American aeooledesire and
hope for the Nicaraguan people. I can iind no better
expression than the 30 April 1985editorial in the Nicaraguannewspaper La P&a that did not seethe light
of day because it was censored in its entirety by the
Sandinist OlEce of Communication. Given the Sandinist fondness for extensive quotations from American
publications, I believeit fitting that I should now quote
to them from La frensu. Indeed, it is my distinct
honour to do so and in so doing to demonstrate to the
world that, despite the tighteningSandinistoppression,
the spirit of freedom, honour and independenceis still
very much alive amongst the Nicaraguan people.

53. Specifically,Nicaragua’s campaignof subversion
and destabilization in Central America has violated
Article 2, paragraph 4. of the Charter of the United
Nations, articles 3, 18.20and 21of the revised charter
of the Organizationof American States, and article 1of
the Rio Treaty.’

59. The editorial is entitled “Ten points which won’t
be found in Moscow” and reads as follows:

54. Nicaragua’s actions are also contrary to the principles enunciatedin paragraph 3 of General Assembly
resolution 290 (IV) of 1949on the essentials of peace
and the 1970Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, annexedto Assembly resolution 2625
ww.

“After the Congressional denialof President Reagan’s request for $14million, it is not in Russia where
the solution to the tremendous problems of Nicaraguawill be found or where peacewill be obtained.As
much as Russia might want (for its own interest as a
&or Power) to help us, our orbit is in the American
continent; our neighbourhoodis democratic and our
economic destruction already so profound that we
would continue in decline, socialising misery and
ruiningourselveb for a fanaticalideologicalwhim that
we wish to call ‘sovereignty’.

55. *Today, in “Alice in Wonderland” fashion, Nicarag seeks to divert attention from its campaignof
destabiization and interference in the internalaffairs of
others by attemptingto focus attentionon the American
response.

“In order to pay Russia for its favours we will have
to accentuate our pro-Soviet alignment,and it is as
much a lack of sovereignty to fall mto the claws of the
eagleas it is to fall into the paws of the bear.

56. But, clearly, as I have mentioned previously,
there is nothing in any bilateral or multilateral agreement to which the United States is party that prevents
the United Statesfrom-at the very least-taking steps
to ensure that its own national conduct, its own trade
policy, in no way abets the campaign of subversion
which Nicaragua has undertten. Clezrly. tte national
emergencyeconomic powers invoked by the President
of the United States, pursuant to United States law, are
testimony to the gravity which we attach to this concern. The United States Government has not only a
right, but an obligation, not to aid, however indirectly,
the secret war waged in Central America by Nicaragua.

“The destruction in Nicaragua will not stop, nor
will Nicaraguans cease to perish because of a treaty
with Moscow. The only treaty that can save us is one
that all Nicaraguans sign.
“The following are the ten basic points of such a
treaty:
“I.
8

A true non-alignment:

“2.
The reign of law. without
with judicial procedures,
respect
and with the freedom to denounce
protection
from abuses;
“3.
police;

The political

neutrality

62. I thank the members of the Council for this opportunity once again to speak about the grave concern of
the Government
of Mexico over the sensitive situation
prevailing
in Central America,
a situation
which runs
the risk of becoming even more serious owing to actions
that jeopardize
the international
legal order and the
right of peoples to self-determination
and undermine
diplomatic
channels for negotiation
and understanding
between the parties.

retroactive
laws.
for human rights
abuses and to find
of the army

and the

“4.
The elimination
of the Committees
for the
Defence of Sandinism,
instruments
of partisan pressure against the freedom of the citizen and obstacles
impossible to overcome
for the functioning
of democracy;

63. At the beginning
of the debate (2577th meelingl
we listened to the statement
of the representative
of
Nicaragua,
in which he considered
some of the main
events of the Central American
crisis and the recent
measures which greatly atfect his country
and which.
by and huge. have been interpreted
as an escalation of
regional
tensions
and a coercive
measure against a
State Member of the Organisation
taken in violation of
Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations.

“5.
Total religious
freedom (the State must respect absolutely
the realm of faith and conscience
and the work of the Christian
churches);
“6.
Educational
freedom
and the inalienable
right of paren;s to choose for their childreu the education they want;

64. It is a publicly known fact that as from 7 May the
United States Government
suspended
its trade reiations with Nicaragua,
including cancellation
of sea and
air navigation
between the two nations.

“7.
A mixed economy.
which is not a matter
simply detlned as the percentage
of private property
that exists. but rather the legal protection
of the
entrepreneur
and property
owner,
which are currently subject to arbitrary
confiscation
and the lawless intervention
of the State. For this reason, this
point requires revision of all unjust expropriations;

65. The proscription
of coercive economic measures
aimed at putting pressure
on the soverei.sn
will of a
State is one of the fundamental
principles
of international law that has been enshrined
in numerous mtdtilatend agreements
and instruments.

“8.
Freedom
of expression.
and freedom
of
organization
and of assembly
for political parties.
The right of access to the electronic
media (television). Strict equahty of access for the party in power
and all other parties;

The

“9.

Free trade

” 10.

Total

editorial

66. We would refer to the Declamtion
on Principlesof
International
Law concerning
Friendly
Relations and
Cooperation
among States ia aecordence
with the
Chatter of the United Nations,
adopted in 1970 by the
General
Assembly
by resolution
2625 (xxv),
which
stipulates:

unions;

and complete

amnesty.”

**No State or group of Statee has the right to intervene, directly or indirectly,
for any reason whatever,
in the internal or external
aR&e of any other State.
Consequently,
armed
intewention
and all other
forms of intetfemrtce
or attempted
tltmats against the
pcmodity of tbe State or against its political, tcD
node and cultural elements. are in violation ofittternational law.

concludes:

“These are the ten basic points for the attainment
of peace. a peace which is not in Yanzanilto.
nor in
Moscow,
but in Nieamgua;
it is to save the revolution
that belongs to all Nicmaguan s. the deviation
from
which is causing us death&d
destruction.
They are
the ten points for Nicaragua’s
return to a democratic
republican
Government.”

“No State may use or encourage
the use of eeonomic, political
or any other type of measures to
coerce anotber
State in order to obtain front it the
subordination
of the exercise of its sovereign
rights
and to secure from it advantages
of any kind.

60. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the tep
resentative
of Mexico.
I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement,

...

61.
Mr. MU&O2
LED0
(Mexico)
(intcrpreratlon
j&i
&WniShj:
6II bdhdf of my dei+iion+
1 cm@iuulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency
of
the Security
Council. a high post reflecting
the great
virtues of impartiality
and fine diplomatic
skill&at
you
possess. We are convinced
that you will be able to guide
this debate to a positive conclusion,
a debate that is so
crucial for the future of international
relations and the
stability
of our hemisphere.

“States shall conduct their intemationel
relations
in the economic,
social. cultural, technical and tmde
fields in accordance
with the principles
of sovereign
quality
and non-intervention”.
67. The inter-American
system is itself based on the
principle of non-intervention.
The charter of the Organization of American
States lays down in article 19 that
9

“No State may use or encouragethe use of coercive measures of an economic or political character
in order to force the sovereign will of another State
and obtain from it advantagesof any kind.”

process. The participants emphasizedthe urgent need
to promote trade between Central American countries
and Europe. North America, Japanand Latin America.
It is important to avoid any violation of the spirit and the
letter of the commitments made in San Jose.

68. In addition, the Latin American Economic System has on a numberof occasions consideredthe question of coercive measures. In September 1983.at its
ninth special session, it condemnedthe applicationof
such measures against countries of the region. At its
tenth regu!ar session, held in October 1984.the Latin
American Council adopted another decision on coercive measures, in which it recalled the commitments
undertaken by the contracting parties to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and affirmed that the
application of such measures undermined the peacemaking efforts of the Contadora Group.

74. The principal aim of the Government of Mexico
has been to guaranteein the Central American region.
as in any other region, the right of self-determination
and its practical corollary, political pluralism-pluralism that will make possible in eachcountry the develop
ment of its own social organization andensure for each
State full sovereignty over its political and economic
processes as well as the grcatcst freedom in their intcrnational relations.
75. Ideological differences between countries. like
the diversity of their social traditions and structures,
should not be made a reason for confrontation. In a
complex and diverse world, international relations
must be based on tolerance, genuineco-operation and
justice, and all forms of discrimination, hostility and
exclusivity must be set aside. Contemporary history
has much to teach us regarding the grave dangers of
acting in a way that runs counter to that objective.

69. Furthermore, there is a norm of customary internationallaw to the effect that in times of peace trade
ports should be open to international traffic and that
accessto such ports by vessels cannot be preventedin a
discriminatory fashion because of their nationality.
70. In keeping with the relevant provisions of the
Charter, the Security Council must determine in the
light of the facts the measures that should beadoptedto
guarantee the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Member States and to establish peace and security in
the Central American region.

76. Following the events that led to this debate the
Government of Mexico formulated a statement in
which it repeated that the harmonization of politicdl
agreementsbetween the parties involved was the only
appropriate way to settle the conflicts in the Central
American region. My country stressed the urgent need
to prevent tensions that might lead to confrontations
and to avoid any friction that might lead to a generalized confhct in the area with consequences that would
extend far beyond the Central American borders.

71. Mexico deplores the fact that the diplomatic
efforts undertaken by our Government to safeguardthe
essential prhtciples of international coexistence in
the geographicaland cultural area closest to us to are
impededby acts of force. We know that our position is
in keeping with the unanimousattitude of the internationalcommunity in favour of a peacefulsolution to the
CMfi3l American con&t and with the historic determination of the peoples of Latin America to defend
r
sovereignty and independencein the context of
w
respect and co-operatton.

77. Mexico, together with the countries which have
committed themselves to the Contadora process, has
been promoting a responsible dialogue among all the
States of the area, on political coexistence on the basis
of mutual respect and economic and social co-operation. We want to prevent the Central American conflict
from becoming one more element in the Fast-West
Confrontation-We have therefore reallhmed the principle of non-alignment as the formula for peaceful,
orderly and harmonious coexistence in Central Amer.
ica. Our ultimate purpose has been to put forward
strictly Latin American formulas to solve the problems
that must be dealt with and resolved by us alone.

72. At the end of September Iast year, at San Jod.
Costa Rica, there wti a joint meeting of the foreik
ministers of Central American countries, the member
countries of the European Economic Community,
Spain,Portugal andthe Contadora Group. Speakingon
behalf of the latter. the Mexican Minister for Foreian
Affairs said, “With respect to economic and so&l
development, the Contadora Act gives expression to
understandings in favour of developmentand Central
American integration” and also contains “obligations
to promote trade on an intrazonal and extraregional
basis, and proscribes coercion in economic reiations
and discrhninatory practices which are an obstacle :o
trade and economic ties between the countries”.

78. Furthernore, Mexico has advocated the establishment of a frank. constructive dialogueon a basis of
equality between the United States and Nicaraguaand
has offered the hospitality of its own territory for this
purpose. The Manz&illo~talks embodiedthe-effective
possibility of solving. by means of negotiations based
on mutual respect, the differences between two sovereign States with which we maintainstrong relations of
ftiendship and co-operation.

73. At that meetinga proposal was made to activate
co-operation between the countries of Western Europe
and Central America in keeping with the support that
such nations haveconsistently offered to the Contadora

79. At one time this dialogueled to a climate of detente and provided a basis for understanding which
IO

other countries of the area to live in peace and security,
free from outside interference”.

could be strengthened relatively easily if the contacts
could be resumed. We could once again set in motion
the appropriate political mechanism to settle existing
disagreements in a civilized way and prevent aggressive
acts such as those which this Council now has to consider.

86. Both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have adopted resolutions firmly supporting
the effort made by the Contadora Group in seeking a
peaceful solution to the Central American issue and
urninn all the narties concerned to render their coo&&on
to the Contadora Group. However, what
bothers us is the fact that the United Nations resolutions on respecting the independence and sovereignty
of all the countries of Central America have aot been
fully implemented and that there still exist various
forms of outside interference, resulting in a continuously turbulent and intranquil situation in that region.

80. Mexico insists that regional differences must be
resolved in keeping with the provisions of Chapter VI of
the Charter. Economic coercion is incompatible with
the objectives pursued in the process begun by Contadora. We renew our call to all States to respond
effectively and clearly to the diplomatic action that we
have undertaken. We invite the countries concerned to
resume in a framework of dignity the dialogue that was
interrupted.

87. Recently the United States declared that it would
impose a trade embargo against Nicaragua, which
caused further deterioration in the relations between
the two countries. Many countries have expressed their
concern in this regard. The Chinese delegation has
consistently advocated that disputes between States
should be settled through peacelid negotlatlons in
accordance with the basic nonns guiding international
relations and on a basis of equality. We maintain that
the interference in the internal alBtlrs of Niearagun
by the United States and its exertion of pressure on
Nicaragua by imposing a trade embargo and through
other measures constitute violations of the putposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter and will
aggravate the tension in Central Am&a.
to the detrlment of the peaceful solution of the problem of the
region.

81. The Central American crisis has been the subject
of consideration by the Council for several years now
and has also been on the agenda of the General Assembly. In its resolution 3914, of 26 October 1984, the
Assembly urged “all States, in particular those with ties
to and interests in the region, to respect fully the purposes and principles of the Contadora Act.”
82. Despite the unequivocal and unanimous pronouncement of the international community, aggressive designs are still clearly standing in the way of the
Contadora peace-making efforts in Central America.
The time has come to choose between peace and war,
between imposition and dialogue, between lasting principles and transient passions.
83. Scrupulous respect for the principles of law and
the nractice of diolomatic negotiation in the search for
genuine solutions’to the probhmsof our time should be
the constant norm in Member States. This is the best
way of commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations: it should be celebrated not by
ceremonies but by political decisions that confirm our
desire for peace and justice.

88. The Chinese delegntlon is of the view that the
Central American question should be settled on a fhlr
and just basis by the Central American counwles
through negotiations in accmdanee with the principle8
national selfdetemrlnatlon and fnc Born any outside
interference. T+ Contadorn Group has made UIuc~~g~“~

$4. Mr. LIANG Yufan (China) (Inro~remrion from
Chinese): I am very pleased to see you, Sir, the distilpished representative of Thailand. a friendly nelg&
bouring country of China. presiding over the meeting.
The Chinese delegation warmly congratulates you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. We are sure that with your outstanding
talent and rich experience in diplomacy you will em&k
the Council to accomplish the important tasks facing it
in May in an excellent manner. I wish also to take this
opporiunity to express our thanks to your predecessor.
Mr. Javier Arias Stella of Peru, for his valuable contributions made during his tenure of the presidency of
the Council last month.

andhasthuswonwldespreadprpiKfromtheinterttiUlOd-Y.IhcChhtCStdtkostiDttWkh8StO
miterate here that China resolutely supports the ContadoraGroupinitseffortforapeacefulsolutlondthe
Central Amerlean issue and hoper that the United
States and the other Parties concerned will mpond
effortssotbattbetenslonhtCentmlAmerlcaaiayk
rdaxcd.
89. Mr. BlERRlNG @enmark): Mr. Prasldem, fvlr
I wish to congratulate you most sincerely on your
accession to the twesider~~~ of the Security Council for
the~oth(liy.lscnurrrthotwithy~richex~
rknce in diplomacy you will make a vaMabk contrlbutiontotheworkofthecouncil,nndIwplru~youot
the co-operation of the Danish delegation. Furthermore, you represent acountry with which Denmark has
always had special ties of friendship and co-operation.

85. The international community has always been
much concerned with the situation in Central America.
The Security Council has been seized ofthis issue many
times before and emphatically reaffirmed in its resolution S30 (1983) “the right of Nicaragua and of all the
II

I wish also to avail myself of this opportunity to express
my admiration for the outstanding way in which your
predecessor, the representative of Peru, Mr. Arias
Stella, carried out his responsibilities last month.

94. Last September a conference of foreign ministers
was held at San Jose between the States members of the
European Community, Portugal and Spain, the States
of Central America and the Contadora States. In the
joint communique which was issued from that meeting
the ministers reaffirmed their commitment to the objectives of peace, democracy, security and economic and
social development and political stability in Central
America. They inaugurated on that occasion a new
structure of political and economic dialogue between
Europe and Central America, The ministers also agreed
to extend and diversify their mutual trade to the fullest
possible extent and, taking into account the importance
of economic development for the countries of Central
America, the Community committed itself to do everything possible towards the development of the region
within the context of its present and future programmes
in support of developing countries.

90. Once again the Council is seized of the serious
situation in the Central American region. Acts of violence leading to loss of human lives, misery and violation of human rights have long been a fact of daily life.
The tense situation has for several years attracted the
attention of the world and has been a cause of great
concern to us all.
91. The crisis in Central America is closely related to
the processes of change in which the countries of the
region are immersed. The centuries-old social and economic iqjustices and oppression are at the root of the
present situation. Just and durable solutions to the social inequalities and economic underdevelopment cannot be achieved by armed force, or by any other form of
coercion. The escalation of violence offers no hope to
the peoples of the region. Only economic and social
reforms, a more equitable distribution of resources and
a commitment to democratic systems of government
through free elections can solve the underlying problems of the countries concerned. Respect for the fundamental principles of non-interference, the inviolability of national frontiers. self-determination without
external pressure and the settlement of contIicts by
peaceful means through negotiation is of overriding
importance. Nothing is galned by drawing the problems
of the area into an East-West context.

95. In line with the belief in the value of trade and
economic co-operation as expressed in the San Jose
communiau& my Government is of the firm view that
the imposition of economic sanctions-though not violating general international law-will in no way help in
solving the problems and reducing the conflicts of-the
region. It is understandable that the long-standing situation of instability and unrest in the region gives cause
for concern to neighbouring countries. However, tension in the region will increase, and the embargo puts
the Contadora process in serious jeopardy. thereby
in CentraI~mericri,
96. The United States hasdemonstrated in the past, in
the most magnanimous way, its readiness and ability to
mount large-scale assistance to countries and regions
in distress. The time has come to transform the crisis in
Central America into an opportunity: to seize the impetus it provides and to use it not only to help the countries of the region to secure their freedom from aggression and violence but also to help them with their social
and economic development.

92. The main responsibility for the solution of regional problems lies with the countries in the reglon
itself. My Government has therefore fully supported
the peace efforts of the Contadora Group since they
were initiated. The Contadora process constitutes a
political and diplomatic eITort -with a potential for
achievements of the greatestsignifkance. The four
Contadora eountrles, In close c&&oration
wltb all
the.Central American Governments concerned, have
shown a persistent readlneas to continue the process,
despite diffdtks
encountered, and have indeed
obtained remarkable results. But it is a fraglk undertaking and demands of all parties directly or indirectly
involved the utmost flexibility and restraint.

97. Meanwhile we urgently appeal to the parties to
refrain from any action which will further aggravate the
l3lluauon.
98. Mr. TRGYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inrerpre~u&nfiom
Russian): First, I welcome you, Sir, the representative of Thailand. to the
respondble post of Fresklent of the Security Council.
We are certain that with your customary diplomatic
acumen you will continue to guide the work of the
Council this month successfully. I take this opportunity
also to express our gratitude to the representative of
Peru, Mr. Arias Stella, for the skiiful-i wouid say
masterly-way in which he canied out the functions of
President during the month of April, which was by no
means an easy month from the point of view of the
Council’s work.

93. The Contadora nrocess has gained support from
the whole international community, without~exceplion.
In its unanimously adopted resolution 530 (1983). the
Security Council commended the eIforts of the Contadora Groun and appealed urecntlv to the interested
States to co-operate~fuiiiy wifh &e Group, whiie at the
same time reaftIrming the right of Nicamgua andofau
the other countries k the &a to live in peace and
security, free from outside interference. These positions have since been supported in resolutions by the
General Assembly, also adopted unanimously. This
international consensus and support of the Comadora
effort must be maintained.

99. Today is a special day for all mankind and for the
United Nations, The peoples of the world are cele12

Bureau of that Movement considered the dangerous
situation surrounding Nicaragua and categorically condemned the lawless actions directed against that country. In our opinion, the sentiments expressed in the
communique adopted at that meeting [S/17/63, unnex]
are completely warranted.

brating the fortieth anniversary of the victorious conclusiou of the struggle against fascism, which had set
out togain world supremacy. That world-wide, historic
victory was gained through the common efforts of various countries. In commemorating this great victory.
the Soviet people, who contributed decisively to the
overthrow of fascism in annihilating more than 70 per
cent of Hitler’s divisions. have not forgotten the major
contribution made to the strugggle against our common
cncmy by the peoples of the countries of the anti-Hitler
coalition, the fighters in the national liberation armies.
the partisans, the members of the underground, and
those who participated in anti-fascist insurgencies and
the resistance movement.

105. Over the past four years. problems connected
with the situation in Central America have been a constant feature of the agenda of the Security Council. We
have seen that, despite existing United Nations resolutions, the situation in that part of the world continues to
deteriorate. It is becoming an increasingly dangerous
source of international tension. There is one reason for
this: the further escalation ofanti-Nicaraguan action on
the part of the United States, action aimed at interference in the internal affairs of a sovereign State and at
the toppling of its leg8J Government. Preparations for
the expansion of armed operations carried out by the
Somozists and their allies are being accelerated and
directly co-ordinated by United States personnel.

100. The military alliance that came about during the
years of the war demonstrated the potential for cooperation that is inherent in the joint strttggte for peace
and a better future for mankind. Today a message has
been issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union and the Council of
Ministers of the Soviet Union. Its title is “To the Peoples. Parliaments and Governments of All Countries”
bn the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the end of
the Second World War. This tness88e emphasizes that
“one of the main lessons that have &en l&med is that
agsression has to be resolutely end concertedly cornbated before the actual flames of war flare up.”

106. The spring of this year has been characterized by
a further round in preparations by the United States
forces in Central America, with clearly interventionist
intentions. Evidence of this is the utmrecedented number of United States servicemen who were assigned to
that part of the world during the “Big Pine” and “Univers8l Trek” manoeuvres. as well as the fact that
and that landing operations are be&g further perfected.
The t&tories of cert8in Central American States 8re
being turned more and more into a springboard for a
dev8st8ting anti-Nicateguan WBC.

101. Today, the Soviet Union is appealing to 8ll peapies, parliaments and Governments to heed the voice of
reason and, through joint and active efforts, to halt the
gradual trend towards the abyss of nuclear catastrophe
and to bar the way to a new WBI.

107. Having emtmrked.on the course of s$ving tlte
cyern ofC+tnl Amence by force, the Umted Slates
In tactics of openly blocking any ways and
m88ns?I? 8ffe&tg 8 political settlement in th8t u8rt of
the world. It is p&ciOely Ike f8ult of the Unlteditates
that the United States-Nicamgtmn t8lks were broken
elf and that the p88ce efforts of the Cont8dor8 Omup
have bean tbwartad und8r conttivcd pmtcxts. 06h8mi8&y, wltkoutb8ckingitspositionupby8ny8rgtttnent8tbn, Washi~
has r8j8cted 8ll constructive propos8lr made by the Nicamguan Government and has
ignored all its tenders of good will.

102. An impnmmt part in 8ll this undoubtedly will
have to be played by tlte United Nations. The message
to which I have referred go8s on to lndluue that it is in
the common interest of 8ll countrks to promole the
enhenced effe4tivenesr of th8 United Nations 8s 8n
internotional tool for peace 8nd s8cufity 8tnong peoples
and in the implearcnfatlon of the lofty @
procI8Im8d
in its Ch8rt8r: to s8ve succe8ding wr
fmm the
scourge of w8r 8nd to ensure char peoples live tog8thef
in the world 8s good neighbours.
103. The dekg8tion of th8 Soviet Union supported
Nic8ragua’s request for an urgent tne8ting of the Security Council. We list8ned c8mfully to the statement
made in this chamber by the representative of Nic8mgu8, Mr. Ch8morro Mom. The f8cts cited in th8t
excclkntly phutned 8nd bnlsaced stptement confIrm
th8t this request WB) well founded.

108. From time to time. pursuing obviously tactical
purpostcr, tlte United States h8s not shrunk from resorting to m8ooeuvrer designed to obfuscate the new,
even more dangerous rt8ge th8t h8s been r88ched in its
8ggmrive policy in that part of the world. Under the
guise of s048lkd peace plans, wh8t is in fact being
rqcm;g
is a &**
OrKe dii L ite iaieird iirwture of Nicmgua, changes in its foreign policy. A sovereign country is being instructed, in the form of an
ultimatum, about which States it may main& reiations with and which St8ter it may not maintain relations with. Amwas aptly stated in this connection by the
President of Colombia. Belisario Betancur, these plans
ore no more and no less than “preparations for war”.

IO4 The tremendous 8l8rm felt 8t the rt8te of atrain
in Central America has been qui’e clearly expressed
today in the statements of 8 numkr of oth8r St8tes
Members of the United Nations. l&any rpeskerr hove
expressed the general view of the Movement of NonAligned Contries, comprising approximately IO0 States
of the world. On 7 May this year, the Co-ordinating
I3

199. It is a fact that it has become a matter of public
record that there are plans to increase the total strength
of counter-revolutionary units to a total of 35,066.At
the same time, it has been directly acknowledged that
there is a possibility that United States armed forces
may be used against Nicaragua if Nicaragua does not
yield to crude pressure
andblackmail.

ment”. But in the caseof Nicaraguasanctions
have
beenimposed
withconsummate
ease,withtheobvious
intentionof precluding
anypossibilityof adialogue
and
the peacefulsolutionof the problem.

116. Thestatement
madetodayby therepresentative
of the UnitedStatesonly corroborates
the arguments
put forwardby Nicaragua.Thebasicpurposeof that
wasto attemptto justify increasing
intervenI IO. At thesametime,asweknowfrominformation statement
that hasreachedus,the Pentagon
isactively working tion by the UnitedStatesin the affairsof that small
out thedetailsof further militaryactionto be carried country.He triedto “explain” why the UnitedStates
out in CentralAmerica,basedon its “experience”in shouldbeinterferingin the affairsof anothercountry,
Lebanon
andGrenada.It wouldseemthat thelessons but hesaidnothingaboutthe mainoointat issue-who
rightto carry’out suchintervenof thenot-so-distant
past,includingthepastof IOyears gaveWashingtonihe
ago.havenotbeenproperlylearned.Whattheancients tion?Thatis a questionto whichthe SecurityCouncil
saidwastrue:whomthegodswoulddestroytheyfirst wouldlikean answer.Sofar it hasreceived-none.
makemad. ’
117. Therepresentative
of theUnitedStatesaccused
of somesortof interventionin theatfairsof
Ill. All theseacts have beencarriedout ooenlv. Nicaragua
Onewonders
whythoseneighbours
and
floutinggenerallyrecognizedprinciplesof morality; itsneighbours.
internationallaw and the Charterof the UnitedNa- otherLatinAmericancountrieseitherhavebeensilent
tions.Sucha courseof actioncannotbut arouselegit- or havespokenout againstUnitedStatesactivities.
Finally, whenhe assertedthat somesort of special
relationship
existsbetweenNicaragua
andthe Soviet
andindignationwithinthe UnitedStatesitself:
Union,the representative
of the UnitedStatescould
112. The latestlink in the chainof lawlessactions cite only onefact: that PresidentOrtegahad visited
wasthe impositionby the United Statesof a trade Moscow.It wouldbe ratherstretchingthingsto conembargo
andotherdiscriminatory
economic
measures siderevery visit by a headof Stateto anothercounagainsiNicaragua.All thishasbeendonein spiteof try’s capitalto be somesort of subversiveactivity.
established
internationalprinciplesand the bilateral 1think. by the way, that tomorrowPresidentOrtega
and multilateralcommitmentsVentered
into by the will be in Madrid.
UnitedStateswithinthe frameworkof the UnitedNa- Ilg. ThepresenteventsaroundNicaragua
mustnections,the UnitedNationsConference
on Tradeand essarllybe consideredin a broadercontext.
As
Development,
theGeneralAgreementon Tariffsand emphasized
in his statement of 23April thisyearby the
Tradeand other omnizations. The clear purpose here
General&rotary of the CentralCommitteeof the
isto damage
the economyof a developing
countryand evunist
Party of the Soviet Union, M&hail Gorto bringits peopleto their knees by means of a trade
*
blockade.It Itasnotbeenconcealed
that theseactions
areiatendedto bolsterthegeneralinterventionist
pol“The UnitedStatesonenlvclaimsthe ‘riuht’ to
icy pradsedagainstNicaragua.
ridingroughshod
over, the interestsof othercoun113. It is well knownthat unilateralpoliticallimltaIrks andpaopks,eswellasthe traditionsof intertkmsontradeand&itraryboycottsorsanctloneofany nationalmlalknsaadexistinntraatksandanteG
kind create an atmosphere of tension and mistrust in
mmls.It c4xulady creatests
ofcdlictMd
internationaleconomicrelationsand underminethe
the lhmal ofwar by exaw-bating the situation first in
legalbasisof thoserelations.
onepart of the world, thenin another.Today the
UnitedStatesis Uueamning
the heroicpeopleof
114. In thisconnection
it isnotinappropriate
to recall
Nicaragua
with militaryviolence,tryingto depriveit
onceagainthat. whileimposing
embargoes
andblockOtits~andsov~ty,~itdid$thecaseot
ades against Statesunwillina to act at the behest of
the peopkOfGrenada.”
Washhigton.
the UnitedStat& hasfor manyyearsnow
stubbornlydefendedthe racist r&he of Pretork 119. The SovietUnionmly
rqiectsandconagainst
theimposition
by theSecurityCouncilde&cdemnsthe policy of aggression,
interventionin the
live international
m.
internal&airs of Nkarqua andStateterrorismwhich
i3kiaspvrusd~thatcountry.ItrisesinMence
I IS. Weshouldbevery gratefulto the UnitedStates ofthein&nabkrigMsoftheNkamguan peopleto
delegation
ifit couldexplainto theCouncilwhy,wben- free,detnocra&andindependent
development,
andit
everthe questionof imposing
sanctions
againstSouth stands
fldy behindthatpeopkin its snuggleagainst
Africaarises,UnitedStatesrepresentatives
assertthat theaggressive
inroadsof imperialism.
This approach,
suchactionwouldnot yield the desiredresult.They whichwe maintainasa matterof principle,wasconhaveclaimedthat what is neededin the caseof the fvlmd duringtherecentvisitto ourcountryof adelegauparrheidregime
is“dialogueandconstructiveengage- tion fromNicaragua,headedby ResidentOrtega.
14

120. A solution to the problems of Central America
will be found not through strong-arm methods, ultimatums or embargoes, but only by seeking a peaceful
settlement through negotiations, taking into account
the legitimate interests of all countries in the area and
resaecting their sovereinntv. It is still not too late to
return tojhe path set out in the Charter of the United
Nations. That is why the Soviet Union is in favour of
giving a further impetus to the activities of the Contadora Group and supports the initiatives of the Government of Nicaragua aimed at initiating dialogue and
removing the state of tension from Central America.
121. Indeed, that position cannot but be shared by all
who truly cherish the ideal of peace and genuinely
acknowledge and defend the principles of the Charter.
This is what is demanded by United Nations consensus
decisionson the situation in Central America. includinn
Security Council resolution 530 (1983) and Genera
Assembly resolutions 3800 and 3914. This is made
abundantly clear by the violent reaction throughout the
world to the most recent steps taken by the current
Administration in Washington.
122. In our opinion, the Security Council will be
acting correctly-and responsibly if ii demands that the
rights of Nicaragua be respected like those of other
countries, including its rlghifreely to determine its own
political, economic and social system, and lf it condemns intervention in the affalrs of Central Amerlcn
and the illegal imposition of economic embargoes and
calls for an immediate end to those actions.
123. Mr. WOOLCG’IT (Australia): Mr. President.
I could speak about the ties that link our two countries.
but it is ~stdflcient to say that I am delighted to congratulate you. as the distinguished representative of a
country of the south-east Asian region, a region of
which Australia regards itself as a part, on your assumption of the oresidencv and to assure YOU of my
delegation’s confidence thnt you will dis&rge yo&
duties with great distinction. I should also like to
express our -appreciation to the President for April.
Mr. Javier Arias Stella. for discharging his duties so
skilfully and effectively.
124. We are considering today developments ln a t-egion with a long history of violence and insect&y. It is
a region with serious economic. social and polkkal
problems stemming from centuries of exploltatlon and
iqjustlce. The problems of the region may not be new,
but they are serious, and the international community
has an obligation to take a responsible interest in developments in Central America, as well as doing what it
can to help better the lot of the peoples of that region.
12% bfy country is situated far from Central America.
but our membership in the Security Council places
upon us an obligation to play a constructive and r&onsibk role in the search for peaceful solutions ‘to those
issues which come before the Council.
126. Australia’s views on the situation have been
clearly expressed on a number of occasions over the

last year or so. We have pointed to the existence of
uniust economic and social situations as the basic
source of the region’s problems, and we have urged that
the East-West contlict be kept out of Central America.
We have called on all countries to support the actions
of the Contadora Group. which is seeking a peaceful
and negotiated solution to the conflicts of-the region. We have noted the concern of the Contadotn
countries themselves and of others with close ties to the
region-such as Canada, Peru, Brazil, Argentina and
Mexico-that
this process should not be placed in
jeopardy. Solutions to the problems of the region can
come only from the people of the region themselves;
they cannot be imposed from outside.
127. The Security Council should do all it can to SUDport this process of negotiation. While it is the ContadoraGroup which is doing the hard work. the Council
can support it by pointing to the principles and practices
which should guide all States involved. Most importantly, all Stat& should fulfil, in good faith, their obligations under the Charter of the United Nations,
including the obligation to settle international disputes
by peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace and security and justice are not endangered.
128. In applying these general principles to the particular case of Central America, we can make certain
observations. All Central American countries have the
right to live in peace and security, free from outside
interference. This principle was restated in Security
Council resolutioa 530 (1983) and remains valid today.
Nicnrngna has the right to choose its own form of Government, without outside interference. The use offorce
to resolve disputes is to be deplored, no matter who
uses it. The cycle of violence in Central America must
be stopped The Contadora process should be fully
supported by all States. not just ln their rhetoric, but
also in their actions. Trade sanctions in this case will
not, In our opinion, achieve the end they are snpposed
to achieve. but nm likely to have the opposite effect
-that is. to immase tensions and thus hinder the Cont&In process.
129. My ddegath
listened attentively to the statements of prec&ng speakers. AustraUa understands
U&d States concerns in the r&n and does not deny
thattbeUnitedStnteshasarlghttokconcernedabout
what is happen@ so close to its own borders. It is
natural for all countries to be concerned about what is
hap@ngintbeirneighbomhood.
It is in this context
that the Anstrallnn Prime Minister and Fomipn Minister
have made clear that they do not consider the impositionoftmdesanctionstobeanappropnateactionin
ik churiiriancer. The Atisiiaiiaii Goveiniiicni regrets
that this step was taken.
130. To conclude. I make a plea to all countries involved to refrain from violence or the support of violence in Central America. Australia calls on all parties
to avoid provocative actions which may increase tensions or complicate the search for a peaceful solution to
the problems of the region.

13I. Australia expresses the solemn hopethat all parties will embrace the process of dialogueand negotiation in the conduct of their relations. By such means
they can work together for political, economic and
social reforms, as necessary steps towards the emergenceof stableGovernments, supported by democratic
choice throughout the region, and for a much-desired
improvement of human rights. That is the objz? ir: to
which all parties should dedicate themselves. That is
the objective which all parties should strive to achieve.
Australia hopes that this debatein the Security Council
will play some part in the achievementof those objectives.
132. Mr. de KEMOULARlA (France) (inrerprerafion
from French): It is a pleasureto join previous speakers,
Mr. President, in warmly congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency. I scarcely need to refer
to the ancient ties of friendship that link our countries.
Having had the pleasure of getting to know you better
over a number of months, thanks to our friendly contacts, I know that your sense of negotiationand your
flexible but effective authority will serve you well
during your period as President. I should also like, Sir,
to tell your predecessor, Mr. Arias Stella, that his term
of office as President was much appreciated by my
delegation.His diplomatic experience and his natural
cntutesy had a very positive impact on our negotiations. He knows, as 1 do, of the excellentrelations that
have united our two nations for some time-indeed,
from the very beginning.
133. I should be remiss if1 failed to remind the Council of the concern caused to my Government by any
increase in tension in Central America. whatever its
origin.
134. When military actions ledthe Security Council to
adopt resolution 530 (1983) in May 1983, we were
pleasedthat certain ftmdantentalprinciples of the Charter were unanimously reaffii
by members of the
Council, particularly, in the fourth preambular paragraph, “the obligationof States to settle their disputes
exclusively by peaceful means”.
135. Thatunanimityabouttheneedtofindameansto
bring about peac&l developments in Central America
and about support for the efforts of the Cotttadora
Group were also expressed at the last two sessions of
the GeneralAssembly, in its resolutions 38/lOand39/4.
136. That is the course of action we wish to see taken
in order to find a lasting regional solution in Central
America. The conclusion and implementation of the
Contadora Act would enableallthe countries ofCentral
.&g&a

to hvrlnn
--. ---r

&no

- tb
m..v -.linea
. - - - frrrly
_. - - -

&cl!

by

their populations.
137. The undertaking of the Contadora Group cannot
but be adversely affected by the coercive measures
taken against Nicaragua. My country regrets all the
more that that has occurred, since the Ten of Europe
havejust sent a special good will mission to the Group
and to the States of Central America.

138. Such economic measures, like measuresof a different nature which prompted the Security Council to
meet in April 1984.wrll affect the lives of populations
that have already been sorely tried. They bear within
them the seeds of further internal tensions. In Central
America, as elsewhere, we are quite convinced that
there can be no genuineor lastingdemocracy unless it is
founded on peace and economic and social development.That is why France supports the process of negotiation in that region and maintains relations of cooperatiun with the States of that area.
139. Therefore France cannot but earnestly appealfor
dialoguewhile at the sametime reaffirming its commitment to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, to the continuation of the Contadora process
and to all those bilateral negotiationswhich have been
initiatedin order to produce the necessary and urgently
neededeasing of tension.
140. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement. 141. Mr. ORAMAS OLIVA (Cuba) (interpretdon
Spanish):
1 congratulate you, Sir. on your
assumption of duties as President of the Security Council for this month. I am certain that with your great
experience and skill you will successfully guide over
the proceedings of this important body. I also congratulate Mr. Arias Stella of Peru, a distinguished colkague Corn the America which is watching us today
with deep concern and hope in the Council’s ability
to assume its responsibility regarding the delicate
situation in Nicaragua. The excellent work done by
Mr. Arias Stella in the Council has faithfully reelected
his concern for and commitment to our peoples.

from

142. Once again it is necesary to call upon the Security Council to consider the situation created by the
u&stified, unilateral embargo the Governme& in
Washington has imposed upon Nicaragua. This new
sten in the escalation of United States Government
the many politi&l, economic and military acts of
aggression which that country has had to endure practically from the very momem when the satrapy of the
Somozas, the illegitimateoffspting of Yankee ntilitary
intervention in Nicaragua, was defeated.To the political harassment, the press campaignsdesignedto distort the imageof the Sandinistrevolution, the training,
arming and financing of counter-revolutionary bands,
the mining of ports and the carrying out of endless
m&ry manoeuvres on the borders and coasts of
Nicaragua must be added the embargonow imposed to
kill the people of Nicaragua with starvation.
143. The pretext used to impose this criminal
embargo is the trip of the Resident of Nicaragua to the
Soviet Union. Since when does the President of a sovereignand independentcountry have to ask permission
of Washington to take a trip to another capital?In the

nameof what legalconcept or moral precept does the
United States arrogate such a right to itself?

petenceof the Security Council. We strongly condemn
this absurd, illogical and immoral measure-with
which, let me repeat, Cuba is familiar because it was
imposed on us 26 years ago and may well be imposed
tomorrow againstanyone who will not follow Washington’s dictates.

144. The time has come for human reason, wisdom
andintelligenceto prevail. Those who for years have in
a svstematic mannerbeennoisoninawith fairy-tales the
atmosphere in the Central American region-must stop
this escalationandso avoid further suffering, deathand
destruction.
145. The Government in Washinnton must think carefully about the fact that its alliesmeetingin Bonn a few
days ago expressed disagreement with the embargo
against Nicaragua. In other places, friends of the
United States have added their voices to those who
disagree
with that measure.Never hasthe isolation
beengreater.It mustconsiderthiscarefully;it shows,
furth&-more, disagreement with the policy-the United
States has been conducting against Nicaragua for so
manv
. years.
.
146. Why doesthe UnitedStatesnot negotiatehonestlyandcalmlywith Nicaragua?
Whydo& it notsup.
port with specitic.tangibleand seriousactionsthe
effortsof theContadoraGroupto arriveat a peaceful
solution.whenNicaragua
hasdemonstrated
flexibility
andthe politicalwill to neuotiate?
Thisembargo
is a
harshblowto theeffortsof Contadora
in thesea&hfor
a solution.The embargo
mustbe rescinded
by those
whoimposed
it, thusmakinga contributionto easing
teneionin the area.Why doesthe United States not
exerciseintelligence
andpoliticalcourageandnegotiatewith the legitimate
constitutional
Governmentof
Nicaragua,
headed
by DanielOrtega?
147. For26yearsnowCubahasbeenthevictimof this
criminalandinhuman
policyof blockade,
whichindicts
stttferinguponpeoples
butat the same time makes them

151. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the rep.
resentative of the United Republic of-Tanzania.I invite
him to take a place at the Council tableand to make his
statement.
-- ~-152. Mr. LWENO (UnitedRepublicof Tanzania):
Mr. President,I shouldfirst like to thank you, and
throughyoutheothermembers
of theCouncil,for the
opportunityyouhaveaccordedmy delegation
to participatein the Council’sdeliberations
on the itembefore it. My delegation
joinspreviousspeakers
in extendingto youthe hightributeyousowelldeserveon
whatweknowwill beyour successful
leadershin
of the
Councilfor thismonth.Welikewisecongratulate
your
predecessor,
the Presidentfor the monthof April.
.
153. Like every other peace-loving
memberof the
internationalcommunity,we in the Tanzaniandelegationhavebeenfollowingdevelopments
in Central
Americawith deebconcernandthereforethedebatein
the Councilon th’ecomplaintby Nicaragua
with keen
interest.We believethat at stakein the admittedly
explosivesituationinthatareaarethevery principles
of
the UnitedNations,asembodiedin the Charter,on
whichthe very survivalof most,if not all, nations
depends
andonwhichthefutureof penceandsecurity
rests.
154. On morethan oneoccasionthe Movementof
Non-AlignedCountries,of whichmycountryis a de-

stauncher defenders of tbe cause they uphold.
148. Justas4Oyearsago when theroarofthecattnons
was falling silent, out of the ashes of the bombs in the
cruel war unleashed by the Nazis and the Fascists a cry
surged from the peoples, a cry is surging again: peace
-peace in which to devote our ene@ies to develop
merit. The Nicaraguan people want peace with digr&y-peace to rebuild the country destroyed by So.

moxa;peaceto rebuddthatwhichwasdestroyed
by the
murderous
bandsof Somoza’shenchmen
who today
aregivenlogisticalsupportandguidedby theCentral
Intelligence
Agency.

voted member, has reviewed the situation in Central
America and expressed its concern at the disturbii
develonments there. While indeed the security of
States In the area is being undermined, these de&p.
ments now pose a serious threat to httemational peace.
Therefore the timely complaint by Nicaragua to the
Council and that country’s call for a peacetid settlement
of the dispute cannot but be commended as an exprerrsion of the spirit that should guide all the parties concerned. We therefore wish to take this opportunity to
add our voice to that of the Government and people of
Nicaragua in their appeal.
155. It cannot be overem&asized that a lastlna s&ttion to the problem-with
&gard not only to Ni&agua

149. We ask the Security Council to heedthe cry of but to the wholearea-depends
entirelyon strict obthepeoplesin ourAmericaandacton thebasisofthe servance
of the principlesbfthe Charter.particularly
Ortization’s Charterby supportingthe Comadora remeetfor the independence,
sovereigntyandterriGroupsothatreasonanddialogue
mayprevailandthe ton%integrityof all States.In the caseof Nicaragua,
thunderof gunsandcruelembargoes
by thosewhoact a non-aligned
State, its non-alignment
shouldbe rewitharrogance
cease.
swcted.To that end.therefore.thepartiesshouldrefrainfromanyactsthatamountto aggression
andinter150. TheGovernment
of the UnitedStateshasacted ferencein the internalaffairsof otherStates.andno
unilaterallyin imposing
thisembargo,
anactionwhich, effort shouldbe sparedin seekinga solutionto any
underthe termsof the Charter,fallswithinthe com- disputes
throughpeacefulmeans.

17

156. For quite some time the Contadora Group has
beenendeavouringto achieve a peacefulsettlementof
the disputes among the Central American countries,
to oppose outside interference and to ease the tension in the region. The countries of Colombia, Mexico,
Panamaand Venezuela, together with the five countries of Central America, have engagedin negotiations
on several occasions, making it possible for the situation in the region to develop a positive orientation.
However, the independenceand sovereignty of Nicaraguaandother Central American countries have been
subjectedto continuous threat from outside, which renders it impossible to alleviate the tension in Central
America. This naturally causes widespread concern
amongthe international community.
157. At its thirty-eighth session theGeneral Assembly
took what many of us deemed to be one of the most
significant decisions of that session when it adoptedby
consensus its resolution 38/10.entitled “The situation
in Central America: threats to international security
and peaceinitiatives”. That resolution was the product
of many hours, indeedmany days, of hard negotiations
among the members of the Contadora Group and the
countries directly concerned. As we all know. that
resolution, inrer ah, unequivocallyreaffirmedthe
rightof al!thecountriesof theCentralAmericanregion
to live inpeaceandto decidetheirownfuturefreefrom
all outsideinterferenceor intervention.It reaffiied
thatrespectfor thesovereignty
andindependence
of all
Statesof theregionwasessential
to ensurethesecurity
and peacefulcoexistenceof the CentralAmerican
States,andit expressed
supportfor the effortsof the
contadoraGroup.

161. The positionof my delegationis that we shall
continueto be guidedby thecommonpositionof the
Non-AlignedMovement. My delegationmaintains
that, in orderto removetensionin CentralAmericain
generaland in Nicaraguain particular,it is of vital
importance
to putanendto allinterference
andthreats
fromoutsideandurgesall thoseconcerned
to refrain
frommakingCentralAmericaanareafor theirrivalry
andfromdisplaying
theirmilitarymightor resortingto
intimidationfor that purpose.The independence
and
sovereigntyof Nicaragua
andotherStatesof Central
Americashouldbe respected,andthe affairsof the
variouscountriesof the regionshouldbe left to the
respectivepeoplesthemselves.
In the meantimewe
give our supportto the ContadoraGroupin its continuedeffort to achieveapeacefulandreasonable
solution to the CentralAmericanquestionasa whole.
162. TheGovernment
of theUnitedRepublicof Tanzaniapledges
its solidaritywith thepeopleandGovemmentof Nicaraguaduringthesetrying moments.
The
SecurityCouncil,asthebodyresponsible
for thepreservationof peaceandsecurity,candonolessthangive
encouragement
andsupportto ongoing
genuine
efforts
aimedat bringingabouta long-lasting
peaceandajust
solutionto the problems
in CentralAmerica.
163. The PRESIDENT:The nextspeaker
isthe representative
of Poland.1invitehimto takea placeatthe
Counciltableandto makehisstatement.

164. Mr. NOWAK (Poland):Sir, the delegationof
Polandwishesto congratulate
you, therepresentative
of Thailand.on your assumption
of the presidency
of
Weare convincedthat your diplomatic
158. It wasour hopethat suchan unquivocalpro- thiscouncii.
intelligence
andwisdomwillhelpthisbodyto deal
nouncement
of theGeneralAssembly,madewithouta skill.
the difficult tasksaheadof it. 1 take
vote.wouldbea harbinger
of peac&l negotiated
solu- effeetivelywith
opportunityto expressouradmiration
for theway
tkmstothefBmbkmBdtheregiDn.EvenmoreimpDr- this
in whichthe representative
of Peru,Mr. JavierArias
tatt,itwnaonrexpe&thmthatmorttothreatsiutd
guidedthe deliberations
of the Councilduring
dttha boredon forcewouldcometo anend.The Stella,
themonthd April.
verylscttbnt,on~vexcd8nis~8othjs./tbadbcen
165. Severaltimesalreadymy delegationhaspresentedthe positionof the PolishGovernmenton the
Nicarauuan
complaintto the SecurityCouncilandon
thein&easein tensions
in CentralAmerica.Polandhas
19. It isregrettable.however,thatthathasnotbeen askedto speakbeforetheCouncilthistimealsoinorder
thecaseandthat.onthewhok,thi4shavegonefrom to expr& its concernover certainthreatsto intertheir dimensions
transcend
bsdtowcwse.ThatNicamguahasf&obli&tohave nationalsecuritybecause
recourseto the Councilyet a&t testifiesto the fact the CentralAmericanregion.
that, far fFombeingalleviated,its concernshavestill
notbeenmetaadhaveevenbecome
mompre3sing
and 166. TheSecurityCouncilhasalreadydealtwithopen
andcovert actsof aggression
committedagainstNicintense.
araaua
in
sdte
of
the
readiness
of theNicaraguan
Gov.
...dN.,inGiia
emtint to ~@a+ BSACionof ihe COG&~2ndin
i66 ?&. Cii
prehensive
expositionto theCouncil.broughtbeforeit s&e of the efforts of the four countriesof the Conyetagaina series
dalkgationsdacta of aggression
and &Iota Group.
subversion
andotherformsd provocationagainstMs
country.The internationalcommunitycannotremain 167. Referringto thesedevelopments,
mydelegation
that thecrisisin CentralAmericawasthe
passivein
thefaceofalltheseactsofdestabilixation,allemphasized
theseactsof economic
strangulation
nowbeingcatrled resultof theextensionof differentdestabilizing
factors
ratherthanbeingin anywayattributableto East-West
out againstNicaragua.
~greatlyeneoum@theinter-

rivalry. In the view of my Government, on the onehand
the origins of the problem in the Central American
regionwere linked to thelack of economicdevelopment
and to grave social injustices, while on the other hand
the instability of the region was exacerbated by an
intensified resort to a policy of interference and intervention as manifestedby increased United States military activity in the region and threats of the use of
force, pressure andeconomiccoercion againstthe Iegitimate Government of Nicaragua.
168. It is with grave concern that we have to state that
the United States has recently intensified those activities. My delegationfollowedwith great attention yesterday the statement of the representative of Nicaragua
describina in detail all the unlawful actions against his
country. ?he development of events is cam&g legitimate alarm.The United States flagrant interference in
the atfairs of a sovereign State is demonstrated by its
being madeclear in Washington that what the United
States Government wants is a changeof government in
Managua.Any further pretence about “covert action”
is now ludicrous. The international community now
knows beyond any doubt that the United StatesAdministration openly supports military action against Nicaragua.A variety of measures is beingappliedto coerce
the Sandinist Government.
169. We are witnessing another examplefrom a long
list of countries that have beensubjected recently to a
purely political reasons. I use the term “so-c&d economic sanctions” becausethey were not approved by
the Security Council. It is no surprise to my unttttry, or
to many others, that the policy of economic pressure
against Nicaragua in order to make that aover&n State
comply with the political wishes of a more pow&l
country originates in the United States. Using as a
pretexi the hternal developments towards a m&e just
and democratic order in Nicaragua, the United States
has been undertaking wholly ideol~cally motivated
action a@rst Nicaragua encompassingevery aspect of
internationalrelations, including the economic aspect.
170. It is hardly necessary to orove that such a nolicv
is totally unlawful and inc&sisient with the prov>sio&
of the Charter of the United Nations. In particular, the
measures to which 1 have referred are clearly inconsistent with Articles I and 2of the Charter. They depart
from such fundamentalprinciples of internati&al~law
as those concerningthe sovereignequality of States and
respect for the tights inherent in sovereignty, non-intervention in internal affairs and co-operation among
States. Such steps are followebes in our case-by
bi&&@ ifiie~i&Oi;~ w&r&&
& G-Gtkcs ‘fi wija
tradiction with a basic and universally recognizednorm
of the law of treaties, paclu runt servo&u. The economic restrictions also underminethe establishedpractice of international trade relations, contiled in various international instruments, that political ekments
are not introduced into trade and commerce. The said
actions should be treated as unlawful and unjustified

and as undoubtedly involving international responsibility for all losses and damageincurred.
171. We therefore urge the immediate revocation of
any trade embargo or restrictions imposed by the
United States in violation of the recognixednorms and
nrincinles of international law. Existing diierences
should be resolved on the basis of friendly-co-operation
between States, through dialogueand in the spirit of the
Chatter. In this respect, my delegationshares the ideas
of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of NonAligned Countries presented today by Mr. Krishnan of
India.
172. The extension of political tensions into the
sphere of economic co-operation introduces an dement of uncertainty and instability. It also creates an
extremely dangerous precedent for the future. Many
States are reluctant to commit themselves to broader
economic co-operation, fearful of increasing exposure
to political pressures.
173. It is therefore, in the opinion of my delegation,
high time not only to think but also to act vigorously in
the direction of strengthening confidence in international economic relations. Confidence-building is a
broad and prolonged process. However, sting the
process of confidence-buildingin the most constructive
spirit would make a small but important contribution
to the positive restructuring of the present environment
of international economic relations, thus providing a
favourable stimulus to political relations. Within the
framework of such steps, we can also foresee a constructive settlement of the contlict between the United
States and Nicaragua.
174. There is no doubt that the main condition for the
restoration of neacefulrelations is the immediatecessaContadora Act on Peace and Co-operation in Central
America paves the way for lasting +ace in the region.
Poland shares the conviction of the four Cotttadora
States that “the Contadora Group is the appropriate
forum for dealing with the Central Ant&can situation”. as expressed in the information bulletin from
Panama City distributed as document S/l7103 of
I5 April 1985.
173. To conclude. the delegation of Poland, reaffuming its fum solidarity with Nicaragua, requests that
the Security Council make a strong call to the parties to
the conflict to abstain from any action aimedat destabillzing or undermining other States or their systems,
including the imposition of trade embargoesor restrictions,
blockades
.& Cm&.
Ai oriheother
wbs sanctions
wmd not author&d
sw
wi-&by
their conflicts through bilateral and multilateral negotiations within theContadora process. Further, the sovereignty of States and the inalienableright of States,
Nicaragua included, to determine freely their political. economic andsocial systems should be reaflirmed.
Last but not least, all coercive measures of an economic
orother nature. which violatethe primple of non-inter19

ference in internal
affairs, whether
imposed against
Nicaragua
or any other State, should bc condemned
as
a threat to international
peace and security.

in Central America,
which, over and above the urgent
search for a peaceful solution to the Central American
crisis, is a genuine effort to come up with the right
framework
and means conducive
to the restoration
of
confidence
and the promotion
of regional co-operation-in
a word, to ensure sound and lasting conditions
for the restoration
of peace at last.

176. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative
of Algeria. 1 invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
(Algeria)
(interpretation from
pleased to be able, on behalf of the
Algerian delegation,
to express my congratulations
to
you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency
of the
Security Council for this morth. We are convinced
that
your competence
and wisdom are the best guarantee of
prudent conduct of the Council’s
work. I should also
like to take this opportunity
to extend my congrattdations to Mr. Arias Stella. the representative
of Peru, on
the way in which he discharged
his duties as President
of the Council last month.
177.

Mr.

DJOUDI

183. Finn and honest support for this Act would finally have permitted
the efforts of the Contadora
Group
to reach the stage at which a downward
spiral in the
tension in Central America could have begun and accelerated. However,
it seems that with the decision on the
embargo on trade relations with Nicaragua
the tension
in the region has increased and thus justifies
renewed
and increased concern as to the future course of events
in the region.

French): 1 am very

184. Once again we see that the situation, because of
its extreme gravity,
requires the greatest restraint so as
to prevent
any action that might provoke
a sudden
escalation
of tension.
At the same time, it makes it
necessary that the greatest encouragement
be given by
at1 States, in particular
the most powerful among them,
to the Contadora
Group,
whose patient and praiseworthy
undertaking
merits more careful consideration
and a better tribute than the imposition
of a new obstacle to its persistent
efforts to promote
a peaceful solution to the problems
of the region.

178. For too many years now the situation in Central
America
has been constantly
marked by disquieting
signs of a dangerous evolution.
Following
an inexorable
logic of confrontation,
it thus threatens
to break out at
any time, with consequences
of unpredictable
dimensions, into a regional conflagration
fraught with danger
for international
peace and security.
What makes matters worse is that this evolution
is takina date in the
global context of an international
situaticuthat
is particularly
troL %I and in which tangible signs of renewed confidence
cannot yet be discerned.

185. It is clear that the trade embargo decreed by the
United States agahsst Nicaragua
is no kind of reward for
the efforts of the Contadom
Group, nor will it lead to a
restoration
of stability and peace in Central America.
On the contrary,
this measure is likely to cause further
exacarbabon
of the tension at the same time as it se
riously reduces the chance of a negotiated
political
settlement.

179. There has therefore
been from the very beginning much food for serious thought on the part of the
international
community.
180. The Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries,
whose very history bears witness to solidarity
and work
for progress and peace, has constantly
expressed
its
increasing
concern
through
the assiduous
attention
with which it has followed
events, continually
voicing
its support for the right of the peoples of the region to
self-determination
and independence.

186. Adopted
in violation
of international
law, this
measure nuts couoter to the Cotttadora
spirit of reconciliation
and harmony.
It is unjust in its nature and
di&proportiort?&
in its scope; it will certahtly
harm
ccanomc
mterests of a State wtth bnuted national
msources
which is tacklittg the sarious repercussions
on the domestic
front of an intematio
ml economic
crisis. The impact ofthat crisis is all the greater because
of the mobilixation
of all Nicaragua’s
national means
to face the constant threat to its sovereignty
and independence.
Contrary
to the principles
of the Declaration on Principles~of
lnter&ioriai
Law concerning
Friendly
Relations and cooperation
among States in
accordance
with the Charter
of the United Nations
[Generul Assembly resolutlon 2625(XXV), annex] the
embargo is also a further attack on the principie
of noninterference
and non-intervention
in the internal atfairs
of States. it is a serious departure
from the course of
dialogue and negotiation.
At the same time, it is proof of
the continuation
of a mistaken approach to the problem
ofcentral
America, which is persistently
depicted as an
East-West
confrontation.

181. The Security Council, for its part, is seixed ofthe
question and has already reaflirmed
in its resohttion
530
(1983) the right of Nicaragua
and of all States in the
region to live in peace and security free from foreign
interference.
That was certainly
a timely reaffhmation of a right which the Gene&
Assembly
has in a
most responsible
way devoted
itself to promoting
as
inalienable.
182. In addition to this unanimity,
four Latin American countries-Colombia,
Mexico,
Panama and VeneZueki-hPve
undertaken
painstakingiy
to reconstruci
a
consensus for peace in Central America and to achieve
the translation
into reality of the good will aroused by
the Contadora
process in the five Central American
countries.
Inspired
by obstinate
determination
and
optimism,
these countries
have devoted patient efforts
to the preparation
of an Act on Peace and Co-operation
20

187. Algeria is tirmly devoted to the principle of a
negotiatedpolitical settlement of the problems raised
by-the situation in Central America. in strict respect for
the right of States freely to choose their political. economic and social systems. Naturally, the Nicaraguan
people cannot be denied this right, for that people,
through a longstruggle againstdictatorship andoppression. dearly bought its right to take its place as one of
the free peoples that can decide their fate in full sovereignty.
188. Reconnizinethat the initiative of the countries
members ofthe Cbntadora Group was an action based
on fundamenta!respect for that right, Algeria from the
outset unreservedly supported their eff&ts. They are
exemplary efforts that are a true challenge, in view
of the complexity and difficulty of a task which an
unfavourableinternationalsituation has madeparticularly acute. They are sound efforts as well, because
they will leadto the necessary rehabilitationof negotiation in contrast to confrontation and will ensure that
dialogueprevails over mistrust and suspicion. They are
timely and persistent efforts also, since they reaffirm
the urgency of reabsorbing regional conflicts within
their regionalframework, at the precise moment of the
welcomed resumptio,r of dialoguebetween the superPowers.
189. Quite clearly, then. the work of the Contadora
Group by its significance. KS beyond the initial limits
of an urgent recourse to an adhoc initiative andreaches
the level of a symbolic responsibility in efforts that
basicallyrevert to the choiceiaid down in the Orgatu~ation’s Charter, which @es pride of placeto recourse to
dialogueand negotiation.
1%. So today we must chart the course to a true
return to the s&it of Contadora by ~IIY
and
unequivocally re&irming our support for the &tadora Group’s action. This meeting of the Security
Council is being held on the very eve of a meeting
scheduledby the Contadora Group. It is our hope that
the Council;clearheadly and calmly. will adopt e lucid
positionthat may be seenasencouragement
for the
resumption
of theContadora
process
and.at thesame
time,asa message
of hopefor thepeoples
of CZittal
America.
191. ThePRESlDENT:Thenextspeakeristhe representative
of Brazil. I invitehimto takea placeat the
Counciltableandto makehisstatement.

194. Brazil comesbeforethe SecurityCouncilasa
LatinAmericancountrywhichisdeeplyconcerned
that
the crisisin CentralAmericais becomingsteadily
worse.At alltimesBrazilhasconsistently
defended
the
needfor a peaceful,negotiated
settlement
for Central
Americanproblems,
asettlement
based
onprinciples
of
internationallaw andin conformitywith the Charter
of theUnitedNations.Wehavecautioned
against
acts
andactionswhich,by transplanting
intoourregionthe
problems
that pertainto the East-Westconfrontation,
canonlyserveto postpone
theestablishment
of a state
of peaceandtranquillityin CentralAmerica.
195. The road to negotiation,particularlythe one
beingfollowedwith the valuableco-operation
of the
ContadoraGroup, is the only way to attain a valid
result,throughrespectfor therightof peoples
to selfdetermination
an> ‘hroughstrict observance
of the
principleof non-Interference.

I%. In line with the wsition it hasalwaystaken,
Brazildeplores
theuseo&iIateral economic-measures
that are inconsistent
with the Charterof the United
Nationsand with the charterof the Organizationof
AmericanStatesandthat posenewobstacles
to negotiatedsolutions.
Weappealto allthepartiesinvolvedto
abstain,inspiredby a truedesirefor peace,from any
actsor actionsthat endanger
the prospecls
for understanding
andto makea directcommitment
to negotiation efforts.
197. Brazil is convincedthat negotiationis still the
option.Thosewhobecause
of their moredirectinterestsin the CentralAmericanquestionhave,accordingly. moreconcreteresponsibilities
mustclearlyand
firmly exercisetheoptionfor negotiation,
sinceneither
confrontationnorthe useof forcewill solvetheproblemin CentralAmerica.
198. ThePRESIDENT:Fournames
remainonthelist
of speakers
for thisafternoon’smeetinS.
In viewof the
lateness
of thehour,thosespeakers
will bec&d upon
at the nextmeetingof the SecurityCouncil.

u)o. Mr. SORZANO(United Statesof America):
Therehave beenrepeatedallegations
that the trade
embar andothereconomic
measures
thattheUnited
132. Mr. MACIEL (Brazil):I shouldfust likelo add Stateshastakenin recentdaysconstitutea violationof
my delegation’scongratulations
to those already the~roftheUnitedN&ns.Letmeagainrepeat
expressed
to the President
of theSecurityCouncilas thatthereisnothingintheChatterthatpreventsaState
will asto the representative
of Peru,the-President
of fromexercising
its-&@to terminatetrade.Whileunder
theCouncillastmonth.
rulechatter the secudtycwncil maymMds!ecertein
typesof economicmeasures
andbind all States,the
193. MY Government
andI arevery matefulfor this Charterin nowayprecludes
actionby individualStates
opportunityto addressthe Securitycouncil at this in pursuance
of theircustomaryandsovereign
r@htsto
time.I shouldliketo calltheCouncil’sattentionto the safeguard
their security.
statement
issued
by the BrazilianGovernmentin Brasiliaon the itembeforethe Council.It hasbeencir- 201. Therehavealsobeenallegations
that thetrade
culatedasdocumentS/17166.
embargoby the UnitedStatesagainstNicamgua
vie
21

lates the charter
of the Organization
of American
States. We do not believe that it does. On the contrary.
our actions are consistent
with that charter and further
its purposes.

those who sianed it. It led directly to the invasion of
Poland by German troops on the morning of I September 1939. Great Britain and France declared
war on
Germany
on 2 September,
and the Soviet
Union
invaded Poland on I7 September.
Despite the valiant
resistance of which we are all well aware, Poland was
conquered.

202. It is Nicaragua
that is engaged in a course of
action which is a massive violation of the charter of the
Organization
of American
States. It is conducting
a
campaign
of subversion
and aggression
against its
neighbours
and is violating
the political
and human
rights of its people. The United States decision to cease
trading with Nicaragua
is intended primarily
to prevent
Nicaragua
from deriving
benefits from trade with the
United States which would, directly or indirectly,
support its illegal, aggressive
and destabilizing
course of
action in the region.

208. On 28 September
1939 another secret GermanSoviet motocol
modified
the arrangements
made that
August! all of Lithuania
was to be-a Soviet sphere of
influence,
not a German
one, but the dividing line in
Poland was changed in Germany’s
favour, being moved
eastward
to the Bug.
209. On IO October
1939, the Soviet Union compelled
Est6nia. Latvia and Lithuania
to admit Soviet aarrisons
onto their territories.
Approached
with si&ilar
demands, Finland refused to comply. The Soviet Union
attackid
Finland on 30 Novemb&
1939. After a heroic
defence,
Finland
was forced
to sue for peace on
6 March 1940. Soviet terms were accepted: beyond the
earlier demands that had led to Finnish resistance,
the
Finns were forced to cede areas in the Salla and Kuusamo communes
and their part of the Fisher Peninsula
and to undertake
the building
of a railway
from
Kemijarvi
to the frontier.

203. The
repiesentative
of the Soviet
Union,
Mr. Troyanovsky,
spoke eloquently
about the great
Allied victorv
in the Second World War against the
forces of Hiderite
fascism. He spoke movingly
about
the contributions
the Soviet people made towards that
victory,
and indeed the Soviet people must be recognized
as having
sacrificed
tremendously
and as
having contributed
enormously
to that particular
victory. The Soviet representative
also noted that that
event of 40 years ago indicated the potential for joint
collaboration
in desirable directions.
Had he stopped
there 1 would not have asked to exercise the right of
reply. However-and
unfortunately-the
Soviet rep
resentative
continued
by accusing
the United States
of violating
international
accords, of interfering
in the
domestic affairs of States and, especially, of interfering
in the internal affairs of neighbouring
countries.

210. In June 1940, Romania
was compelled
Soviet Union to cede Bessarabia
and northern
vhta.
211. On I3 April 1941, Japan concluded
pact with the Soviet Union.

204. What I should lie to do is refresh the memory of
the Council and that of the Soviet delegation.
It would
be nice to have historical
amnesia, but unfortunately
some of us are burdened
with a memory
of history.

by the
Buko-

a neutrality

212. So much for Soviet
non-interference
in the
affairs of its neighbouring
States, and so much too for
Soviet attitudes
about Hitlerite
fascism.

205. In 1939. Hitler had the Rhineland,
Austria and
Czechoslovakia,
and his eyes were turned towards
Poland. Poland, conscious
of the designs of its neighbours, had entered
into e non-aggression
pact with
Germany
ln 1934 and a non-aggresslottpact
with the
Soviet Union in 1932. On 26 November
1938, Poland
also concluded
a further treaty of friendship
with the
Soviet Union.

213. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of Nicaragua has asked to speak in exercise of the right of
reply. I now call on him.
214. Mr. CHAMORRO
MORA
(Nicaramra)
f&rpretation
from Spanish):
I would have p&e&
not
to swak in redv, as I have just asked to do. First of all.
I Adder
&t &at has be& &lid today by delegations
members
and non-members
of the Security
Council
clearly demonstrates
the concern of the international
community
about the recent measures adopted agahtst
my country,
which increase tension in the region and
undermine
the Contadora
peace process which seeks a
negotiated
political
solution
to the problems
facing
Central America.

206.
Yet. durinn the niaht of 23 Aumst
1939. the
German-S&&t
ion-aggr&sion
pact--the
inf&us
Hitler-Stalin
pact-was
signed in Moscow.
The pact’s
secret protocol stipulated that, ifchanges a&&g
Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania
were made, Lithuania’s northern
frontier
should be the dividing
line
bt-wen
Gere7;-j “...?LI
&ini,uence,
thti
c: lllO” St”
wv,e
s.&res
in Poland the line should be approximately
that of the
Narew,
Vistula and San rivers, and that Bessarabia
should be a Soviet sphere of influence.

215. Secondly,
I would have preferred
not to speak
because the statement
by the United States representative amazed me so much that quite-frankly
I have
almost lost my powers of speech and my ability to think
clearly and calmly.

207.
This cynical agreement
stupefied Europe even
though its secret proic%d was then unknown
to all but
22

216. Thirdly, 1 did not want to speak because we
know about the traditional custom of the United States
delegation, which is to attempt in Council debates,
particularly those whtch have been requested by Nicaragua, to divert attention so that it will not have to
answer logically :Andtruthfully the just accusations
which on many occasions Nicaragua has madeagalnst
it in this lofiy forum in considering the acts of aggression of which we have been victim for many years,

221.

217. It is the generalpractice for that delegation,in its
attempt to divert attention, to use a string of womout arguments regarding a whole series of aspects relating to our internal policies. arguments which, it
seems to me, they don’t even believe themselves.
I think not even Mr. Sorzanohimself sincerely believes
those arguments, but he feels obliged, as a representative of his Government. to repeat themover andover
again, ad nauseam.

Those assertions require no further commentfrom me.

218. Yesterday I spoke of the description by the
United States historian, Richard Hosstadter, of the
paranoid style of United States foreign policy, whose
principal characteristics include a constant leapof the
imaginationfrom the incredibleto the unimaginableand
the characterization of the enemy as an implacable,
satanic force. I also mentionedthat the various Unlted
States representatives were apt to use metaphor and
Orwellian inversion. and I asked who corrupted language,who polluted words, who stood on the side of
truth and who was lying shamelessly.
219. Today’s statement by the representative of the
United States proves the truth of the assertions that
I madeyesterday, which is why I have ventured to repeat them. At thesametIme,thky leadmetoaskhowhe
can have respect for this forum, which is charged with
ensurhtg int&ational peaceand security, andhow he
can so underestimate the intelIlgence,sensitivity and
understanding of the members of the Council.

We also heard:

“The measures recently adopted by the United
States do not violate the charter of the Organization
of American States: on the contrary, our actions are
consistent with that charter and further its tmrooses.
It is Nicaragua that is engagedin a course-of-action
which is a massive violation of the charter of the
Organization of American States.”

222. I shall not use this opportunity to refer, as the
Americans are used to doing with reference to us. to
the internal affairs of the United States. We respect the
right of self-determinationof peoples, unlike the United
States, which interferes in the internal affairs of
the peoplesof Latin America and other reglons of the
world. I shall not refer to the many denunciations of
violations of human rights that have recently anneared
in some United States newspapers about ihi use of
totture even here in prisons in New York. Neither shall
I refer-because I do not want to interfere in United
States internal affairs--to the almost 1,ooO United
States citizens who have beenarrested in the past few
days in various United States cities, solely because
they oppose the unconsidered decision of the United
States Government to implement a trade embargo
aminst Nicaragua. Nor do I want to refer-because.
I-insist, I do not want to interfere in United State:
internal affairs-to the interrogation that various
United States citixens have been subjected to when
they have returned to Uttlted States territory after
travelIinuto my coutttty. FIMUY. I will not dwellon
the inve&gati&tsthat havebe& madeof a seriesof
UnitedStatescitizenseimnlybecausethey hadtele
phonecoetactswith our p&manentMl&on to the
UnitedNations.
I nowturn to otheraspects.
I donotwantonthis
occasionto dwelleitheron the well-knownandthoroughlycondemned
double-standard
policy
towardsmy
223.

220. 1 cannot fail to ask all these questions, which
retlect my perplexity and my anxiety, having heard,
among other things:
“On every occasion that Nicaragua has appeared
beforetheCouncil. it has sought eithertoforestall the
progress of the Contadora process or to interfere in
the internal affairs of the United States by seeking to
itiuence our domestic political debateaboutCentral
America.” [Supa, para. 34.1
1 thank the representative of the United States for ascribing to my poor, small, non-aligned country that
ievel of poiitical, miiitary and economic power whiccbit
exercises and through which it influences and channes
processes taking p&e not only in Latin America &l
Africa but in other parts of the world, and which it also
uses to prevent the realization of the desire for liberation and independenceof some territories that still suffer under the colonial yoke.

act&-&itlcal,wonomic aftdmuitary~sion.The
members
of theCot&l andthelntematlottaIcontntunity arevery well awareof the pttbllcatkmsthat the
Americanpmssconstantlymakesavailableto us,and
alsoknowofthe debates
In theUnitedStatesCongress
andthseccretdocuments
thathave&c&ted andhave
beenplacedatourdisposal.
224. I shallnot refer to the allegeddesiresof the
UnitedStatesfor a polIticalsolutioaandfor supportof
Contadora.It pays Upserviceto the work of Contdora, but In realhyits supportisckarly reco@zd in
the NationalSecurityCouncIIdocumentmadepublic
towardsthe endof lastyear, in whichtheAmericans
congratulated
themselves
onhavingeffectivelyat that
momentblockedthe Contadoraprocess.
225. Nor shallI dweUontheirjustifications
todayfor
the embargoagainstnon-aligned,
peace-lovingNic-

23

aragua, though 1 shall quote a statement made by
Mrs.. Kirkpatrick when she was her Government’s
representative in the Security Council. She said:
“Each of these drafts is linked in one way or another
to sanctions and is consequently inimical, we are
convinced, to our common objective of independence for Namibia. We do not consider economic
sanctions an effective way Of influencing political
decisions. We believe that a study of history will
support our opinion that such measures were not
effective when they were appliedagainst Italy in the
1930sor against Rhodesia in 1970.”
I should like to suggest to the United States representative that his Government listen to the clamour of
African peoplesfor the needto implementsanctions of
every kind against the South African regime and its
criminal policy of apartheid.
226. Finally, owing to the advancedhour and because
representatives have other commitments, I shall not
now-although I reserve my right to do so tomorrowexpanduuon the extensive legalarguments that I mentioned yesterday to support-our denunciation of the
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. the
charter of the Organization of American States and
the General Agreement an Tariffs and Trade, as well
as the principles of tbe Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
227. I merely wish to pose a question to the representative of the United States, considering the content
of his intervention today. If tbe United States really
considers tiny, non-aligned, underdeveloped Nicaragua a threat to its security and its forelgtt policy and
therefore feels obligedto declare a state of emergency,
why. since it is a memberof the Security Council, does
it not use this lofty forum-wbicb is entrusted precisely
with watching over international peaceand seeurltyto denounce Nicaragua, which, it says, is commlttbtg
aggression against it and which, it says, constitutes
a&eat to peace and security? If the-united States
is so sure of itself-if it is so sure it is not vlolatlngthe Charter of the United Nations and tbe charter
of the Grganization of American States and other internationalagreements, why does it not resort to existing
organs, such as the International Court of Justice,
insteadof acting in a contrary mannerand disregarding
tbe validity and competence of the Court on these
issues? I think these are two exirtlng forums available
to tbe United States; they would provide anapproprlate
means for it to validate its assertions. Before using
force or resorting to aggression, the United States
should exhaust the available means for tbe peacefui
settlement of disputes availableto States Members of
this peace-loving Grganixation.

229. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interprerution
from Russiun):
Whenever
the United States is in the dock. in the Security Council
it always comes out with anti-Soviet calumny. This is
the usual hackneyed trick that it uses.
230. 1 should like to draw the Council’s attention to
the fact that the representative of the United States,
without even knowing what the representative of the
Soviet Union would say in the Council’s meetingtoday.
nevertheless launched into a scurrilous anti-Soviet
tirade in anattempt to rewrite anddistort history. It was
an unsuccessful, a dirty trick.
231. Yes, we are truly at odds with the United States
when it comes to the lessons of history. It was the
United States which, in plain view, committed a true
outrageagainst the victims of fascism when at the highest State level a few days ago the American President
laid a wreath on the graves of SS butchers. But we are
not going to play into the hands of the representative of
the United States and get into questions which have
nothing to do with the item on our agenda.
232. We have on the agendaan itemon the situation in
Central America. The United States representati ‘e in
his main statement has already tried once againto drag
thenameof the Soviet Union into what is taking place in
Latin America. It was a very clumsy and unsuccessful
attempt. The intervention of the American imperialists
in Latin America began long, long before the Soviet
Union existed on the map of the world.
233. About one hundred years ago, at the end of the
last century, tbe United States Marines landedin Riode
Janeiro, then the capital of Brazil. What Soviet agents
were tbev seeklnn? At tbe end of the last century. the
United States M&es on three occasions landed in
Buenos Aires, the capital of Argentina. What Soviet
agents were they seeking then, Mr. Sorxano?
234. The United States, as 1 have already bad occasion to say, baa conuttltted 82 acts of intervention in
Latin Am&an countries, including 10 against Nicaragua. Tbls is why. Mr. Sorxano, despite all your
slanderous assertions, it is not the Soviet Uulon but the
United States tbat should be feared in Latin America. It
is no a&lent tbat tbe president of a Latin American
country with bitter bony expressed his regret that God
was so far and tbe United States so close.
235. Tbe PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
tbe United States, wbo wishes to speak in exercise
of tbe rlgbt of reply.
236. Mr. SORZANO (United States of America): The
Nicaraguan representative indicated that my presentation this afternoon so surprised him that he
almost becamespeechless and could almost not reason
straight. In view of tbe fact that what be said here at
length a moment ago was a repetition of what he had
said at length yesterday, I promise the Council that

zt8. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, who has asked
to he allowed to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
24

240. The PRESIDENT: 1, too, am almost speechless.
I call on the representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, who wishes to speak in exercise of
the tight of reply.

1 will try harder the next time: perhaps 1 will succeed
in making him speechless and we will then 80 home
earlier.
237. With regard to Mr. Ovinnikov, I thought that in
view of his imminent departure it would be a pity if we
did not have one further sparring match. I apologize
to the members of the Council for keeping them here.
I would just note that when 1 referred before to the
Soviet Union’s “friendly” relations with its neighbours
I was taking an awfully smallslice of Soviet history and
anawfully small slice Of geOgraphy. Thelateness of the
hour, however, prevents me from beginningto expand
that slice of time and geopraphy. As Mr. Chamorro
Mora said, we all have commitmentsto which we have
to attend.In deferenceto those commitmentsI will stop
here.

241. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian):
The representative of the United States was rl8ht when he said
that we had several sparring matches in the Security
Council. What he did not say was that he did not win a
single one of those matches.
242. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the
United States has asked to speak in exercise of the r&M
of reply. I call on him.
243. Mr. SORZANO (United States of America):
I, too, am becoming speechless but am wilhng graciously to concede that the Soviet representative has
always bested me in all these things.

238. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Nicaragua, who has asked to speak in exercise of the
right of reply.

The meeting

239. Mr. CHAMORRO MORA (Nicara8ua) (interfrom Spanish): I shall try to keep my promise not to take up much more of the Council’s time.
Having heard the United States representative, however, I would merely suggest to him-not as an argument for use in his next statement to render mespeechless-that he appeal to his Government to halt its
aggressionagainst Nicaragua. Then 1will be silent and
not need to calI for meetin8s of the Security Council

rose ut 7.40 p.m.

pretation

NOTES
’ United Nationa, neofy Se&a, vol. 367, No. 5224.
a la~r-AmericPnT~1yofR~ip~Ao~~~~.8~otRlode
Janeiro, 2 September t947. Ubld., vol. 21. No. 324 to).)

25

Liflw in United Na:ionr,

New York

moo

5+6lU%-March

19!X?-2.050
