United Nations

A/RES/61/15

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 January 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 74

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 November 2006
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/61/L.21 and Add.1)]

61/15. Report of the International Criminal Court
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 60/29 of 23 November 2005 and all its previous
relevant resolutions,
Recalling also that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court 1
reaffirms the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Emphasizing that justice, especially transitional justice in conflict and postconflict societies, is a fundamental building block of sustainable peace,
Noting with satisfaction the fact that the International Criminal Court is fully
operational and has achieved considerable progress in its analyses, investigations
and judicial proceedings in various situations and cases which were referred to it by
States parties to the Rome Statute and by the Security Council, in accordance with
the Rome Statute,
Recalling that effective cooperation and assistance by States, the United
Nations and other international and regional organizations remains essential for the
International Criminal Court to carry out its activities,
Welcoming the continuous support given by civil society to the International
Criminal Court,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing effective
and efficient assistance to the International Criminal Court in accordance with the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International Criminal
Court (“Relationship Agreement”), 2
Acknowledging the Relationship Agreement as approved by the General
Assembly in its resolution 58/318 of 13 September 2004, including paragraph 3 of
the resolution with respect to the payment in full of expenses accruing to the United
Nations as a result of the implementation of the Relationship Agreement, 3 which
provides a framework for continued cooperation between the Court and the United
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
See A/58/874 and Add.1.
3
Articles 10 and 13 of the Relationship Agreement.
2

06-49533

A/RES/61/15

Nations, which could include the facilitation by the United Nations of the Court’s
field activities, and encouraging the conclusion of supplementary arrangements and
agreements, as necessary,
Recognizing the role of the International Criminal Court in a multilateral
system that aims to end impunity, establish the rule of law, promote and encourage
respect for human rights and achieve sustainable peace, in accordance with
international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Expressing its appreciation to the International Criminal Court for providing
assistance to the Special Court for Sierra Leone and for granting a leave of absence
to its Deputy Prosecutor for Investigations to enable him to work for the
International Independent Investigation Commission,
Reiterating the historic significance of the adoption of the Rome Statute,
1.

Welcomes the report of the International Criminal Court for 2005–2006; 4

2.
Welcomes the States that have become parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court1 in the past year, and calls upon all States from all
regions of the world that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to consider ratifying
or acceding to it without delay;
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider becoming
3.
parties to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International
Criminal Court; 5
4.
Encourages States parties to the Rome Statute that have not yet done so
to adopt national legislation to implement obligations emanating from the Rome
Statute and to cooperate with the International Criminal Court in the exercise of its
functions, and recalls the provision of technical assistance by States parties in this
respect;
Welcomes the effective cooperation and assistance provided to the
5.
International Criminal Court by States, the United Nations and other international
and regional organizations, and calls upon them to continue providing such
cooperation and assistance in the future;
Encourages States to contribute to the Trust Fund established for the
6.
benefit of victims of crimes within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court, and of the families of such victims, as well as to the Trust Fund for the
participation of least developed countries, and acknowledges with appreciation
contributions made to both trust funds so far;
Emphasizes the importance of the full implementation of the
7.
Relationship Agreement,2 which forms a framework for close cooperation between
the two organizations and for consultation on matters of mutual interest pursuant to
the provisions of that Agreement and in conformity with the respective provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Rome Statute, as well as the need for
comprehensive information from the Secretary-General with respect to steps taken
in the implementation of the Agreement;

_______________
4

See A/61/217.
Official Records of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, First session, New York, 3–10 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.V.2 and
corrigendum), part II.E.

5

2

A/RES/61/15

8.
Notes the establishment and operationalization of the International
Criminal Court liaison office to United Nations Headquarters, and encourages the
Secretary-General to work closely with that office;
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
9.
Organization, 6 in which reference is made to the important role of the International
Criminal Court in advancing the cause of justice and the rule of law;
10. Recalls that, by virtue of article 12, paragraph 3, of the Rome Statute, a
State which is not a party to the Statute may, by declaration lodged with the
Registrar of the International Criminal Court, accept the exercise of jurisdiction by
the Court with respect to specific crimes that are mentioned in paragraph 2 of that
article;
11. Notes the work of the Special Working Group on the Crime of
Aggression, which is open to all States on an equal footing, and encourages all
States to consider participating actively in the Working Group with a view to
elaborating proposals for a provision on the crime of aggression;
12. Looks forward to the fifth session of the Assembly of States Parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, to be held in The Hague from
23 November to 1 December 2006, as well as the resumed fifth session to be held in
New York from 29 to 31 January 2007, and encourages the widest possible
participation of States in these proceedings;
13. Takes note of the decision of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome
Statute at its fourth session, while recalling that according to article 112,
paragraph 6, of the Rome Statute, the Assembly of States Parties shall meet at the
seat of the International Criminal Court or at United Nations Headquarters, to hold
its sixth session in New York in 2007, and requests the Secretary-General to provide
the necessary services and facilities in accordance with the Relationship Agreement
and resolution 58/318;
14. Invites the International Criminal Court to submit, in accordance with
article 6 of the Relationship Agreement, a report on its activities for 2006–2007, for
consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-second session.
56th plenary meeting
20 November 2006

_______________
6

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 1 and corrigendum
(A/61/1 and Corr.1).

3
