A /67/PV.99

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

99th plenary meeting

Monday, 16 September 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 11 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declarations
on HIV/AIDS
Draft decision (A/67/L.69/Rev. 1)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly considered agenda item 11 at its
84th and 85th plenary meetings, on 10 June.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
decision A/67/L.69/Rev.1, entitled “Implementation of
the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the
Political Declarations on HIV/AIDS”. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to adopt draft decision A/67/L.69/
Rev.1?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 67/562).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Robl (United States of America): The United
States would like to make the following explanation of
position on draft decision A/67/L.69/Rev.1.
The United States is pleased that the General
Assembly has adopted a decision on the SecretaryGeneral’s important report (A/67/822), although
belatedly. We would like to express our regret that we
were not able to arrive at a consensus and welcome

the report, as has previously been our practice. As is
often the case, reports such as this cover a wide range
of subjects and can touch on issues that are sensitive for
Member States. We recognize that some of the issues
raised in the report are difficult for some Member
States; in fact, some sections of the report have caused
debate within our own Government.
The United States was prepared to look at the
report as a whole, acknowledge the strong overall
analysis it provides and welcome it as an important
contribution to the dialogue as the global community
makes the final push towards 2015 on the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). While much has been
achieved in recent years in the fight against HIV and
AIDS, there is much left to do. We must be prepared to
discuss the epidemic rationally, with a basis in science.
It is a fact that key populations, including men
who have sex with men, people who use drugs and
sex workers, are driving the growth of the epidemic in
certain hotspots. As we strive to meet the MDGs and
look to the post-2015 process, we must acknowledge
and respond to each country’s epidemic by pursuing
an evidence-based, non-discriminatory approach. With
that as our basis, together we can create an AIDS-free
generation.
Ms. Carayanides (Australia): While Australia
is pleased that a decision (decision 67/562) has been
agreed on under this very important agenda item, we
would like to express our disappointment that Member
States were not able to agree on the text that welcomed
the Secretary-General’s report on the issue (A/66/757).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-47476 (E)

*1347476*

A/67/PV.99

The report, which gave all of us reason to be optimistic
about the progress towards the targets for a world free
of AIDS, also provides us with clear directions on what
still has to be done, particularly for populations at risk.
We thank the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS for its ongoing efforts on the HIV response.
Achieving the targets set out in the 2011 Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS must remain a priority for
all of us.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union, who wishes to make a statement following the
adoption of the decision.
Mr. Poulsen (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. We would first like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (A/67/822)
on the progress towards achieving the targets of the
Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS: Intensifying Our
Efforts to Eliminate HIV and AIDS, adopted by the
General Assembly in 2011. We appreciate the review
of the progress made and the challenges involved in
meeting the 10 specific, time-bound targets by 2015.
We would like to stress that we consider the report to
be well balanced, emphasizing as it does the worstaffected countries while taking into consideration the
specificities of the various regions.
The EU and its member States are committed to
upholding human rights and gender equality, and the
common EU values of solidarity in support of equitable
and universal coverage through quality health services.
In its relationship with partner countries, the EU pays
particular attention to rights-based programmes for
addressing the specific needs of key populations. While
we do not wish to oppose consensus in the Assembly
on the decision (decision 67/562) on the implementation
of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and
the Political Declarations on HIV/AIDS, the European
Union and its member States wish to stress that we
find no reason not to welcome the Secretary-General’s
report, as the General Assembly did with regard to
the Secretary-General’s 2012 report. However, we
have decided to accept the proposal to take note of the
report, thereby demonstrating our utmost flexibility in
a spirit of collaboration and compromise, and to reflect
the importance we attach to the AIDS response.

2

The European Union and its member States wish to
reaffirm our commitment to addressing HIV and AIDS
and our support for all the actors involved in the AIDS
response.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 11?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/67/L.80)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda
item 63 and its sub-items (a) and (b) and agenda item 13
at its 25th and 26th plenary meetings, on 17 October,
and its 28th plenary meeting, on 22 October 2012.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Mozambique to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.80.
Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): It is with honour
that I introduce, on behalf of the African Group, draft
resolution A/67/L.80, entitled “Consolidating gains and
accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria
in developing countries, particularly in Africa, by
2015”. Furthermore, Mozambique is proud to Chair the
African Leaders Malaria Alliance (ALMA).
Over the past decade, more than 1 million lives have
been saved, with a 25 per cent reduction in mortality
globally and a 33 per cent reduction in mortality
in Africa. That success has happened through the
collaborative efforts of Governments, non-governmental
organizations, community-based organizations, United
Nations agencies, international organizations, donors,
foundations and other stakeholders. Indeed, African
countries and partners have mobilized hundreds
of millions of dollars to scale up malaria-control
interventions, including long-lasting insecticidal nets,
indoor residual spraying, rapid diagnostic tests and
artemisinin-based combination therapies. As a result,
nine African countries— namely, Algeria, Botswana,
Cape Verde, Eritrea, Namibia, Rwanda, Sao Tome and
Principe, South Africa and Swaziland — have already
achieved or are on track to reduce malaria incidence by
75 per cent, and two additional countries, Madagascar

13-47476

A/67/PV.99

and Zambia, are on track for a reduction of 50 to 75 per
cent by 2015.
Notwithstanding those gains, the grim reality
is that malaria is still a global threat that affects 99
countries globally and contributed to 595,000 deaths in
2010. Africa continues to bear the brunt of that burden,
accounting for 81 per cent of malaria cases occurring
worldwide; and 90 per cent of malaria deaths occur
in the region, with 86 per cent being those of children
under 5.
The Roll Back Malaria Partnership Harmonization
Working Group supported countries in completing
a comprehensive programmatic and financial gap
analysis, detailing a $3.6 billion gap in the resources
needed to sustain universal coverage of essential malaria
interventions in Africa to the end of 2015. Today, we are
less than 840 days from the 31 December 2015 deadline
to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. More
than ever, we need the big push, as described by the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Financing the
Health-Related Millennium Development Goals and
for Malaria and strongly advocated for by the Chair
of ALMA, His Excellency President Armando Emílio
Guebuza.
This annual United Nations draft resolution is
critical because it provides a rallying message for
countries and guideposts to key partners, such as
the African Development Bank; the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; the Economic
Commission for Africa; the World Bank; the United
Kingdom; France and the United States; the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation and others, to ensure that
we build sustainable funding plans and ensure quality
financial management, including priority-setting and
accountability for results.
I also want to recognize the creation of the AsiaPacific Leaders Malaria Alliance.
This year’s draft resolution highlights a few
technical updates and new developments since last
year. The new components are as follows: it takes note
of the declaration of the Special Summit of the African
Union on HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, held
from 12 to 16 July 2013 in Abuja; it urges the inclusion
of research and evidence-based and cost-effective
and context-appropriate environmental management
solutions to malaria-control strategies; and it recognizes
the importance of a multisectoral approach to advance
global malaria control efforts, and therefore looks

forward to the presentation to Member States of the
Roll Back Malaria Partnership and the United Nations
Development Programme Action Framework for a
Multisectoral Approach to Malaria.
In addition to those developments, we would
also like to have the document reflect the following
amendments, which were made post-consultations.
In line 5 of paragraph 13, the phrase “treatment
in pregnancies” should be deleted. Secondly, in line
6 of paragraph 27, the phrase “treatment for pregnant
women, antimalarial treatment for all populations”
should be deleted and replaced with the phrase
“therapies for pregnant women, children under 5 and
infants”.
The draft resolution conclusively requests the
Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the
Director General of the World Health Organization
and in consultation with Member States, to report
on the implementation of the draft resolution at the
sixty-eighth session, specifically on progress towards
achieving the 2015 targets of the Abuja Declaration
and those of the Global Malaria Action Plan, as well as
Millennium Development Goal 6.
Let me express our appreciation to the
representatives who participated in the consultations
for their constructive engagement and contributions.
We furthermore thank those Members who sponsored
the draft resolution, and invite other delegations to join
the sponsorship today.
We look forward to the adoption of the draft
resolution by consensus, as in previous years.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.80, entitled
“Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to
control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2015”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Gettu (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, in addition to those delegations listed on
document A/67/L.80 or previously mentioned during
the introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have also become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Bosnia and Herzegovina, France, India,
Italy, Lithuania, Montenegro, New Zealand, Nigeria,

13-474763

A/67/PV.99

Norway, Slovenia, Suriname, Sweden and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.80, as orally
amended?
Draft resolution A/67/L.80, as orally amended, was
adopted (resolution 67/299).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 13?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 14 and 113 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the
Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/67/L.83)
The President: Members will recall that, at its
42nd and 43rd plenary meetings on 28 November 2012,
the General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 14
jointly with agenda item 113 and agenda item 119.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members about the status of the consideration of
draft resolution A/67/L.83, entitled “Review of the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social
Council”. Due to the late submission of the agreed text,
there was insufficient time for the Secretariat to process
the document, issue it in all six languages and circulate
it for consideration at today’s plenary meeting.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to transmit
the agreed text contained in draft resolution A/67/L.83
to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session,
in order for the Assembly to take action on the draft
resolution at that session?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda items 14 and
113.

4

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I shall now invite the attention of
the General Assembly to draft resolution A/67/L.82,
circulated under agenda item 19 and entitled “Modalities
for the sixth High-level Dialogue on Financing for
Development”.
Members will recall that the Assembly concluded
its consideration of agenda item 19 at its 61st plenary
meeting, on 21 December 2012. In order for the
Assembly to take action on the draft resolution before
it, it will be necessary to reopen its consideration of
agenda item 19.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will further recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2012, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 19
to the Second Committee.
To enable the General Assembly to take action
expeditiously on the document, may I also take it
that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 19
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately
to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of
the 2002 International Conference on Financing for
Development and the 2008 Review Conference
Draft resolution (A/67/L.82)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.82, entitled
“Modalities for the sixth High-level Dialogue on
Financing for Development”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/67/L.82?
Draft resolution A/67/L.82 was adopted (resolution
67/300).

13-47476

A/67/PV.99

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the
Programme for Further Implementation of
Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and
of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development
Draft decision (A/67/L.81)
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2012, the
General Assembly allocated this sub-item to the Second
Committee.
Members will also recall that at its 63rd plenary
meeting, on 22 January 2013, the Assembly agreed
to consider this sub-item directly in plenary meeting,
proceeded immediately to its consideration and adopted
decision 67/555, entitled “Open Working Group of the
General Assembly on Sustainable Development Goals”.
Members will further recall that at its 89th plenary
meeting, on 21 June 2013, the Assembly adopted
decision 67/559, entitled “Intergovernmental committee
of experts on sustainable development financing”, and
at its 91st plenary meeting, on 9 July 2013, adopted
resolution 67/290, entitled “Format and organizational
aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development”.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
decision A/67/L.81, entitled “Board of the 10-year
framework of programmes on sustainable consumption
and production patterns”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/67/L.81?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 67/564).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 54 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/67/425/Add.1)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) which is before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendation of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
have been made clear in the Committee and are
reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take a decision in the
same manner as was done in the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), unless
notified otherwise in advance.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution.

13-474765

A/67/PV.99

The Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

security-sector reform and post-conflict peacebuilding
in Africa. That would include efforts to implement
the African Union Framework for Post-conflict
Reconstruction and Development.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/301).

The African Group welcomes the ongoing efforts of
the two Councils to hold joint meetings and commends
the Security Council for its anticipated meeting with the
African Union Peace and Security Council in October.
The Group looks forward to a concrete expression
of the determination of the two Councils to further
consolidate their strategic partnership.

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 54?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union
Draft resolution (A/67/L.67/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate on agenda item 121 and its
sub-items (a) to (w) at its 40th plenary meeting, on
19 November 2012.
I now give the floor to the representative of Eritrea
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.67/Rev.1.
Mr. Desta (Eritrea): I have the honour to introduce,
on behalf of the African Group, draft resolution
A/67/L.67/Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union”.
The African Group would like to express its
appreciation to all delegations for their constructive
engagement in and contributions to the draft resolution.
Our gratitude is also directed to the President of the
General Assembly for allowing a space for members
to conduct further consultations and clarifications
on ambiguous aspects of this very important draft
resolution. I also thank the Secretary-General for
allocating his time to attend this important meeting.
The draft resolution submitted today reaffirms the
existing cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in key areas of peace and security as
well as development. The draft resolution recognizes the
need to enhance strategic partnerships and cooperation
between the United Nations Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union in
the realms of conflict prevention and resolution, early
warning, mediation, crisis management, peacekeeping,

6

With less than 800 days left to the 2015 deadline
for achieving the Millennium Development Goals, the
draft resolution recognizes that Africa remains the only
continent not on track to achieve the Goals. The draft
resolution therefore stresses the need for the United
Nations to redouble its efforts to address the challenge
of poverty eradication and the critical issues of debt
cancellation, enhanced official development assistance,
increased inflows of foreign direct investment,
technology transfer, the building of productive capacity
and the creation of employment opportunities, as well
as food insecurity, agricultural partnership, quality
education, gender quality, improved maternal health
and combating the spread of HIV/AIDS, malaria,
tuberculosis and other related infectious diseases.
Finally, the draft resolution acknowledges the
increasing relevance of strategic partnerships for
the development of the African continent. The draft
resolution expresses appreciation for the active role
that both the United Nations and the African Union
are playing in facilitating that relationship aimed at
enhancing the attainment of Africa’s development
goals. The African Group attaches great importance to
ongoing strategic partnerships with various countries
and regions and takes note of the new form of partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the context of the International Conference on African
Development, held in Yokahama, Japan, from 1 to
3 June. The African Group would like to welcome and
commend ongoing strategic partnerships in the context
of Africa-China, Africa-European Union, Africa-South
America, Africa-Arab Summit, Africa-Turkey, AfricaIndia and Africa-Korea.
The President: The Assembly shall now take a
decision on draft resolution A/67/L.67/Rev.1, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union”, as orally corrected.

13-47476

A/67/PV.99

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Gettu (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/67/L.67/Rev.1 or mentioned during its introduction,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
the draft resolution: Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Estonia,
Finland, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Lithuania, Malaysia,
Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovakia, Spain and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.67/Rev.1, as
orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/67/L.67/Rev.1, as orally
corrected, was adopted (resolution 67/302).
I now give the floor to the representative of
Japan, who wishes to speak in explanation of position
following the adoption of the resolution.
Ms. Okai (Japan): Japan is happy to have joined
the adoption by consensus of resolution 67/302, under
sub-item (a) of agenda item 121, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union”.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank
Eritrea for having introduced the draft resolution, and
Swaziland for its hard work in successfully facilitating
the negotiations on the text of the resolution.
The central role of the United Nations and African
Union (AU) in promoting international peace and
security and sustainable development in Africa is
indisputable. The need for those two entities to work
together to enhance effectiveness is also appreciated by
all of us. It is in that spirit that Japan has wholeheartedly
welcomed the participation of the African Union
Commission as one of the co-organizers of the Tokyo
International Conference on African Development
(TICAD) since 2010, together with the United Nations,
the United Nations Development Programme, the World
Bank and the Government of Japan. It is our strong
conviction that TICAD V, the most recent Conference,
convened at the Head-of-State level in Yokohama,
Japan, in June, provided a unique platform for a
deepened partnership between the AU and the United
Nations. We also wish to draw the Assembly’s attention

to the fact that the outcome document of TICAD V
has been circulated among Member States (A/67/938,
annex I), including a covering letter singed jointly
by the Permanent Observer of the African Union and
the Permanent Representative of Japan to the United
Nations.
We would like to commend once again the
increasing partnership and collaboration between
the African Union and the United Nations. Japan
will remain strongly committed to strengthening the
cooperation between the two bodies.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum.
Draft resolution (A/67/L.79)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held the debate on agenda item 121 and its
sub-items (a) to (w) at its 40th plenary meeting, on
19 November 2012.
I now give the floor to the representative of New
Zealand to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.79.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I have the honour of
introducing draft resolution A/67/L.79 on behalf of
Australia, Kiribati, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, the Solomon
Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and the Marshall
Islands, the current Chair of the Pacific Islands Forum,
whose warm hospitality as host of the most recent
meeting of the Forum made such an impression on all
who attended.
It has now been 42 years since the Pacific Islands
Forum was established. It is astonishing to reflect that,
at that time, only three of our members, and only one
Pacific country, were United Nations Members. Indeed,
several had yet to gain their independence. Today’s
reality is very different. Fourteen Pacific States are
United Nations Members and, in the past month, we

13-474767

A/67/PV.99

welcomed to New York the latest of them, the newly
established Permanent Mission of Kiribati.

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.79?

Our members, who represent some of the world’s
smallest communities, know that, regardless of size
and geographic location, our region cannot afford to
be a passive witness to discussions on climate change,
oceans and fisheries and sustainable development, the
outcomes of which have such substantial implications
for our people.

Draft resolution A/67/L.79 was adopted (resolution
67/303).

The United Nations has been an important partner
to the Pacific in our pursuit of stability and sustainable
development. But more can be done to improve the
scope, focus and effectiveness of that support, in which
regard we pay very special and warm tribute to the
Secretary-General’s unprecedented engagement with
our region, including several meetings with Pacific
island leaders, two joint statements and an actual visit
to the region in 2011. Such sustained attention has been
greatly welcomed by us. Over the coming year, we look
forward to translating those discussions into practical
improvements to the United Nations engagement on the
ground. This draft resolution provides a firm foundation
for taking forward that engagement.
Once again, I thank our many friends in the United
Nations membership who, by their sponsorship of
this draft resolution, have displayed their support and
solidarity with us today. I submit this draft resolution
for the Assembly’s collective consideration.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.79, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Gettu (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/67/L.79 or previously mentioned during
its introduction, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Chile, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Hungary, India,
Israel, Montenegro, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Singapore,
Slovakia, Spain, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and the United States
of America.

8

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (s) of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 39
The situation in the occupied territories
of Azerbaijan
The President: In connection with this item, I
have received a letter dated 9 August 2013 from the
representative of Azerbaijan. The representative of
Azerbaijan has requested that consideration of this item
be deferred to the sixty-eighth session of the Assembly.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to defer
its consideration of the item and to include in the draft
agenda of the sixty-eighth session the item entitled “The
situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan”?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 39?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 40
Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting on 21 September 2012, the General
Assembly decided to include that item in its agenda on
the understanding that there would be no consideration
of the item by the Assembly until further notice.
In connection with the item, I have received a note
verbale dated 11 September 2013 from the Permanent
Mission of the Comoros to the United Nations requesting
the inclusion of the item in the provisional agenda of
the sixty-eighth session. May I take it that it is the wish
of the Assembly to include the item entitled “Question
of the Comorian island of Mayotte” in the draft agenda
of the sixty-eighth session?
It was so decided.

13-47476

A/67/PV.99

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 40?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 43 to 48
Question of Cyprus
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
The situation of democracy and human rights
in Haiti
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi
nuclear installations and its grave consequences
for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and
international peace and security
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait
The President: Members will recall that, at
its 2nd plenary meeting on 21 September 2012, the
Assembly decided to include agenda items 43 to 48 in
the agenda of the sixty-seventh session, in accordance
with paragraph 4 (b) of the annex to its resolution
58/316 of 1 July 2004. In resolution 58/316, the General
Assembly decided that those items shall remain on the
agenda for consideration upon notification by a Member
State. Accordingly, those items have been included in
the draft agenda of the sixty-eighth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
43 to 48?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 126
International residual mechanism for
criminal tribunals
The President: Members will recall that, at
its 2nd plenary meeting on 21 September 2012, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-seventh session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of the item to the sixty-eighth

session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to defer consideration
of agenda item 126 and to include it in the draft agenda
of its sixty-eighth session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 126?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 148
Financing of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad
The President: Members will recall that, at
its 2nd plenary meeting on 21 September 2012, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-seventh session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to defer consideration
of agenda item 148 and to include it in the draft agenda
of its sixty-eighth session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 148?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 152
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor
The President: Members will recall that, at
its 2nd plenary meeting on 21 September 2012, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-seventh session.
It is my understanding that it would be desirable
to defer consideration of this item to the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly. May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to defer consideration
of agenda item 152 and to include it in the draft agenda
of its sixty-eighth session?
It was so decided.

13-474769

A/67/PV.99

The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 152?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 119 (continued)
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly considered this item, in a joint debate with
agenda items 14 and 113, at its 42nd and 43rd plenary
meetings on 28 November 2012.
Before proceeding further, I should like to
inform members on the status of the consideration of
draft decision A/67/L.84 entitled “Extension of the
intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the human rights treaty body system”. Due to the late
submission of the text, there was insufficient time for
the Secretariat to process that lengthy document, issue
it in all six languages and circulate it for consideration
at today’s plenary meeting.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to transmit
the agreed text contained in draft decision A/67/L.84
to the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session
in order for the Assembly to take action on the draft
decision at that session?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
119.
It was so decided.
Agenda items remaining for consideration during
the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly
The President: I should like to remind delegations
that the following agenda items, which have been
considered at previous meetings, remain open for
consideration during the sixty-seventh session of the
General Assembly: items 9, 14, 15, 20 (b) and (h), 30,
31, 33, 70 (a) to (c), 94 (b), 106, 107, 110 (a) and (b), 111
(f), 112, 113, 115, 118 (a) and (b), 119, 121 (b), (i), (p), (q)
and (v), 124, 125, 128 (a) to (r), 129 to 147, 149 to 151,
153 to 157, 158 (a) and (b), 159 to 164 and 171.
As members are aware, those items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the sixty-eighth

10

session of the General Assembly with the exception
of sub-item (b) of agenda item 110, entitled “Election
of thirty members of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law”; sub-item (b) of agenda
item 118, entitled “Central role of the United Nations
system in global governance”; sub-items (b), (i), (p),
(q) and (v) of agenda item 121, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations”; sub-items (a) to (d), (i), (k), (m) to
(p), and (q) of agenda item 128, entitled “Financial
reports and audited financial statements, and reports
of the Board of Auditors”; agenda item 138, entitled
“United Nations pension system”; agenda item 139,
entitled “Administrative and budgetary coordination
of the United Nations with the specialized agencies
and the International Atomic Energy Agency”; and
agenda item 145, entitled “Scale of assessments for the
apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
9, 14, 15, 20 (b) and (h), 30, 31, 33, 70 (a) to (c), 94 (b),
106, 107, 110 (a) and (b), 111 (i), 112, 113, 115, 118 (a)
and (b), 119, 121 (b), (i), (p), (q) and (v), 124, 125, 128
(a) to (r), 129 to 147, 149 to 151, 153 to 157, 158 (a) and
(b), 159 to 164 and 171 at the present session?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to include agenda items 9, 14,
15, 20 (b) and (h), 30, 31, 33, 70 (a) to (c), 94 (b), 106,
107, 110 (a) and (b), 111 (i), 112, 113, 115, 118 (a) and (b),
119, 121 (b), (i), (p), (q) and (v), 124, 125, 128 (a) to (r),
129 to 147, 149 to 151, 153 to 157, 158 (a) and (b), 159
to 164 and 171 in the draft agenda of the sixty-eighth
session?
It was so decided.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: We have reached another
notable moment on the United Nations calendar. With
the end of the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly, we express our gratitude to the President of
this body, His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, as well as
the Vice-Presidents, committee chairs and others who
helped steer the Assembly through an eventful year. I
again thank His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić for the
great dynamism that he brought to the job. When he

13-47476

A/67/PV.99

was elected President, he was just a month away from
his thirty-seventh birthday, making him one of the
youngest people ever chosen to serve in that capacity.
I am sure he now feels considerably older than 38.
Presiding over 193 Member States has a way of ageing
a person.
Over the past year, the General Assembly has
realized a number of significant achievements across
the range of issues that are on the General Assembly’s
agenda. To cite but a few, the Assembly held its firstever high-level meeting on the rule of law and adopted
a far-reaching and forward-looking Declaration on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels.
The Assembly also adopted an Arms Trade Treaty,
the first-ever international treaty to regulate the
trade in conventional weapons. Those were important
breakthroughs indeed. All in all, the Assembly
adopted more than 300 resolutions, including on the
strengthening of the Organization itself.
You, Sir, also convened a number of thematic
debates and dialogues on entrepreneurship, culture,
inequality and, just last week, on the responsibility to
protect, a timely initiative indeed. The Assembly also
renewed its efforts to combat trafficking in persons.
The sixty-seventh session coincided with a
challenging period for the international community.
The Assembly stepped in when the Security Council
was divided on Syria.
The Assembly also continued to wrestle with the
prolonged consequences of the global economic crisis.
Member States also began the hugely important
discussions on the post-2015 development agenda and a
new set of goals for sustainable development, including
by establishing the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals and the High-level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development.
During the sixty-seventh session, we also closed the
General Assembly Hall for much-needed renovations. I
thank Member States for their continued support for the
Capital Master Plan.
I again thank all those who, during the sixty-seventh
session, helped to lay the necessary groundwork for
achievements in the years ahead. I look forward to the
capable stewardship of Ambassador John Ashe during
the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly to
take this vital work forward for the benefit of the people

we are here to serve. I thank you, Mr. President, for
your leadership.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
This is the last time that I will be addressing the
General Assembly in my capacity as its President. I
would like to give my address from the lectern, standing
before the Assembly.
It has been a distinct privilege for me to preside
over the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
I have been truly humbled by the opportunity to serve
the world on behalf of my nation. Seven decades after
we became a founding Member of the Organization in
the wake of the great victory over fascism, and 20 years
after having been left out of this Hall as our country
descended into a maelstrom of ferocious civil war,
we stood with pride on the world stage once again,
empowered by the confidence bestowed upon us by
the Member States. I have made every effort to carry
out the duties of my office to the best of my ability, to
exercise my authority in a forthright and even-handed
manner, and to faithfully serve the cause of the United
Nations.
One of the finest accounts of the Organization was
given by His Excellency Mr. Osvaldo Aranha of Brazil
on his final day as President of the General Assembly
at its second session, back in 1947. His words are as
inspiring now as on the day he spoke them. The United
Nations, he said,
“stands for the new order, based on peaceful
accord, on understanding, on free discussion,
on free decision and on the common and equal
responsibility of peoples. It is the organ of world
public opinion.” (A/PV.128, p. 1442)
I would like to thank everyone who has helped me
carry out the agenda of the sixty-seventh session: first
and foremost, the representatives of the 193 nations that
make up this Hall, in particular the Vice-Presidents and
the Main Committee Chairs, as well as the facilitators
I have appointed over the course of the past year. I
would also like to thank the hardworking people in
various branches of the Secretariat for their support
and assistance, especially the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management, the Department
of Public Information and the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs, as well as the interpreters, protocol
officers and security personnel.

13-4747611

A/67/PV.99

My multinational team was anchored by a group of
devoted Serbian advisers, who worked in tandem with
highly capable diplomats seconded from their capitals.
Allow me to acknowledge their industry and diligence,
and to thank them for their invaluable contributions.
Last but certainly not least, I wish to express my
sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
invaluable advice and guidance throughout my term.
It has been an honour to work with him over the
past 12 months, and I take this opportunity to pay a
wholehearted tribute to his spirited leadership of the
United Nations. Right now he is represented in this Hall
by my good friend the Deputy Secretary-General, Jan
Eliasson, one of the most capable diplomats I have met
in my career. I would like to thank him for his strong
support and the backing of the Secretary-General in his
leadership of the Organization.
During this session, Member States adopted close
to 90 written and oral decisions, and around 300
resolutions. One of the most significant related to the
text of the breakthrough Arms Trade Treaty (ATT)
(resolution 67/234 A and B), the first legally binding
instrument ever negotiated at the United Nations to
establish common standards for the international
transfer of conventional armaments. That robust and
actionable document will enhance transparency in
the weapons industry; oblige sellers to provide an
assessment as to whether their commercial activity
could facilitate human rights abuses or violations
of humanitarian law; and strengthen reporting and
accountability mechanisms. I respectfully urge Member
States that have not yet signed or ratified the ATT to do
so at the earliest opportunity in order to expedite its
entry into force.
On the sixty-fifth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 181 (II) A and B, mandating two States
for two peoples in the Holy Land, I was privileged
to preside over a historic meeting of the General
Assembly (A/67/PV.44) in which Member States
voted overwhelmingly to grant Palestine non-member
observer State status in the United Nations (resolution
67/19). It has helped set the stage for direct negotiations
between the parties in the aftermath. I take this
opportunity to urge all stakeholders to the peace
process to join together in a common cause and thus
bring to close an era of great enmity in the Middle East.
The horrors of the past inevitably shape who we are, but
unless we are ready to tame and eventually overcome
them, the future is not likely to be any different. I

12

believe that the talks that are now under way represent
the best chance in a generation to achieve a just and
comprehensive settlement, enabling two proud nations
to finally start living side by side in peace and security.
Another notable achievement of the sixty-seventh
session was the landmark resolution on the United
Nations and global economic governance (resolution
67/289). For the first time, Member States set baseline
terms for flexible and regular interaction in the General
Assembly between the United Nations, the Group of
20 (G-20) countries and non-G20 countries, as well as
international financial organizations. Henceforth, this
Hall will serve as an inclusive platform for exchanging
views, sharing information and reflecting on common
concerns about financial and trade issues. That will
complement existing multilateral efforts to establish
what a recent report of the Secretary-General called
a “more inclusive and participatory global economic
governance framework” (A/67/769, para. 58).
The great Irish man of letters George Bernard Shaw
once wrote that
“[t]he people who get on in this world are the people
who get up and look for the circumstances they
want, and, if they can’t find them, make them”.
In order to create such circumstances, which would
raise the vitality of the General Assembly, a decade
ago States Member States of the United Nations gave
a mandate to the President of the General Assembly
to propose topics for thematic debates on issues of
critical importance. During the latter part of the sixtyseventh session, I convened more than a dozen such
events. Each, I believe, provided us with a unique
opportunity to exchange views, as sovereign equals, on
key subjects affecting the international community as
a whole. I am proud of the fact that a record number of
countries participated in them, empowered to speak up
and present their cases, and listen to frank and open
responses. Together, we broke a number of taboos, and
made sure there would be no more forbidden topics in the
General Assembly. I believe it will help this universal
parliament to assume an even more pronounced role in
the governance of world affairs.
In addition to those mandated by specific
resolutions, thematic debates were held on international
criminal justice, the peaceful resolution of conflicts in
Africa, sustainable development and climate change,
culture, entrepreneurship, education, social inequality
and, most recently, credit rating agencies. Some of

13-47476

A/67/PV.99

them were groundbreaking events that featured not
only the high-level participation of Member States, but
gave the world’s most prominent platform to leading
international opinion-makers, religious leaders,
artists, academicians, athletes and non-governmental
organizations.
The most glaring failure of the international
community during the sixty-seventh session has been
the ongoing tragedy of Syria. I feel deeply ashamed that
we have not been able to find a way to stop that carnage.
In that proud and ancient land, the death toll continues
to rise with every passing hour, as does the number of
refugees and internally displaced persons. The nation’s
social fabric is breaking down. Schools have been shut
and hospitals operate without medicine. Continued
militarization deepens the suffering of Syria’s people
and strengthens those who seek to establish ethnic
or sectarian fiefdoms. To end the fratricide, we must
have a high-level political dialogue. We must bring the
parties together and make them talk to each other face
to face. To that end, I believe we must push even harder
for an international peace conference on Syria, and
wholeheartedly support all initiatives that can prevent
exacerbation of the catastrophe.
Syria is but the latest fissure to appear in the
international system. In recent times, both the quantity
and frequency of flashpoints has been surging
upwards. Our problems have become more complex
and have led to an increase in the overall sense of
uncertainty about our future. Humankind is facing
a test of unprecedented proportions — an existential
crisis unlike any the world has experienced in its
long and tumultuous history. We are in the midst of a
period of great consequence, characterized by growing
economic instability, rising social inequality and
spiraling environmental degradation. Our energy and
agricultural demands are soaring; our access to clean
water is plummeting; sovereign debts are mounting;
populations are exploding; youth unemployment is
rising; the polar icecaps are melting and droughts
becoming commonplace. All nations are increasingly
affected, and none can hope to solve those challenges
on its own.
It is against that backdrop that world leaders
came together, in June 2012 in Rio de Janeiro, to
set the foundation of the post-2015 agenda. They
agreed to comprehensively integrate the three
dimensions of development — social, economic and
environmental — into a single, fully coherent and

sustainable whole. And they endowed the General
Assembly with additional mandates.
Over the course of the sixty-seventh session, we
took the essential first steps to fulfil them. We set up
the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development
Goals; we agreed on the terms of the Intergovernmental
Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development
Financing to propose options for financing them; and we
achieved consensus on the framework for the high-level
political forum for monitoring their implementation.
I am very proud of those achievements. They have
established the necessary groundwork upon which
substantive issues can now start to be addressed. The
General Assembly has less than 850 days to do so.
I believe that there is still a lack of understanding in
certain quarters of the enormous scope of that task. It is
probably the most challenging endeavour in the history
of multilateral diplomacy. All eyes are now turned to
this Hall for leadership, and this Hall must now answer
the call of an anxious humankind.
This is the only international institution endowed
with indisputable legitimacy to act on behalf of all
sovereign States. If it fails to establish the parameters
of a universal transition to sustainability, we will not
move forward. Across the globe, economies would
slump, social tensions rise and adverse climate change
gallop ahead with abandon. We would lurch as a world
into a downward spiral from which we might never
recover.
I believe that this is the moment to shake off
complacency and throw aside old habits that reinforce
the status quo. It is the moment to reinvent the very
definition of human progress to transform what not so
long ago was but a far-off dream into a reality for all of
humankind. And it is the very last moment to chart a
course towards a more secure and sustainable future.
There will be no second chance — no “next time”,
no “do over”. We must not squander this opportunity out
of fear, reticence, distrust, incredulity or whatever else
may be holding us back. As we embark on this fateful
journey, I believe we should draw inspiration from
what the great Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld
once wrote not long before his death:
“Never look down to test the ground before taking
your next step; only he who keeps his eye fixed on the
far horizon will find the right road ... Never, ‘for the

13-4747613

A/67/PV.99

sake of peace and quiet’, deny your own experience and
convictions.”
God bless the representatives gathered in this Hall;
God bless Mr. John Ashe, my successor; and God bless
the Organization of the United Nations.
Agenda item 2 (continued)
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The President: We are now coming to the end of the
sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly. I would
like to invite representatives to stand and observe one
minute of silent prayer or meditation.

14

The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Closure of the sixty-seventh session
The President: Before proceeding further, I would
like to invite to the podium the President-elect for the
sixty-eighth session, His Excellency Mr. John Ashe, to
hand over the gavel to him.
I declare closed the sixty-seventh session of the
General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

13-47476
