United Nations

S/PV.6559

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6559th meeting
Monday, 20 June 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Messone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-37934 (E)

*1137934*

S/PV.6559

Ethiopia. We would like for that to happen as quickly
as possible because, among other things, it will enable
the people displaced from Abyei to return to their
homes. Their return is conditional on the withdrawal of
all other military forces, the demilitarization of the
Area and the replacement of the Sudanese military
forces by the Ethiopian forces.

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, Chairperson of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan, and Mr. Haile
Menkerios, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan, to participate in this meeting via
videoconference from Addis Ababa.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ezekiel Lol
Gatkuoth to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Mbeki.
Mr. Mbeki: We will give a very brief and, I hope,
succinct report about what is happening with regard to
various matters relating to the Sudan.
We would first like to inform the Council that,
happily, within the past hour, the Government of the
Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
(SPLM) signed an agreement on Abyei. As the Council
is aware, we have been negotiating that agreement with
them for several days, but now the agreement has
finally been signed.
Indeed, both parties have asked us to commend
the agreement to the Security Council. I am quite sure
that, when the Council looks at the agreement,
members will see that the parties are requesting various
interventions by the United Nations with regard to the
implementation of that agreement. We would certainly
like to very strongly commend the agreement.
We hope that the Council will consider the
agreement as soon as possible, in particular with regard
to matters that will result in the demilitarization of
Abyei and the replacement of all Sudanese military
forces by forces to be supplied by the Government of

2

As I was saying, that would expedite the return of
those displaced to their areas and would therefore
improve the possibility of addressing all humanitarian
matters. Of course, it would also bring to an end the
threat of violence and actual violence in the Area.
Thus, we are really hoping that the Security Council
will look at the agreement as soon as possible and take
all decisions necessary to ensure that its various
provisions can be implemented.
We would also like to inform the Council that we
are dealing with the current situation in Southern
Kordofan. Again, as the Council may have heard, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Sudan, Mr. Haile Menkerios, as well as ourselves, the
United States Special Envoy and members of the
political leadership of the SPLM from northern Sudan
went to Southern Kordofan last week to meet with the
leader of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army, Abdel
Aziz Al-Hilu. Our objective was to encourage them to
participate in a process that would peacefully resolve
the conflict in Southern Kordofan. We were very
fortunate to be able to immediately travel back to
Addis Ababa with people whom he delegated to
participate in those negotiations.
We are hoping that, with the arrival tomorrow
morning in Addis Ababa of senior political leaders
representing the people of Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile states and representatives of the Sudanese
Government,
we
will
seriously
engage
in
comprehensive negotiations on Southern Kordofan.
Those talks will relate to the security and the political
situation and will begin tomorrow.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haile Menkerios has also been engaging with the
Government of the Sudan on the need to urgently
address the humanitarian situation in Southern
Kordofan. I am quite sure that he will be able to report
on that. Indeed, I believe we have positive news with
regard to that matter as well. We are hoping to move on
the matter of Southern Kordofan so as to immediately
address the humanitarian situation. We also hope to

11-37934

S/PV.6559

begin urgent and comprehensive discussions on the
issue tomorrow to finally resolve its political and
security aspects.

been reached and, as I was saying, hopefully will be
implemented quickly, we can then engage them on the
matter of the final status of Abyei.

Of course, we are also continuing negotiations
with the Sudanese parties on post-referendum
arrangements, which mainly involve how relations
between the North and the South will be structured
once South Sudan gains its independence on 9 July. I
am very pleased that good progress is being made. We
have already finalized discussions on assets and
liabilities, which include provisions for addressing the
issues of Sudan’s international debt. That particular
series of negotiations has been concluded.

That is the report we wanted to give. Again, we
would like to thank the Security Council for the
attention it is paying to the issue of the Sudan, and we
hope that it will continue to extend to all of us — the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
ourselves and everyone else, and, of course, the
Sudanese parties — all of the assistance and the
support that we need to ensure that we can resolve all
of these particular challenges, which are facing an
important part of our continent.

We have presented the parties with an agreement
comprised of a package of measures relating to the
economy, covering such issues as trade, currency and
oil. The parties now have a comprehensive proposal
and will be studying it beginning tomorrow. Hopefully,
if we can agree on that proposal, then we will have
resolved the matters related to cooperation between the
North and the South on economic issues.

The President (spoke in French): I thank
President Mbeki for his detailed briefing.

The parties are close to also concluding
discussions on and resolving security matters, which
broadly include border security. In reality, the one
outstanding issue is the size and composition of an
international force that will assist the two Sudanese
States in ensuring security along their shared border,
including the policing of the demilitarized zone, to
which they have already agreed.
What I am trying to say to the Council is that we
are attending to the urgent matters of Abyei and
Southern Kordofan, where conflict has arisen. At the
same time, however, we are pushing ahead with other
necessary discussions in order to properly define the
nature of relations between the North and the South.
We are hoping that by the end of June we will have
concluded all of these, so that by the beginning of July
there will be a clear picture as to what will happen.
I should have said that, with regard to the Abyei
matter, it has also been agreed by the parties that it was
necessary to resolve the current issues that relate to the
security of Abyei before we come back to a
consideration of the matter of the final status of Abyei.
As a Panel, we will be consulting with the principals,
President Al-Bashir and First Vice-President Salva
Kiir, as to when they propose we might make our
presentation to them about what the final status of
Abyei should be. Given that this agreement has now

11-37934

I now give the floor to Mr. Haile Menkerios.
Mr. Menkerios: Since the Security Council was
in the Sudan recently, I will focus only on the
developments that have taken place since the Council’s
visit.
First, with respect to the security situation,
President Mbeki spoke at length about the events in
Abyei, which up until this agreement remained just as
it was, with some exchanges around the Kiir River
between the parties. Hopefully today’s agreement will
bring that to an end, but to date the situation remains
very tense indeed.
President Mbeki also talked about the security
situation in Southern Kordofan, where fighting is
ongoing. There is hope, however, since, as was
explained, the two parties have agreed that possibly it
could come to a stop within a very short time. We are
hoping that this cessation of hostilities will be followed
by a ceasefire once a political agreement and a security
arrangement for the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM) members in Southern Kordofan,
and by implication in Blue Nile State as well, have
been reached.
In the meantime, also in the South, some sporadic
fighting continues in the northern part, particularly in
Unity State and Jonglei State in Southern Sudan. Much
of that is going to slow down a little bit, because now
the rains have come and people’s capacity to move is
limited. However, these types of confrontations
continue to occur around Abyei, the situation remains
tense in Southern Kordofan, with a lot of territory
having changed hands. In the northern part of the

3

S/PV.6559

South itself, armed groups have created a very difficult
humanitarian situation.

becomes impossible for any form of transport to travel
in that area.

Because there is active fighting, it has not been
easy to obtain humanitarian access across active firing
lines. However, we have agreed today with Mr. Mutrif
Siddiq, State Minister at the Ministry of Humanitarian
Affairs of the Sudan, that we will have access to most
of those areas where very, very critical humanitarian
situations exist. In some of those areas, some of our
own staff are also trapped on either side, and, because
they are around the firing zone, we have not been able
to access them easily. Much of our supplies, including
humanitarian supplies, generally come through Port
Sudan; they come to the North and then, from the
North, move towards the South; hopefully they will
arrive on 9 July. That will not be tremendously
hampered, but we are making plans on how that may
have to shift to a later date.

There is a possibility of border monitoring. The
two parties have discussed this and have accepted in
principle the need for a third party in border
monitoring. There has a been a suggestion by the
AUHIP that, if there is going to be a border-monitoring
mission, such a mission be a United Nations mission
and that it be integrated. Abyei and the border mission
to be established would be integrated under one
leadership
so
that
there
would
not
be
compartmentalized missions, with, for example, one
for Abyei, one for the border and one for the South, so
as to avoid multiplicity. In principle there has not been
any negation or any opposition to that, although as yet
there is no firm agreement on this issue from the
parties.

Up to now, they have agreed in principle. I have
been here about a week trying to assist the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel (AUHIP) to
secure this agreement on Abyei and to work towards a
ceasefire also, but I will be leaving either tonight or
early tomorrow morning. We will try to implement
what the officials, particularly in the area of
humanitarian access, have agreed to here.
Next are preparations for the possible mission in
the South, which we talked about when the Security
Council mission was here. This is going well. Much of
the assets that we envisage might be required for that
mission. We are in the process of passing over to the
South from the North.
The other issue is Abyei. Now that there is an
agreement, the two parties have agreed on Ethiopian
troops, which are trusted by both sides. The role played
by Prime Minister Meles Zenawi in assisting the Panel
and the parties in the provision of troops is highly
appreciated, and hopefully once the Council responds
positively to the request by the parties that President
Mbeki has just transmitted, upon instruction of the
Council we will be ready to assist in the quick
deployment of those Ethiopian troops to Abyei, so that
the South can withdraw in a very short time and those
who have been displaced from Abyei can return home.
The rainy season is coming very soon, and the sooner
the Council gives instructions, the sooner we will move
to get the Ethiopian troops in place, so that this can be
done quickly, before the rains fill the rivers and it

4

We felt, however, that although we will use some
of our assets in support of a possible Abyei mission, as
described, there is also a possibility that those support
units will support a possible border mission that would
later be integrated with that of Abyei. We are thus in
the process of liquidating all other UNMIS presence in
northern Sudan. Because of the tensions that still exist
and the need for constant monitoring, we have
informed the Government of the Sudan that until the
last day, until 9 July, UNMIS will be fully operational
and that the process of liquidation, if it is to take
place — unless other agreements would change that —
would have to start after 9 July and provide adequate
time for liquidation.
There will also be a need, post-UNMIS, to
continue to assist the AU Panel at the political level.
There are many other partners who are participating or
continuing to assist — the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union and individual
countries — and it has been proposed that the
Secretary-General appoint his Special Envoy to
continue to provide his good offices in support of the
AUHIP.
Let me stop here, and I will be ready to answer
any questions Council members may have.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Menkerios for his briefing. I now give the floor to
the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We have
just heard the good and positive news from Mr. Thabo

11-37934

S/PV.6559

Mbeki of a temporary agreement with respect to the
administration and security of the Abyei Area.

an agreement on Southern Kordofan State and all other
pending issues.

I am pleased on this occasion to welcome the
conciliation efforts of Mr. Mbeki and Mr. Haile
Menkerios and their joint efforts to achieve these
temporary arrangements for the Abyei Area. Moreover,
I would like to thank Mr. Meles Zenawi, Prime
Minister of Ethiopia, for his effective role in achieving
this agreement. Our thanks and appreciation extend to
those three African brothers, who have shown their
tireless commitment. The announcement leads us to
believe optimistically that the pending issues will be
resolved. As I mentioned earlier, the Government of
the Sudan is sincere in its determination to resolve all
pending issues.

Permit me to stop here, with many thanks.

Mr. Mbeki described to the Council the good
news in the area of resource-sharing, and he announced
that the parties are close to an agreement on this issue.
In the context of the economic and oil issues, we have
also heard excellent news, namely, that the parties have
reached major solutions and that those agreements will
be finalized very soon. Moreover, on the security
situation, especially in the border area, the parties are
very close to a solution that will be announced in the
very near future. We wish them every success in that
endeavour. We look forward to a resolution of that
issue as well as the pending issues related to the Abyei
Area.
While I will not go into further detail, I would
like to underscore a few points. The Government of the
Sudan welcomes the work of the United Nations and
the Security Council and requests that reactions related
to the issues be tempered and slowed down somewhat,
so that efforts under way may put an end to all of the
pending issues.
With respect to Southern Kordofan State, I am
speaking on the basis of my personal and direct
contacts, and not on the words of Mr. Menkerios.
Although the Government has not yet accepted the
agreement to permit humanitarian access to Southern
Kordofan it is perhaps on the verge of doing just that.
In line with Mr. Mbeki’s comments, tomorrow or the
day after tomorrow, consultations and contacts will
take place among the various parties in Southern
Kordofan State to achieve a solution of this pending
issue. I can reaffirm to the Council that the
Government of the Sudan, just as it has achieved an
agreement on the Abyei Area, is determined to achieve

11-37934

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of the Sudan for his statement. I now
give the floor to Mr. Gatkuoth.
Mr. Gatkuoth: I am so grateful for the
opportunity to address the Security Council and to
present the views of the Government of Southern
Sudan. On behalf of the people and the Government of
Southern Sudan, I would like to express our
appreciation to the Council for its ongoing efforts in
support of the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA).
In 2005, we all embraced the CPA as the
framework and road map for the resolution of the
conflict in the Sudan. The Government of Southern
Sudan remains committed to the full and final
implementation of the CPA in all of its aspects. The
CPA is a legal agreement binding on the parties, and
we must all collectively renew our efforts to implement
it in full.
We are concerned that recent violations of the
CPA by the Government of the Sudan through armed
attacks and destabilization efforts in the South, its
failure to work in good faith to complete
implementation of the existing agreements on Abyei’s
final status, the stalling of efforts to define and
demarcate the North/South borders, and the failure to
conduct the popular consultations in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile have put at risk the emergence
of two States at peace after 9 July 2011.
Today, we face a situation where the Sudanese
Armed Forces have taken Abyei and have violently
driven out its residents. The Sudanese Armed Forces
have now turned their attention to Southern Kordofan,
which, as a result, is experiencing a disturbing level of
violence, a humanitarian crisis and unnecessary
suffering. Khartoum has recently conducted aerial
bombardment of Agok, where many of Abyei’s
displaced have fled, and has also conducted other
bombardments inside Southern Sudan, such as in the
area of Jau, in Unity State.
Despite suggestions to the contrary, it is
increasingly clear, given the speed and scale of the
operation, that the attack by the Sudan Armed Forces
on Abyei was part of a deliberate plan conceived prior

5

S/PV.6559

to 19 May 2011. While the Government of Southern
Sudan regrets the 19 May shooting incident that led to
an exchange of fire between the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) and the Sudan Armed Forces
in the Abyei Area, the use of force by Khartoum in
Abyei has been completely unjustifiable and wholly
disproportionate. It is an attempt to circumvent the full
and final implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and to secure by force that which it
has not secured at the negotiating table or in the
binding award of an international tribunal.
The humanitarian impact of the violence in Abyei
has been catastrophic. Khartoum’s actions have caused
enormous harm to innocent civilians, constituting a
serious violation of international human rights and
humanitarian law. Tens of thousands of NgokDinka
civilians have been driven from their ancestral homes
in Abyei, as the United Nations itself has confirmed.
The Sudan Armed Forces, accompanied by armed
Misseriya militia, have indiscriminately killed and
maimed civilians, torched people’s houses, looted
property and possessions — including United Nations
humanitarian supplies — and facilitated and
encouraged the influx of Misseriya into northern parts
of the Area. We call on the United Nations to share its
more detailed reporting on these violations with the
international community.
This attempt to alter Abyei’s demography by
force is unacceptable and must be reversed
immediately. The National Congress Party cannot be
allowed to defy its legal obligations under the Abyei
Protocol of the CPA or its obligations under
international law. Unless the NgokDinka civilians are
able to return to their homeland, it will be difficult to
hold the referendum required by the CPA.
Despite this disturbing context, I am pleased to
report that the parties have just signed an agreement in
Addis Ababa aimed at securing the immediate
withdrawal of the Sudan Armed Forces from Abyei and
the entrance of an Ethiopian brigade to protect
civilians. In this context, we are grateful for the
ongoing support of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, under the leadership of
President Thabo Mbeki, and to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Haile
Menkerios, and Prime Minister Meles Zenawi for their
efforts.

6

The Government of the Sudan has said that its
presence in Abyei is not forever. A timetable for the
North’s full and unconditional withdrawal from Abyei
must now be implemented swiftly. The Government of
Southern Sudan welcomes and endorses the offer made
to the parties by the Government of Ethiopia regarding
the deployment of Ethiopian peacekeepers in Abyei
under a United Nations Security Council mandate and
operating under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter.
The consent to this deployment by the
Government of the Sudan is consistent with its
commitments under the CPA. We strongly encourage
the Council to endorse a Chapter VII mandate for those
forces, and to supply them with the necessary resources
to ensure they are deployed within the next two weeks,
as outlined in the Agreement.
The Agreement we have just signed does not —
and indeed, should not — attempt to address or
prejudice any outcome on the final status of Abyei.
With the recent changes, we are confident that the
Agreement will be used only for its intended purpose
of restoring peace to Abyei, and not to fuel tensions or
to prejudice discussions on the final status of Abyei.
In the interest of peace, my Government made a
number of other concessions on issues such as
transferring the leadership of the Abyei Area
Legislative Council to the National Congress Party, and
the composition and leadership of the proposed Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee.
Under the Agreement, the illegal claim over
Abyei on the part of the Government of the Sudan will
end. The Abyei Area will no longer have a special
administrative status under the presidency of the
Republic of the Sudan but rather will fall under the
supervision of both the President of South Sudan and
the President of the Republic of the Sudan. We reiterate
that Abyei belongs to both the North and the South,
and it will so continue until the people of Abyei decide
otherwise. The Government of Southern Sudan remains
fully committed to the negotiation process led by the
African Union High-level Panel and to reaching in the
near future an agreement on the definitive status of
Abyei that is consistent with the terms of the CPA and
with the PCA Award.
There are crucial obligations in the CPA that have
not yet been fulfilled and that are still subject to
ongoing implementation efforts — for example, the

11-37934

S/PV.6559

Abyei referendum, the arrangements for the Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile States, and the finalization of
the definition and demarcation of the North/South
border.
With regard to the Two Areas — Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile — my Government denounces
the violent attacks of the Sudan Armed Forces on
populations in Southern Kordofan that have caused a
second humanitarian crisis in which tens of thousands
from the area have now joined the NgokDinka in their
flight to the South. We welcome the international
community’s condemnation of those activities and its
assistance with humanitarian support for those
displaced.
We reject as unrealistic and inconsistent with the
terms of the CPA the insistence by the Government of
the Sudan that SPLA elements in the areas must disarm
or move to the South. It is that uncompromising
position — as articulated in the ultimatum presented
recently to SPLA elements in these areas to withdraw
southwards by 1 June or face action — that has led to
the recent violence. Khartoum cannot continue to
address political challenges with violence.
We contend that any forces deployed in the two
areas were deployed in accordance with the CPA, in
fulfilment of the requirement to form Joint Integrated
Units (JIUs). Under the CPA, these JIUs are to remain
in the areas until after the end of the interim period.
Therefore, any presence of SPLA forces in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile is consistent with the CPA.
The forces in question are from the two areas and must
stay where they are. Additionally, over 45,000 SPLA
forces from the two areas are currently in the South,
and arrangements will need to be made for them to
return to the North.
The legitimate concerns of the local populations
of these areas, including those forces, must be
addressed through the processes agreed to in the CPA.
The popular consultations include not just a process of
assessing the will of the people of these two areas, but
also a negotiation with the national Government to
resolve outstanding concerns and grievances. The
implementation of this outstanding CPA requirement
will increase the likelihood of continued peace and
stability both along the shared border and within
Northern Sudan after 9 July. We are willing to engage
with Khartoum in support of those processes.

11-37934

In the meantime, war is raging in Southern
Kordofan. We ask the Security Council to insist on the
immediate signature of an agreement to end hostilities.
Khartoum must also allow access to humanitarian
agencies to help those who have been displaced.
Without immediate and firm action on the part of the
Security Council, the situation in Southern Kordofan
risks degenerating into ethnic cleansing and possibly
genocide.
It is clear that only in the framework of the CPA
can peace in the Sudan be guaranteed. It is only
through the Security Council’s insistence upon full
CPA implementation that threats to international peace
and security can be averted. While the interim period
of the CPA may end on July 9, the outstanding CPA
commitments regarding Abyei, the two areas and the
North/South borders live on. Resolution of those
outstanding issues is the cornerstone of maintaining
peace between the North and the South, and it is
critical to ensuring the mutual viability and security of
the two nations after 9 July.
Furthermore, the parties agreed in the CPA to a
United Nations mission to monitor the Agreement’s
implementation. The parties agreed
“that the presence and size of the United Nations
peace support mission shall be determined by the
implementation timetable of [the] Agreement ...
and shall gradually phase out with successful
implementation of the timetables, increased
confidence building and commitment of the
parties towards the implementation of [the]
Agreement.”
In accordance with the provisions of the CPA, the
Government of the Sudan’s consent to an ongoing
United Nations mission cannot be withdrawn until such
a time as the obligations contained in the CPA have
been implemented in full by the parties, or only by the
mutual agreement of the two parties.
We reject any suggestion that the CPA has already
been fully implemented, and stress therefore that the
United Nations presence in the three areas of Abyei,
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile — as well as in the
border areas between the North and the South — must
continue, pending the final resolution of the
outstanding issues under the CPA. It would also be
entirely inconsistent with existing Security Council
mandates and the United Nations commitment as a
signatory and guarantor of the CPA for the United

7

S/PV.6559

Nations mission to be withdrawn prior to the full and
exhaustive implementation of the Agreement.
An overriding concern of my Government is to
ensure the ongoing and unwavering support of the
United Nations for North-South security arrangements,
particularly in the border areas. We reiterate our belief
that the main objective of the United Nations should be
to support the full implementation of the CPA and to
avoid a security vacuum after 9 July. We welcome the
Security Council’s support in its recent presidential
statement for a continued United Nations-mandated
presence in Abyei, Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
after 9 July (S/PRST/2011/12), as well as its support
for United Nations assistance for the parties’
management of their shared border after the
independence of Southern Sudan.
In this context, we support the option of a
demilitarized buffer zone between the North and the
South that was discussed recently by the parties in
Addis Ababa. We note that the need for continued
third-party support for North-South security is separate
and additional to the peacekeeping tasks outlined in the
Secretary-General’s recent special report on the Sudan
(S/2011/314).
We reiterate that this current situation must be
addressed by the Council in the context of the legal
framework agreed by the parties in the CPA. Any
premature movement away from the CPA would only
encourage the resolution of differences by brute force,
which would of course come at an enormous economic,
social and, above all, human cost. We therefore urge
the Council to call for the full and immediate
implementation of the agreement to withdraw all
Sudanese Armed Forces troops from Abyei; the
immediate return of the displaced populations to Abyei
under
United
Nations
protection;
the
full
implementation of all CPA provisions with respect to
Abyei; the holding of the popular consultations in both
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states; the complete
demarcation of the North-South border; an immediate
ceasefire in Southern Kordofan; and the granting of
humanitarian access for United Nations and
international organizations into the area.
Our fundamental hope and desire is to see
peaceful coexistence between the two neighbouring
States of Sudan and South Sudan. We are striving to
build a future in which our two countries can work
cooperatively, live in peace with one another and strive

8

for the mutual viability of both of our two nations. We
look forward to South Sudan being welcomed next
month as a member of the international community,
and sincerely appreciate the international community’s
efforts to help both the Sudan and South Sudan achieve
the peace and stability that our citizens desire and
deserve.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Gatkuoth for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): We
welcome the news that the parties have just signed an
agreement on temporary administrative and security
arrangements for Abyei and on the withdrawal of
Sudanese Armed Forces. We are encouraged by this
news. We greatly appreciate the intensive efforts of
former President Thabo Mbeki and the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel over the past two
weeks to assist the parties in their negotiations.
Now comes the crucial task of full and timely
implementation. The Security Council will closely
monitor adherence with its statements and the progress
towards rapidly ensuring that the terms of the Addis
Ababa agreement are swiftly fulfilled. We want to
underscore the urgency of Ethiopian troops deploying
immediately to Abyei, as the agreed interim security
force, under United Nations auspices, and on the
timeline agreed to by the parties.
We also thank Prime Minister Meles Zenawi for
his extraordinary efforts and commitment to resolve
the crisis in Abyei and for his agreement to provide
Ethiopian troops. I also want to extend our gratitude to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Menkerios for his continued and intensive efforts
throughout this process. The United States will soon
circulate a draft resolution for the Council’s
consideration to authorize the creation of this proposed
interim security force for Abyei.
Unfortunately, the situation in Abyei is by no
means the only crisis facing the people of the Sudan.
We are less than three weeks away from the
independence of South Sudan, and the situation in the
Sudan poses an urgent threat to the safety and security
of the Sudanese people, as well as a threat to
international peace and security, that continues to merit
the Council’s sustained attention and resolve.

11-37934

S/PV.6559

On 5 June violence broke out in multiple areas of
Southern Kordofan, including its capital Kadugli. The
reports my Government has been receiving of the
ongoing fighting are horrifying, both because of the
scope of human rights abuses and because of the ethnic
dimensions to the conflict. The Sudanese Armed
Forces have shelled and bombed the areas around
Kadugli, ongoing and intense aerial bombardments
threaten the lives of civilians and United Nations
personnel and a bomb fell just 100 metres from the
compound of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) in Kauda. The Sudanese Armed Forces have
threatened to shoot down UNMIS air patrols and they
have taken control of the airport in Kadugli and refuse
landing rights to UNMIS flights — which has
continued for so long the United Nations staff located
in the compound and United Nations team sites are
running dangerously low on food and supplies.
The lack of access for UNMIS is alarming and
indefensible. UNMIS and humanitarian aid workers
must be granted full access, most especially when so
many are in need of food, water and humanitarian aid.
According to the United Nations, more than
360,000 people have been displaced in the Sudan over
the past six months. More than half were displaced in
the past month. As many as 75,000 people have fled
the fighting in Southern Kordofan. International
non-governmental organizations operating there are
evacuating their staff and a humanitarian crisis of
enormous proportions is unfolding. Up to 10,000 people
have sought refuge at the UNMIS compound in
Kadugli.
The United States calls on both parties to
facilitate access for UNMIS and humanitarian aid
workers. We are also concerned that the Sudanese
People’s Liberation Army has deployed north of the
1 January 1956 border into Southern Kordofan, in
violation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA).
We have also received reports that forces aligned
with the Government of the Sudan search for Southern
forces and sympathizers, some of whom they have
arrested and allegedly executed. We have received
further allegations — not yet corroborated, but so
alarming that I must mention them — that the
Sudanese Armed Forces are arming elements of the
local population and placing mines in areas of Kadugli.
The United States condemns all acts of violence,

11-37934

especially those that target individuals based on their
ethnicity or political affiliation.
Security services and military forces have
reportedly detained and summarily executed local
authorities, political rivals, medical personnel and
others. These acts could constitute war crimes or
crimes against humanity. We demand that the
perpetrators immediately halt these actions and be held
accountable for their crimes. We call on the United
Nations to fully investigate these incidents, and request
a report from the Secretary-General to the Council by
the end of June that details any human rights abuses
that were committed during recent hostilities in Abyei
and Southern Kordofan.
We are deeply concerned by reports that members
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army have threatened
the safety of persons of Arab origin in Southern
Kordofan, including United Nations staff. We insist
that the Sudan People’s Liberation Army’s leadership
condemn such actions and refrain from any reprisals.
The Government of the Sudan can prevent the
crisis from escalating further by immediately stopping
its military efforts to disarm the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement in Southern Kordofan and by
focusing on diplomatic efforts to peacefully resolve the
conflict. The Sudanese Government should also cease
trying to dissolve the joint integrated units in Southern
Kordofan, which were established under the CPA.
Security arrangements for Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile states should be agreed upon through direct highlevel negotiations, and not dictated through the use of
force.
We call for the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North to agree
immediately on a cessation of hostilities and to
immediately end restrictions on humanitarian access
and United Nations movements. It is essential that
violence against civilians and humanitarian abuses
stop, and stop now. The United States calls on both
parties to end the conflict and to resolve the underlying
issues in Southern Kordofan and in Blue Nile, as they
are now beginning to do in Abyei.
Finally, we want to underscore the imperative for
timely and candid assessments by the Council about
the evolving situation, for which we crucially depend
on the Secretariat. That is essential in order for us to be
able to determine and to take the necessary actions to
ensure that the United Nations can carry out its

9

S/PV.6559

mission. Contingents unwilling to carry out their
mandate to protect civilians should not be part of that
crucial mission.
Contingents under attack also need our back-up
and support. With the failure of their Government to
live up to its responsibilities, the Sudanese people have
turned to the international community for protection.
We have an obligation to provide it.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank President Mbeki and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios for
their briefings and for the tireless work of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel on the Sudan,
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in support of peace in the Sudan. We welcome the
news that they have given us this morning that the
parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
have signed an agreement on interim security and
administration arrangements for Abyei. That is an
important step forward.
I note also the statements that Ambassador
Osman and Mr. Ezekiel Lol Gatkuoth have made to the
Council, reiterating the commitment of their
Governments to a peaceful resolution in Abyei and
Southern Kordofan and of outstanding CPA issues. The
Council will hold them to those commitments, which
must be delivered and implemented without further
delay.
The signing of an interim agreement on Abyei is
a necessary, but insufficient, step on the road to the full
implementation of the CPA and to peace for all the
Sudan because today, the Council meets amid violence
and the threat of further conflict. In Southern
Kordofan, escalating violence has led to the
displacement of at least 60,000 civilians, including
30,000 to 40,000 from Kadugli town. Civilians
elsewhere in Southern Kordofan state have suffered the
effects of aerial bombardment by the Sudanese Armed
Forces. We unreservedly condemn that, as we do
summary executions and other abuses reportedly
committed by both sides.
The United Kingdom calls on all parties
immediately to cease fire, and for all crimes against
civilians to be fully investigated and the perpetrators
brought to justice. We urge UNMIS to do all it can to
implement its Chapter VII mandate to protect civilians,

10

and remind the Government of the Sudan of its primary
responsibility in that respect.
The humanitarian situation in Southern Kordofan
is deeply concerning. The United Kingdom calls
urgently on all parties to provide full and unimpeded
access for UNMIS and for humanitarian workers. It is
unacceptable that humanitarian access is being
restricted by the closure of airspace, in particular, of
Kadugli airport to the United Nations, roadblocks, the
laying of landmines and the imposition of restrictions
on other movement. Full humanitarian access must be
provided now and steps must be taken to ensure that
that is maintained after 9 July.
We welcome the fact that negotiations continue in
Addis Ababa. All parties must commit to reaching
agreement without delay on new security arrangements
for Southern Kordofan state that will ensure the safety
of the civilian population and that will enable them to
express their views on the future governance through a
credible and popular consultation process, as provided
for in the CPA. New security arrangements for Blue
Nile state must also be put in place. We call on all
parties there to maintain calm.
In Abyei, we have seen little change on the
ground. The Sudanese Armed Forces remain in control
of the Abyei Area, in violation of the CPA. They must
now withdraw, as demanded by the Council and
stipulated in the Abyei agreement signed today. For
now, the situation remains tense. Further clashes
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) have been reported,
and Agok town has been shelled. The number of
civilians displaced has now reached more than
100,000. The rains are setting in and humanitarian
access is still not permitted.
Given the gravity of the situation, it is clear that
the parties must implement their commitments under
the Abyei agreement without delay. It was signed today
following negotiations in Addis Ababa, under the
auspices of President Mbeki, and included a
commitment to withdraw all Sudanese Armed Forces,
SPLA and other forces. The parties must also ensure
that a ceasefire in Southern Kordofan is established
and that new security arrangements for the two areas
are set up. We welcome President Mbeki’s
confirmation that negotiations on that continue in
Addis Ababa. The parties must also engage seriously
and without further delay on the future status of Abyei

11-37934

S/PV.6559

in line with the provisions of the CPA and the ruling of
the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague. That
needs to be completed before 9 July, when South
Sudan gains its independence.
We have repeatedly stated our belief that the
security of both the Sudan and South Sudan would be
greatly strengthened by a single United Nations
presence in Abyei and in the two areas after 9 July,
which could also support the parties in their
management of the common border.
The events of the past few weeks show that such
a presence will also be necessary to maintain
international peace and security. Reports of 6,000 internally
displaced persons gathering around the UNMIS
headquarters in Kadugli for protection underline the
risks that the civilian population faces if there is no
continued United Nations presence after 9 July. We are
ready and willing to enter a dialogue with both parties
on that subject. We believe that there are clear benefits
to the parties of a continued international presence to
allow monitoring and verification of the agreements
that they reach.
Today, 20 June, we are three weeks away from
the independence of South Sudan. Amid the noise of
conflict, we call on both CPA parties to reflect on the
future that they want to deliver for their people. The
statesmanship that delivered a peaceful referendum on
9 January is urgently needed now. Both parties must
renounce violence and negotiate in earnest in order to
provide a secure and prosperous future for their States.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I also would like to thank
President Mbeki and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Menkerios for their comprehensive
briefings. I am also grateful for the statements made by
the representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan, in
which they reiterated their commitment to a peaceful
solution of all outstanding issues related to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA).
Today, we received encouraging news. We
welcome the agreement on temporary arrangements
regarding Abyei achieved in Addis Ababa. We thank
the Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, President Thabo
Mkbeki, the African Union Panel and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios for their unremitting efforts to help the
parties agree on the issue of Abyei and on solutions to
the remaining CPA issues. Germany will continue to
support those efforts.

11-37934

The agreement on Abyei opens the way to
addressing the pressing humanitarian issues. Now the
focus is on implementation, which is the real litmus
test. Of course, we will have to come back to the
content and implications of the agreement just
concluded in this Council, especially regarding the
interim security force.
The other urgent matter is the situation in South
Kordofan. The military escalation there is deeply
troubling. We have just heard the latest reports of aerial
attacks, tens of thousands of displaced persons, burned
homes, looted United Nations facilities and lack of
access for humanitarian aid. We strongly condemn the
continuous fighting by the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the Sudan People’s Liberation Army, especially aerial
bombardments and artillery shelling, and all attacks on
the civilian population. The obstruction and
intimidation of United Nations personnel are
unacceptable and must stop.
In the same vein, humanitarian access has to be
granted. We strongly urge the parties to the conflict to
immediately cease hostilities and refrain from further
violence. Further military action will have severe
consequences for the whole political and social
environment in the Sudan. We condemn the detention
and abuse last Friday by the Sudanese Armed Forces in
Kadugli of four unarmed peacekeepers who were on
patrol to assess the situation in town. This is not
acceptable.
We encourage the United Nations Mission in
Sudan in its efforts to protect civilians affected by the
hostilities, which requires a credible force posture. We
reiterate our strong support for the Mission under the
leadership of Special Representative Menkerios.
Remaining CPA issues must be resolved in a
peaceful and negotiated manner and in the spirit of the
Agreement. That includes not only a long-term definite
agreement on the status of the Abyei region, but also an
agreement on Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. That
is also the message that the German Foreign Minister
will convey to both parties during his visit to the Sudan
envisaged to begin on 22 June, which will bring him to
Khartoum, Juba and Darfur.
The Security Council has a unique responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security in the Sudan.
We must continue to support those interested in peace
and good neighborly relations. We must stand united
against spoilers of peace. We cannot accept that a

11

S/PV.6559

return to violence may become an option and that the
parties might use proxies in order to destabilize each
other. We must continue to follow the situation closely
and consider the situation whenever developments on
the ground so require.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We wish to
thank His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki, Chair of the
African Union (AU) High-level Implementation Panel
for Sudan, for his comprehensive briefing to the
Council. We would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haile
Menkerios for his briefing. We welcome the presence
at this meeting of Ambassador Osman of the Sudan and
His Excellency Mr. Ezekiel Lol Gatkuoth of Southern
Sudan, and we thank them for their statements.
South Africa welcomed the news of the signing of
the agreement between the Government of the Sudan
and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLA)
today in Addis Ababa. We congratulate the parties and
commend them for their sustained and determined
efforts to resolve the conflict in Abyei. We also take
this opportunity to congratulate the Chair of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
President Mbeki, and Special Representative
Menkerios for their sterling and outstanding work done
to facilitate the temporary agreement.
The deteriorating security situation in Abyei
threatened
the
full
implementation
of
the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and
potentially could have reversed the positive political
gains registered thus far in the implementation of the
CPA. The signing of the CPA ended decades of conflict
and ushered in a new era of hope for the people of the
Sudan. This hope was strengthened by the holding of a
successful referendum and by the positive statements
made by the leadership in both the North and the
South, following the announcement of the referendum
results.
Today, that hope has been renewed once again, as
the parties to the CPA, with the facilitation of the AU
High-level Implementation Panel and the involvement
of Mr. Menkerios, came to interim agreements to
resolve the conflict in Abyei. We welcome the
agreement reached by the parties on the temporary
administrative arrangements for the Abyei area, the
withdrawal of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army from the Abyei area

12

and the deployment of an interim security force for
Abyei composed of Ethiopian troops.
My delegation welcomes and commends the
Government of Ethiopia for generously agreeing to
contribute troops for the implementation of this
security arrangement. We note that this agreement does
not substitute for or prejudice future outcomes on
negotiations on the final status of Abyei, and we
encourage parties to continue the negotiations with the
same resolve and determination as they have shown
until now.
It is my delegation’s view that the Council’s
positive response to the request contained in the
interim agreement will be crucial. For our part, South
Africa will do everything it can to assist in and ensure
the full implementation of the temporary agreement.
Regrettably, in the view of my delegation, the
current developments in Southern Kordofan increase
tensions between the parties, threaten to derail the
post-referendum negotiations and introduce a dire
period of uncertainty as the South prepares for
independence. My delegation is gravely concerned
about the security situation in Southern Kordofan,
which, in its view, increases the tension.
My delegation is gravely concerned about the
situation and the clashes between the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army that
took place on 6 June. We are equally concerned about
the decision to terminate all Joint Integrated Units in
the Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States and the
instruction to deploy all SPLA forces in the two States
south of the border.
Reports of aerial bombardments leading to the
displacement of the civilian population in areas such as
Heiban are also a major concern for my delegation.
The impact of this insecurity in Southern Kordofan has
led to a humanitarian crisis in the region that has
resulted in the loss of life, the displacement of
thousands of people and the withdrawal of non-essential
staff from Kadugli.
The continued reports of shooting and looting in
Kadugli are of concern. We welcome the reinforcement
of the United Nations Mission in the area. The
escalation of violence and hostilities is detrimental, not
only to the people of the area, who are negatively
impacted by the violence, but to the establishment of
two future viable States living in peace and security.

11-37934

S/PV.6559

We are less than a month away from the
declaration of Southern Sudan as an independent State
on 9 July 2011, which in itself is indicative of the
strides that both parties have made to ensure that the
CPA is implemented. It is through the collective efforts
of the parties to the CPA that we are on the brink of
achieving this important milestone. We therefore wish
to encourage and urge the parties to demonstrate the
same resolve and political will to address the current
security challenges facing the people of the Sudan. My
delegation appreciates the ongoing discussions with the
leaders of Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan on the
recent political and security challenges in those areas.
In this regard, we reiterate the call by the
Assembly of the African Union made during its
extraordinary session in which it urged the parties to
the CPA to spare no effort to overcome the current
difficulties and to conclude their negotiations on the
outstanding aspects of the CPA, including the issue of
Abyei and the post-referendum arrangements, under
the auspices of AU High-level Implementation Panel
on Sudan.
Finally, my delegation would like to express its
unwavering support to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Menkerios and the Chair of the AU
High-Level Panel in facilitating ongoing negotiations
between the CPA parties. South Africa stands ready to
support the two parties in constructing two viable,
independent States in the Sudan and in building a
mutually beneficial relationship between them based
on peace and development. In this regard, we call on
the international community to continue its support to
the parties as they address the critical challenges
confronting them.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank former
President Thabo Mbeki and Special Representative
Haile Menkerios for their comprehensive briefings and
the significant work they have been undertaking. I
would like to congratulate them and the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan on the agreement that
has just been reached on Abyei. We hope it will allow
for a quick and full cessation of violence in the Area,
for the re-establishment of full humanitarian assistance
and for the return of the displaced population. We are
encouraged by these positive developments, but they
are only a first step, albeit a decisive one, towards
solving the Abyei issue. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Osman and Mr. Gatkuoth for their
statements.

11-37934

As all members of the Council, Portugal has been
deeply concerned by the rapidly deteriorating situation
in several areas of the Sudan. We have expressed grave
concern about the ongoing violence, namely, the
fighting taking place in Southern Kordofan, which is
causing an alarming and increasing number of
displaced persons. We fully support and encourage the
efforts of former President Mbeki and Special
Representative Menkerios to find a quick solution to
the situation and an immediate end to the hostilities.
We strongly urge the parties to prevent any
further escalation of violence that could lead to new
losses of civilian lives, stop the looting, grant
unconditional humanitarian access to all and abide by
their undertakings and agreements. We encourage them
to build upon the positive indications we received
today in order to get the overall process on track and
fulfil the objectives of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA).
Indeed, the most recent events have threatened to
erode the common ground that enabled the successful
and peaceful referendum. As we have repeatedly
stated, it is our belief that it is in neither side’s interests
to jeopardize all that has so far been accomplished. We
strongly condemn all unilateral actions meant to create
facts on the ground that would prejudice the outcome
of the negotiations. We are of the view that the
interdependencies between the North and the South are
too deep and that the failure or success of one of them
will determine the failure or success of the other.
For that reason, we recall the commitments made
by both sides and urge the parties to work decisively in
resolving their disputes. Dialogue and political
commitment at the highest level is what is needed. We
thus welcome the resumption of talks between
President Al-Bashir and Vice-President Salva Kiir. The
negotiations are complex and have to be led in the
spirit of continued compromise and cooperation. This
is the only path to ensure the viability of the two
States.
In this difficult context, the success of the
mediation work of the African Union’s High-Level
Implementation Panel and its Chair, former President
Thabo Mbeki, appears to us more decisive than ever, as
I have already stated. We call upon the parties to
continue working with the Panel in order to urgently
find a durable and peaceful resolution to the status of

13

S/PV.6559

Abyei and to continue dialogue on all the other
outstanding issues.
Portugal welcomes the commitment by the
Sudanese parties to establish a common border zone
between North and South Sudan, which is to be
demilitarized and jointly monitored and patrolled. We
now call upon the parties to agree on where the zone
should be and to positively consider a third-party
presence along the border. Again, we share the view
that North and South would benefit from United
Nations assistance in this context.
As I have already said, we strongly condemn the
recent fighting in Kadugli and Umm Dorain, and call
upon both sides to exercise maximum restraint in
resolving their disputes in Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile states. In this regard, Portugal sees the
negotiations
between
representatives
of
the
Government of the Sudan and leaders of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement from the two states as a
positive step. We call upon the parties to rapidly
establish security arrangements for the two areas.
Allow me also to say a word on the appalling
humanitarian situation as a result of the violence. We
are deeply concerned by the impact of escalating
violence on the civilian population, including women,
children and internally displaced persons. We recall
that all parties to the conflict must respect and protect
civilians and ensure adequate security for humanitarian
workers. The parties must remove any restrictions that
would slow down the response, and ensure full and
unhindered access for humanitarian assistance and for
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan throughout
the mission area.
We would also like to echo Assistant SecretaryGeneral Catherine Bragg’s appeal to the parties to
allow the establishment of a humanitarian corridor
between Kadugli and El Obeid.
I could not conclude without expressing
Portugal’s strong support for the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan and commending it for its work
in the most difficult conditions.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to congratulate
former President Mbeki and Mr. Menkerios for their
important success in today’s signing of the agreement
aimed at settling the conflict in the Abyei Area. We
welcome the desire for compromise shown on this

14

matter by both Khartoum and Juba. We would like to
hope that the signing of the agreement will create
positive political momentum that makes it possible to
address other issues as well in the context of
implementing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and of the forthcoming independence of Southern
Sudan.
In the current situation, we call on both parties to
refrain from violence and to do their utmost to address
the humanitarian situation.
The Russian Federation continues to support the
activities of the United Nations presence in the Sudan,
in terms of the work of both Mr. Mbeki and
Mr. Menkerios.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to express particular thanks to former
President Mbeki and Mr. Menkerios, who are here with
us today at this meeting. I would also like to thank the
Ambassador of the Sudan and Mr. Ezekiel Lol
Gatkuoth for their presentations and for updating us on
the situation in the Sudan.
We welcome the signing of an agreement on
temporary arrangements for the administration of
Abyei. We hope that it will take effect immediately and
that it will serve to reverse the very serious
deterioration of the security situation. In recent weeks
and even days, unacceptable acts of violence have
occurred, compromising the peaceful transition to the
birth of South Sudan. We strongly condemn the violent
loss of life, the displacement that has taken place and
all the violations of the human rights of the population.
What has taken place in Southern Kordofan and in the
Abyei Area is unacceptable.
The current crisis clearly shows that there are still
serious differences that the parties must overcome.
This is essential if we are to return to the spirit of
compromise and political will displayed on past
occasions. We hope that the agreement that has just
been signed will be a very positive sign in that
direction.
The Peace Agreement itself and its subsequent
implementation, the holding of general elections and
the referendum held at the beginning of 2011, through
which Southern Sudan’s independence was opted for,
are proof that, on any issue, regardless of difficulty or
seriousness, a negotiated and satisfactory solution can
be found by the parties.

11-37934

S/PV.6559

In this context, we would highlight the enormous
efforts made by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel charged with implementing the
recommendations for the Sudan in order to bring the
parties together and resume negotiations. The
leadership of former President Thabo Mbeki and other
members of the Panel and the role played by the
Government of Ethiopia should be underscored. We
trust that the agreements arrived at thus far will serve
as an element for trust between the parties and a step
towards arriving at definitive and sustainable
agreements.
In this respect, it is crucial that the parties refrain
from acts of violence or provocation and incendiary
speech, and renew their commitment to negotiations on
all outstanding issues.
Of equal importance is the need to respect the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan and other
agencies of the system, allowing them to carry out their
various mandates in an environment free of security
threats.
The
commitments
set
out
under
the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and other
security agreements must be fully respected, with
priority given to the withdrawal of all armed forces
from Abyei and the establishment of mechanisms to
ensure security and allow for the return of displaced
persons.
Of equal importance is the need to end the
violence in Southern Kordofan State so as to allow for
the provision of humanitarian assistance to the
population and to establish the conditions needed to
hold the public consultations planned for the region,
which must be an inclusive process reflecting the
concerns and aspirations of the population with
effective implementation mechanisms.
We are only a few weeks away from the end of
the transitional period and the establishment of
Southern Sudan as an independent State. However, we
cannot lose sight of the fact that several crucial matters
under the CPA remain unresolved, such as the final
status of the Abyei area, the satisfactory conclusion of
the popular consultations in Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile States, and border demarcation. Likewise, a
wide range of post-CPA issues also remain to be
resolved, and, to a great extent, the future of good
neighbourliness and bilateral cooperation between the
two parties will depend on these.

11-37934

Against that backdrop, the international
community must remain united in providing all
possible support and assistance to the parties in their
quest to arrive at solutions and commitments aimed at
resolving all of these issues and establishing
harmonious and mutually beneficial relations between
two independent States living in peace and working
together to face common challenges. To this end, the
United Nations and the African Union have a very
important role to play in ensuring the security and
prosperity of all of the population.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Mbeki and Special Representative Menkerios
for their briefings. As the representatives of the Sudan
and Southern Sudan said, the agreement reached in
Addis Ababa on Abyei is a major step forward towards
bringing to an end the crisis that has prevailed in the
region since Abyei was occupied by the Sudanese
Armed Forces on 21 May. This is good news.
I welcome the commitment of Ethiopia, and in
particular of Prime Minister Zenawi, which offers a
solution to the crisis by allowing for the deployment of
Ethiopian soldiers. It is now up to the parties, in
coordination with the Security Council, to see that the
agreement just reached is implemented. I welcome the
fact that the United States has announced its intention
to submit a draft resolution allowing for the
deployment of Ethiopian soldiers.
As we speak, the Abyei area remains occupied.
Armed militias continue to pillage the meagre
resources of the local people, who have fled the
fighting. The personnel of the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS) are subject to acts of
intimidation, be it from repeated fire from heavy
artillery close to UNMIS positions or other obstacles to
their freedom of movement.
The reports we are receiving from Southern
Kordofan paint a picture of a situation of war. The
fighting that has been ongoing since 5 June between
the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army in the Kadugli area has led to the
displacement of more than 60,000 civilians. The
humanitarian
situation
is
deteriorating,
and
humanitarian personnel have no access to the
population owing to the restrictions that have been
imposed.
France calls urgently on the parties to negotiate a
ceasefire, facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid

15

S/PV.6559

and return to dialogue to ensure the implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and allow
for the fair representation of all the minorities of
Southern Kordofan.
It is also crucial that the United Nations Mission
currently in place in the region carry out its mandate to
protect civilians, under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. Thousands of civilians are
currently seeking refuge with the United Nations,
especially in Kadugli. It is our duty to use the
necessary means to protect them.
If we can draw a lesson from the violence in
Abyei and Southern Kordofan, it is that the peace
achieved under the CPA is both precious and fragile.
UNMIS has supported the parties in maintaining peace
in Sudan since 2005. Today, it seems clear that the
presence of the United Nations remains justified as
long as all of the aspects of the peace agreement have
not been implemented and the tensions in the border
areas have not been resolved. We therefore call on the
parties in the Sudan to recognize the value of the
United Nations presence and to engage in dialogue on
possible mechanisms for the period beyond 9 July to
ensure support for peacekeeping and thus to foster
peace and prosperity in the region.
The special report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/314) on this issue is, in our view, a reference
document which can contribute to efforts to avoid a
return to violence, which would have tragic
consequences for both parties.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I thank
President Mbeki, Chair of the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel, and Mr. Haile Menkerios,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
their informative briefings. We welcome the
participation of the representatives of the Sudan and
Southern Sudan, and appreciate their input to today’s
meeting.
We welcome the agreement between the parties
on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei area. We believe that this is an
encouraging development and that it sends a positive
signal with regard to ongoing activities and
negotiations on outstanding issues.
Bosnia and Herzegovina supports continued
negotiation between the parties to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) under the auspices of the

16

African Union High-level Implementation Panel and
urges them to engage constructively in negotiations so
as to reach agreement on the outstanding issues. Every
single one of those issues, if not resolved, has the
potential not only to affect relations between the two
States but also to undermine peace and stability.
While once again welcoming today’s information,
Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply concerned about the
situation in Abyei. It is critical that all military
elements be withdrawn from this area as an important
element for bringing about peace. The future status of
Abyei must be resolved by negotiations between the
parties, in accordance with the CPA. We condemn all
unilateral actions undertaken with a view to creating
facts on the ground that would prejudice the outcome
of negotiations.
We are also concerned about the situation in
Southern Kordofan State and continuing tensions in
Blue Nile. It is essential for the parties to continue
negotiations in order to agree on political and security
arrangements for Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan
States. Meanwhile, both parties must work closely
together to reduce tensions and promote calm in those
regions.
It is vital that humanitarian access be provided in
order to assist the populations affected and that
conditions conducive to the safe return of displaced
persons be established.
Bearing in mind the security situation and the
issue of the future management of the border between
the North and the South, it is vital to establish a
mechanism that provides effective tools for preventing
or mitigating conflicts on either side of the border after
9 July. We deem it important for the United Nations to
maintain its presence in Abyei and Southern Kordofan
and to continue providing assistance to the parties in
border management after 9 July. In that regard, we call
on the parties to reach an agreement that includes a
continuing United Nations presence as a central
element for stability and future relations between the
parties.
We fully support the efforts of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and of Special
Representative Menkerios to ease tensions on the
ground and provide a secure environment for the
civilian population. We strongly condemn all attacks
on UNMIS and call on the parties to respect the
Mission’s mandate and freedom of movement. It is

11-37934

S/PV.6559

essential that UNMIS continue to be able to carry out
its mandate to protect civilians under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter.
Finally, the nature of future relations between the
two countries will depend directly on the resolution of
the outstanding CPA issues. In that regard, we call on
the parties to the CPA to continue negotiations to reach
an agreement on the status of Abyei, as well as other
remaining CPA and post-CPA issues, and to lay a
foundation for friendly and dynamic relations between
the two States that will emerge after 9 July.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank President Mbeki and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Menkerios,
for their briefings on the situation in Abyei and other
areas of the Sudan. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan and the
representative of the Government of Southern Sudan
for their statements.
Over the past month, we have witnessed a serious
deterioration in the security and humanitarian
situations in Abyei, Southern Kordofan and adjoining
areas. More than 100,000 people are reported to have
been displaced. Peacekeepers from the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) have been obstructed
in the implementation of their mandate, and access by
the United Nations humanitarian agencies has also
been restricted.
These developments underline not only the
fragile security situation but also the lack of trust
between the parties to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). As the post-referendum transition
period nears its end, the ongoing conflict could have
disastrous consequences for the people of the region as
the parties divert scarce resources from the urgently
needed tasks of nation-building. It is therefore
necessary to expeditiously resolve the stalemate.
We commend the efforts of the African Union’s
High-level Implementation Panel, led by President
Mbeki and the representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Menkerios, to facilitate dialogue between the
parties and offer a package of agreements on
outstanding
CPA
issues,
including
security
arrangements for Abyei and borders, the sharing of oil
wealth, and so on. The negotiations that began last
week have led to the signing of an agreement on Abyei.
We support the continuing efforts of President Mbeki
and Special Representative Menkerios to mediate

11-37934

between the parties in order to resolve other issues, and
we urge the parties to show a spirit of compromise,
flexibility and political will in order to reach a
comprehensive agreement. We also appreciate the role
played by the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Mr. Meles
Zenawi, for the security arrangements that have been
worked out for Abyei.
A number of pending problems between Northern
and Southern Sudan have long and complicated
historical backgrounds. Their resolution will require
patience and an approach that takes into consideration
the long-term interests of all the peoples of the region.
Any attempt to impose artificial deadlines and
preconceived ideas will not be helpful to enhancing
mutual trust between the parties, nor for the long-term
resolution of the pending issues.
We urge all the parties concerned with an interest
in the issues between the North and the South to
encourage the parties to abjure violence and rededicate
themselves to the same spirit in which they have
implemented the CPA over the past six years.
Unilateral actions, particularly military operations, will
not be in the interests of either party. The parties
should act with the utmost restraint, refrain from
provocative actions and ensure freedom of movement
and access to UNMIS. They should work towards longterm cooperative relationships that will benefit both the
North and the South, and help them undertake urgently
needed development activities. The international
community, including the Security Council, should
stand ready to support the parties in implementing the
agreements that they may reach. We hope that the
agreement on Abyei’s security will be expeditiously
endorsed by a resolution of the Council. To that end,
we stand ready to work with the other members of the
Council.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank President Mbeki and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Menkerios,
for their briefings. We also listened attentively to the
statements made by Ambassador Osman and
Mr. Gatkuoth.
I wish to emphasize several points. First, we
welcome the agreement signed between the North and
the South on interim administrative and security
arrangements in Abyei, which demonstrates goodwill
on the part of both North and South with respect to
maintaining peace and stability in the region of the

17

S/PV.6559

Sudan. We greatly appreciate the efforts and the role of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
led by President Mbeki, and of Mr. Menkerios and the
Government of Ethiopia. We hope that both parties,
with the assistance of the African Union and the United
Nations, can ensure practical implementation of the
agreements. For its part, the Security Council should
provide the necessary assistance and support,
particularly for ensuring the early deployment of the
Ethiopian peacekeeping forces.
Secondly, the Security Council should encourage
both North and South to insist on taking the path of
peace and on maintaining calm and restraint so as to
put an immediate end to hostilities in Southern
Kordofan, Blue Nile and other areas; to refrain from
any actions and words that could lead to an escalation
of the situation; and to fully implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). We hope that
both North and South will capitalize on the existing
positive momentum and reach a comprehensive
solution to the problems in Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile.
Thirdly, we welcome the recent meeting in Addis
Ababa between President Al-Bashir and First VicePresident Salva Kiir Mayardit. Direct meetings
between leaders are extremely important to ensuring
the avoidance of misunderstandings, increasing mutual
confidence and maintaining peace and stability
between the North and the South. The Security Council
should encourage the institutionalization of such
meetings, which should be held as soon as problems
arise.
Fourthly, we support the efforts of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, led by
President Mbeki, as well as the efforts of Special
Representative Menkerios, to promote mutual
accommodation between North and South aimed at
achieving compliance with the CPA, and to arrive at a
comprehensive solution to such problems as that of
Abyei and other outstanding CPA-related issues, as
well as on post-referendum arrangements.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to join my colleagues in
welcoming President Mbeki and thanking him for his
valuable briefing and his mediation efforts in the
Sudan. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Menkerios,
for his important briefing and wise leadership of the

18

United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS). I
thank, too, the Permanent Representative of the Sudan
and the representative of the Government of Southern
Sudan for their statements.
We have repeatedly stressed in the Council the
importance of reducing tensions in the Abyei area and
reaching an agreement about it, because it is a priority
issue that is considered crucial to avoiding a relapse
into war. We have also stressed the need to complete
negotiations on the remaining outstanding issues and
post-referendum matters. In that regard, we welcome
the temporary agreement on Abyei, reached as a result
of negotiations held in Addis Ababa, and we would like
to acknowledge the role played by the Prime Minister
of Ethiopia, Mr. Meles Zenawi, as well as the roles of
President Mbeki and Mr. Menkerios, who helped the
parties reach agreement. We also welcome the
Ethiopian forces’ readiness to deploy rapidly into
Abyei in order to implement the agreement.
We also wish to welcome the parallel progress
that has been taking place to deal with the tense
situation in South Kordofan. We commend the ongoing
efforts of President Mbeki to help reach a solution to
the outstanding issues and post-referendum matters.
Here, we welcome the progress that has been made in
dealing with economic and financial issues.
We call on UNMIS to continue consulting with
the relevant parties on the Secretary-General’s
suggestion for a three-month extension of UNMIS, as
stated in the last report, in order to arrive at an
agreement on post-referendum matters and the
remaining part of the CPA, which are the foundations
of stability in the Sudan and in South Sudan, as well as
of the region in its entirety.
In closing, and from a different angle, we would
also like to call on all parties in Darfur to sign the
document issued by the expanded conference in Doha
and to work on implementing it expeditiously, in a
manner that will lead to a permanent ceasefire and a
final settlement of the Darfur crisis.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Nigeria is immensely
grateful to President Thabo Mbeki for his tireless
commitments to find a durable solution to the crisis in
Darfur and in the Sudan in general. We are also
grateful for the leadership Mr. Menkerios has provided
to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
under very difficult circumstances. We welcome the
participation of the representative of the Government

11-37934

S/PV.6559

of the Sudan and of the representative of Southern
Sudan, and we thank them for their contribution.
Nothing casts a darker shadow on the hopes for
peaceful relations between North and South Sudan in
the era following the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) than the spectre of renewed conflict. We are
therefore deeply concerned about the unauthorized
military activities in Abeyi and the fighting along the
disputed border between the North and South since 5
June 2011. There are reports of the Sudanese Army
amassing heavy weaponry in Southern Kordofan amid
intermittent fighting and heavy artillery shelling. We
feel that the outbreak of fresh hostilities is palpable.
The situation is quite clearly at a tipping point.
Neither the Sudan nor the international community can
afford a renewed conflict, which would undo much of
the progress achieved since the signing of the CPA in
2005. The obligation at this crucial junction is to
ensure that the situation does not deteriorate further.
In that context we welcome the high-level
meeting between President Al-Bashir and VicePresident Salva Kiir in Addis Ababa and the
agreements on temporary arrangements for the
administration and security of the Abyei Area that were
reached today. We commend both leaders for their
courage and commitment to dialogue and negotiation.
We also commend the African Union High-Level Panel
under the leadership of President Mbeki for facilitating
the agreement.
As we welcome the good news of a major
breakthrough by the parties, the real significance of the
temporary
agreement
lies
in
its
effective
implementation. Both parties must now pursue all
efforts to implement a decision to demilitarize the
Abyei Area, withdraw all military troops from the zone
and deploy in the territory an interim security force
composed of Ethiopian troops. Indeed, the agreement
should serve as an impetus for intensified strategiclevel discussions of the political and security
arrangements between the North and the South. In that
regard, we welcome the agreement by the Prime
Minister of Ethiopia to contribute peacekeepers to
facilitate the implementation of the agreement between
the parties.
Nigeria reiterates its firm support for the Security
Council’s presidential statement of 3 June
(S/PRST/2011/12) and calls on both parties to firmly
embrace the ongoing high-level negotiations under the

11-37934

auspices of the African Union Panel. If continued in
good faith, those discussions could result in
agreements on the outstanding CPA and postreferendum issues before 9 July.
We urge the NCP and SPLM to full implement,
and without delay, all the provisions of the Kadugli
agreements. Our commitment to achieving a peaceful,
equitable and mutually beneficial relationship between
North and South Sudan requires that we remain
engaged with the parties to the CPA. We must not only
assist them to devise a framework for continued
dialogue beyond July; we must also play an important
role in their geo-political transformation into two
viable States.
The impact of the deteriorating security situation
on the civilian population is all too evident. Abyei, the
Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan have all seen mass
displacements caused by genuine emergencies. That
situation makes an urgent case for enhanced
international humanitarian aid. We commend the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
World Food Programme, the World Health
Organization and other humanitarian agencies for their
relief support for internally displaced persons (IDPs)
and refugees.
The parties should respect humanitarian
principles and allow all humanitarian personnel timely
and unfettered access to vulnerable communities,
including those who have taken refuge outside the
UNMIS compound in Kaldugi. Conditions should be
created to allow the prompt and safe return of IDPs to
their homes. All parties must also refrain from attacks
on peacekeepers and respect the mandate of UNMIS.
In addition, as we await the emergence of South
Sudan on 9 July, there should be no unilateral action by
the parties. Actions must be realistic and consistent
with the spirit of the CPA and the package agreement
reached. They must build on the achievements reached
to date between the parties and continue to work
closely with UNMIS and the African Union HighLevel Panel under the leadership of President Mbeki.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Haile
Menkerios, for his update of the situation on the
ground in the Sudan and commend him for the latest
developments. I also join previous speakers in
extending a warm welcome to President Thabo Mbeki
for participating in our deliberations today and in

19

S/PV.6559

commending him for his efforts to promote the
achievement of peace in the Sudan.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my national capacity.

Brazil welcomes the temporary agreement
reached on Abyei and thanks the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia for making available security resources for the
implementation of the arrangement. I am also,
therefore, very grateful to have had Ambassador
Osman and Mr. Gatkuoth here with us this morning to
discuss important developments. I thank them for their
statements.

Months after the declaration of independence of
Southern Sudan, which will mark the end of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), an escalation
of violence in Abyei and Southern Kordofan has been a
matter of grave concern. The violence has led to the
death of a number of civilians and massive
displacements of people.

The clashes in Southern Kordofan are to be
deplored. We are concerned as well over reports of
insufficient assistant to southern returnees and of
continuing mistreatment of the civilian population by
the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA). Attacks
and threats against United Nations peacekeepers,
observers and civilian personnel are unacceptable. We
condemn those acts and express concern about the
safety of the personnel of the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS).
Brazil urges the parties to fully implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) for securing
peace in the Sudan. They cannot allow all the efforts
put into making peace unravel in the final mile. It is
imperative that leaders exert utmost restraint and
redouble their efforts to reach a peaceful agreement on
all outstanding issues.
We warmly welcome the efforts of the African
Union, under the leadership of President Mbeki, in
favour of de-escalation. We commend the measures
taken by UNMIS to support the negotiations and to
strengthen its capacity to protect civilians in Abyei and
Kadugli.
There is only one way that both Northern and
Southern Sudan can nurture a new reality of two stable
and viable States living together side by side, in peace
and cooperation. It is by dealing peacefully and
transparently with both their bilateral and their
respective internal issues.
Both Northern and Southern Sudan enjoy great
ethnic and cultural diversity, which needs to become an
asset in a pluralistic and democratic political
environment. Many Sudanese peoples have been able
to coexist and cooperate peacefully for centuries. There
is no reason for them not to be able to do so once again
in the near future.

20

The conclusion of the temporary agreement on
Abyei and the briefings provided by President Mbeki
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Menkerios, have made us more
optimistic. I should like to thank President Mbeki and
Mr. Menkerios and congratulate them on the
agreement. We welcome the commitment of Ethiopia
and Prime Minister Zenawi, including the provision of
Ethiopian troops. We support the proposal of the
United States to submit a draft resolution to the
Council in the near future. We also welcome the
commitment just expressed by Ambassador Osman and
Mr. Gatkuoth regarding the will of both parties to
continue to seek a peaceful resolution to the situation
in the Sudan.
We call on the two parties to show restraint and
to cease hostilities. They must demonstrate their
political determination to overcome the crisis
prevailing in Abyei and Southern Kordofan by
engaging in dialogue. We ask them to facilitate the
channelling of humanitarian aid to help the thousands
of displaced persons who have had to flee the violence.
We invite the parties to implement the conclusions they
agreed upon in Addis Ababa. Gabon remains convinced
that the deployment of Ethiopian battalions to Abyei,
along the borders, will help to ease tensions between
the parties and, at the same time, enforce the security
arrangements.
We encourage the parties to take advantage of the
window of opportunity opened by the Addis process to
restore mutual trust. Preserving the framework of the
comprehensive political agreement is essential, and it
is important to pursue implementation of that
agreement in full. In that regard, the support of the
Panel headed by President Mbeki and the enhanced
support of the United Nations are essential.
Finally, we wish to once again encourage the two
parties to show political determination and a spirit of
compromise.

11-37934

S/PV.6559

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
Do President Mbeki and Mr. Menkerios wish
make any additional comments following the
statements delivered by Council members? I give the
floor to President Mbeki.
Mr. Mbeki: We have no additional comments at
this time, but we are of course ready to answer any
questions that Council members may have.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of the Sudan, who wishes to
comment on the various statements made by Member
States.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Sir, you
may have noticed that during my first statement I tried
to remain in keeping with the positive spirit of the
happy news we just received from Addis Ababa
regarding the signing of a temporary agreement on
Abyei. I do not wish to remain hostage to the events
preceding that agreement because, as we can see, it is a
step forward, despite our reservations with respect to
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM).
Nevertheless, given that the other side has
persistently repeated a number of inaccurate points
about the situation in Abyei and Southern Kordofan, I
have no choice but to refer to the violations committed
by the SPLM in Southern Kordofan and Abyei.
The Sudanese Armed Forces intervened in Abyei
following a very long period of patience and restraint.
The former administrator of Abyei has failed to respect
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and withdraw his
troops from the border region in question. He has
attempted to establish facts on the ground in the region
by allowing in thousands of elements from the
Movement and other militias in an effort to change the
demographic makeup of the region.
Those actions and violations culminated with the
SPLM attacking and killing many of our soldiers and
members of the armed forces who had previously been
members of the Joint Integrated Unit. When the SPLM
attacked the Joint Integrated Unit, comprised of our
armed forces and those of the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS), they killed many of our
soldiers. Since then, our armed forces had no choice
but to intervene to put an end to the violations
committed by the SPLM in Abyei.

11-37934

Council members may recall that we had stated
that the presence of our armed forces in Abyei was
temporary after events forced us to be on the ground.
We also stated that we would withdraw once an
agreement had been reached on security measures. That
is what we did, following the signing today of the
agreement in Addis Ababa. Our withdrawal was the
best testimony to the signing of that agreement. That is
the situation in Abyei.
Regarding the latest developments in Southern
Kordofan, on 4 June SPLM forces attacked the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the police force in Umm
Dorien and then took control of that city. On 5 June,
elements of the SPLM attacked Government forces in
the city of Talodi. On 6 June, the SPLM attacked again
in the city of Kadugli, the capital of Southern
Kordofan, with the goal of taking control of it.
Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu, who had lost local elections in
that state, was appointed governor. These attacks
caused the death, injury and displacement of many of
our soldiers and police, as well as innocent civilians.
Moreover, tens of thousands of civilians were forced to
leave the state. The SPLM is responsible for all of this.
We did not want to go into the details of these
attacks, given the good news and intentions from Addis
Ababa. Nevertheless, we need to talk about this matter
in order to give a correct view of the situation. There
are many who misunderstand. I think some members
had prepared their statements before the signing of the
agreement in Addis Ababa. The war actions of the
SPLM have never been condemned by the Security
Council. What we have seen is very timid
condemnation by the Council following the SPLM
attack against the joint forces of UNMIS and the
Sudanese Armed Forces. Must a strong condemnation
by the Council await a confirmed attack against
UNMIS and the Sudanese Armed Forces? When such
acts are not condemned, the party involved is
encouraged to continue. The result is the death of many
soldiers in the Sudanese Armed Forces.
Nevertheless, we would like to assure the
Security Council that the situation in Southern
Kordofan is under control. The security situation is
stable and life is returning to normal in the main cities
of the state. Our house has been put back in order after
these events, following the intervention of our armed
forces. We call on the Council to send a firm message
to the SPLM condemning the violations that have taken
place in Southern Kordofan and calling for an end to

21

S/PV.6559

the cycle of violence and the withdrawal of forces, as
stipulated in the agreement between the two parties.
Repeated violations will make the anticipated peace
and stability impossible.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that the Government of
the Sudan is sincere in its desire to find a fundamental
solution to the situation in Abyei, Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile, in the framework of the efforts of
President Mbeki and other mediators. I reiterate our
call to the Council to support those efforts so that they
can bear fruit. We also urge the other side to end this
war, which has taken us backwards. We have taken a
positive step forward and we want to reach the end of
this road.
The President (spoke in French): I understand
that Mr. Gatkuoth wishes to take the floor. I now call
on him.
Mr. Gatkuoth: The Government of Southern
Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
(SPLM) are committed to peace. We have yearned for
it for years. Wars are not good. We have fought enough
in the Sudan — from 1955 until 1972 and from 1983
until 2005. We yearn for peace and we will continue to
seek it. We have been calling for peace. The National
Congress Party (NCP), instead of resorting to violence,
should join us in seeking peaceful resolutions to all the
pending issues. That is why we are calling for the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement to be implemented
fully.
On the issue of Abyei, the NCP and my brother
the representative of the Sudan know very well that the
land of the Ngok Dinka was transferred to the North in
1905 by the United Kingdom, because they were being
protected from the Arabs who were enslaving them.
They were put under the administration of the North so
that they would be protected from slavery. Now, if we
have peace in the Sudan, they should be asked either to
return to Southern Sudan or remain where they are

22

now. It is well known that the Misseriya are nomads
who come seasonally to graze their animals in the area,
not only in Abyei but beyond Abyei in Southern Sudan.
In Southern Kordofan there was an election with
very clear results, as my brother the representative of
the Sudan knows very well. Whereas he says that
Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu lost the election, it is the other way
around. Ahmed Harun knows very well that he lost the
election. But of course the election was rigged, which
angered many people in the Nuba area of Southern
Kordofan.
On these post-referendum issues we really need
to work together to reach an agreement, which is why
we have been calling for a peaceful resolution to all the
pending issues, including sharing resources between
the two countries. We are ready to negotiate a deal with
the National Congress Party, because we are interested
in peace. It is because we are actually interested in
peace that we want to make sure we have a deal that
can benefit the two countries, so that we can live in
peace, because wars are never good.
We also want to encourage the National Congress
Party in the North to accept a democratic
transformation, because the North of Sudan is also
diverse. President Al-Bashir declaring an Islamic State
in the North will continue to create problems there.
The National Congress Party must change its policies.
Instead of relying on the Islamization and Arabization
of the North they have to accept the country’s diversity,
which will remain in the North. I say this because if the
North is unstable we in the South are also going to pay
the consequences.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

11-37934
