S/2015/598

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 August 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 5 August 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Further to my most recent report to the Security Council on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2015/475), I have the honour to hereby
request the Council to consider the renewal of the mandate of the United N ations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), which is due to expire on 31 August 2015. In a
letter dated 14 July 2015 addressed to me, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Emigrants of Lebanon requested the Council to extend the mandate of UNIFIL for a
further year, without amendment.
UNIFIL continues to play a crucial role in ensuring peace and stability in
southern Lebanon, as well as full respect for the Blue Line by both Lebanon and
Israel. Following the serious breach of the cessation of hostilities on 2 8 January
2015, calm and stability have been maintained in the UNIFIL area of operations and
along the Blue Line. Nevertheless, the bellicose rhetoric in Israel and Lebanon has
contributed to maintaining a state of tension and heightening the risk of
miscalculation.
In that context, and in accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL continues to
monitor the cessation of hostilities and to assist the Lebanese armed forces in taking
steps towards the establishment, between the Blue Line and the Litani River, of an
area free of any unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons. UNIFIL
remains engaged with the parties on the outstanding issue of northern Ghajar and
continues to monitor and report on ground and air violations of resolution 1701
(2006). UNIFIL also takes all action necessary, within its capabilities, to ensure that
its area of operations is not used for hostile activities of any kind.
The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force continues to carry out its dual mandate of
conducting maritime interdiction operations in the area of maritime operations and
training Lebanese navy personnel.
Efforts are continuing to ensure a comprehensive approach to the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) that integrates the endeavours of UNIFIL,
the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the United
Nations country team to further involve the Government of Lebanon in the
implementation of the resolution and to increase the capacity of the Lebanese armed
forces. The latter is intended to facilitate the grad ual assumption by the armed
forces of effective and sustainable security control of the UNIFIL area of operations
and Lebanese territorial waters, as a key element in supporting moves towards a
permanent ceasefire.
15-13236 (E)

100815

*1513236*

S/2015/598

Cooperation between UNIFIL and the Lebanese armed forces on land and at
sea continues to be essential for the implementation of the mandate of UNIFIL.
Notwithstanding the temporary redeployments of some units of the armed forces
from the South Litani Sector to elsewhere in the country, UNIFIL an d the armed
forces continue to conduct many coordinated operational activities.
I underline the call for increased international support for the Lebanese armed
forces, in response to their capabilities development plan, as well as in the
framework of the International Support Group for Lebanon, including in the context
of the strategic dialogue between the forces and UNIFIL.
The well-established liaison and coordination arrangements of UNIFIL with
the parties, including the tripartite mechanism, have faci litated constructive and
pragmatic measures. UNIFIL continues to build on its efforts to promote practical
arrangements on the ground and understanding between the Lebanese armed forces
and the Israel Defense Forces in order to further stabilize the situat ion along the
Blue Line and build trust.
The process of visibly marking the Blue Line is continuing with the marking
of non-contentious points. UNIFIL has continued to ensure that the tripartite
mechanism is as flexible as possible and enables the parties to discuss a wider range
of issues.
The overall attitude of the local population towards UNIFIL remains positive.
The freedom of movement of UNIFIL and the security and safety of its personnel
are integral to the effective execution of its tasks. The pri mary responsibility for
ensuring the freedom of movement of UNIFIL personnel in the area of operations
lies with the Lebanese authorities.
The total number of military personnel, as at 15 July 2015, was 10,501 and the
civilian component numbered 260 international and 585 national staff.
I am grateful to the 39 troop-contributing countries for their continuing
commitment. That commitment, coupled with the development of a strategic
partnership with the Lebanese armed forces, has enabled the successful
implementation of several key aspects of resolution 1701 (2006). As the UNIFIL
mandate approaches its expiration date, however, it is clear that more work remains
to be done.
I should like to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, Major General Luciano Portolano, and to all the military
and civilian personnel of UNIFIL for the work that they are carrying out in southern
Lebanon in the service of peace.
Regarding the financial aspects of UNIFIL, the General Assembly, by its
resolution 69/302, appropriated to the Special Account for UNIFIL the amount of
$506.3 million gross for the maintenance of the mission for the period from 1 July
2015 to 30 June 2016. Should the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of
the mission beyond 31 August 2015, the cost of maintaining UNIFIL will be limited
to the amounts approved by the Assembly.
As at 24 July 2015, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNIFIL amounted to $97.1 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations as at the same date amounted to $3,231.4 million. As at
24 July 2015, the total amount owed to Member States that contribute troops to

2/3

15-13236

S/2015/598

UNIFIL was $26.9 million. Troop and contingent -owned equipment costs have been
reimbursed for the periods up to 30 April 2015 and 31 March 2015, respectively, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.
With the above information in mind, I recommend that the Council extend the
mandate of UNIFIL for a further 12 months, until 31 August 2016.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

15-13236

3/3
