United Nations

A/52/PV.50

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-second Session

50th plenary meeting
Thursday, 20 November 1997, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Udovenko

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ukraine)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Statements on the occasion of the eighth Africa
Industrialization Day
The President: Before turning to the items on the
agenda for this morning, I should like to remind the
General Assembly that today is the eighth Africa
Industrialization Day.
Since its proclamation by the General Assembly eight
years ago, Africa Industrialization Day has been celebrated
on 20 November. Today, it gives me great pleasure to join
in the commemoration of this event.
What are we celebrating on Africa Industrialization
Day? First, we are celebrating the valiant efforts of the
peoples of Africa to achieve a better life for themselves
through industrial development. Secondly, the celebration
of this event serves as an important reminder of the need to
draw world attention to the industrial development of
Africa. Thirdly, Africa Industrialization Day symbolizes the
solidarity of the international community with the countries
in Africa. Above all, it reaffirms the principle of
partnership and shared responsibility between Africa and
the international community in the industrial development
of the continent.
For many years, the United Nations has actively
supported African countries in their efforts to eradicate
poverty and achieve sustainable economic growth and
development. The New Agenda for the Development of

97-86551 (E)

Africa in the 1990s, the United Nations System-wide
Special Initiative on Africa, the Industrial Development
Decade for Africa and the newly launched Alliance for
Africa's Industrialization are some of the major
programmes and initiatives that come to mind.
Collectively, they underscore the commitment of the
international community to Africa's development. An
integral part of this commitment is the promotion and
acceleration of Africa's industrial development. Based on
the experience of the rich industrialized and the newly
industrializing countries, there is increased recognition
that industrialization holds the key to the transformation
of Africa from poverty to prosperity.
The continuing decline of the industrial sector
despite growing signs of economic recovery in many
African countries has therefore been a cause for serious
concern. As a consequence of the poor performance of
the industrial sector, the share of sub-Saharan Africa in
global manufacturing production has dropped from 0.6
per cent in 1970 to 0.3 per cent in 1995. The share of
manufactured products in total African exports has barely
changed over the last two decades and is still below 10
per cent. Moreover, four-fifths of sub-Saharan Africa's
industrial production is classified as low-technology.
This disturbing trend has contributed to the widening
industrialization and technological gap between Africa
and the rest of the world. It has raised considerable
concern about the ability of African industry to compete
in a highly competitive global economic environment.
Africa's leaders recognized the need to take collective and

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
effective action to address this crucial challenge. In June of
this year, the Assembly of African Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity decided
in their Harare Declaration on African Industrialization to
redouble their efforts to promote sustainable industrial
development through private-sector-led strategies and new
global partnerships. They endorsed the launching of the
Alliance for Africa's Industrialization, supported by the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO), as the principal mechanism for promoting
private-public sector partnerships within Africa as well as
partnerships between African and non-African enterprises.
Given the prominence of the private sector in Africa's
industrialization strategy, it is appropriate that the theme of
this year's celebration of Africa Industrialization Day is
“Development of Small and Medium Industries”. The
majority of industrial enterprises in Africa are small and
medium-sized, but they account for a large share of jobs
created in the economy.
Many are individual or family-owned business
operations with great potential for adjusting rapidly to
changing market conditions. With trade liberalization and
deregulation, their role has increased in importance. They
are increasingly becoming a dynamic force for the
promotion of sustainable industrial development in Africa.
While the United Nations system has done much to
support the efforts of African countries to achieve
sustainable development, much more needs to be done.
Organizations of the United Nations system need to work
more closely together to encourage the growth of small and
medium-sized enterprises in African countries. They need
to intensify their efforts to help small African entrepreneurs
gain access to markets, investments, credit, technology and
training. In this connection, the contribution that the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization has made over
the years in facilitating enterprise-level cooperation between
African and non-African business partners and in providing
a range of technical support services to small enterprises,
particularly those of women entrepreneurs, has been
commendable.
The development activities of United Nations agencies
in support of industrial development in Africa should be
better harmonized. Resources available throughout the
United Nations system for this purpose should be pooled to
maximize the impact of the system's contributions to
Africa's development. An important step in this direction is
the incorporation of the industrial development objectives
of African countries in the formulation of country strategy

2

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
notes and in the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework.
As we celebrate Africa Industrialization Day, we
remind ourselves of the importance of taking a common
approach to our common challenges. The development of
Africa is our common challenge, requiring concerted and
coordinated action on the part of the international
community. Today's event provides a good opportunity to
reaffirm our commitment to international cooperation and
our steadfast support to Africa as it strives to fulfil its
hopes and aspirations for a better future.
I call now on the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: We gather on Africa
Industrialization Day to raise public awareness and
harness international support — political, technical and
financial — for Africa's industrial development. Industrial
development is a key element of sustainable economic
growth. It helps countries achieve important social
objectives, such as jobs and equity. It creates
opportunities for the integration of women. In rural areas,
linked with agricultural development, it can help stem
migration and relieve pressure on cities.
With industrial development, the continent can take
decisive steps towards full-throttle competition in the
globalized marketplace. But without it, as African leaders
themselves declared last June in Harare, African
economies will be condemned to persistent crisis,
dependence on humanitarian relief and deepening poverty,
despair and political unrest.
(spoke in French)
As we mark this eighth Africa Industrialization Day,
hope is the watchword for much of the African continent.
In 1996, for the first time in 20 years, Africa experienced
growth exceeding 4 per cent. More and more countries
are experiencing remarkable economic expansion. The
private sector is beginning to play its role in powering the
economy. Everywhere, civil society is creating the
institutions it needs in order to be heard. Decision-makers
are vigorously pursuing their programmes of political,
economic and social reform. Good governance and its
foundations — political legitimacy, a State based on the
rule of law, and transparency in administration — are
now the goals.
Notwithstanding what has been achieved, the results
of African industry remain too meagre. Inadequate

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
infrastructure; weak institutions; poorly adapted regulations
and systems for stimulating the financial sphere; and the
widening technological gap between developed and
developed countries: these are obstacles that slow the
industrialization of Africa. The continent therefore does not
benefit as much as it could from the globalization and
liberalization of trade, and it remains difficult for African
countries to become fully integrated into the world
economy.
(spoke in English)
This year's Africa Industrialization Day focuses on the
development of small- and medium-scale industries. Such
enterprises are the backbone of economic activity in Africa.
They are a major source of livelihoods and income. In both
the formal and the informal sectors, small entrepreneurs
play a pivotal role in alleviating poverty and promoting
economic progress. Increasingly at ease with new
technologies and niche marketing, they can respond quickly
to changes and new opportunities.

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
agency dealing with industrial development issues, is
already promoting technical assistance to small- and
medium-scale enterprises. As members know, I am
committed to a strong UNIDO.
The work ahead will not be easy. There is donor
fatigue towards Africa, and aid is declining. As we move
forward, Africa's leaders must rise to the occasion. Their
commitment — not only to getting the economic
fundamentals right but to creating the broader conditions
that will encourage investment and development — is of
vital importance. Only then will African industry take off.
Only then will Africa find the path to sustained
prosperity.
For my part, I renew my pledge that the
industrialization of Africa will remain one of the top
priorities of the United Nations, and that I will continue
to be a strong champion of African industrial
development.
Statement on the occasion of Universal Children's Day

But small-scale industries need support from
Governments and the international community. They require
a favourable policy environment. They need to upgrade the
skills of their workers, to improve the quality of their
products, to find sources of financing and to gain market
access. They need technology and the requisite physical
infrastructure. They need partners: partners from within and
beyond the region.
In this light, I welcome recent initiatives by Africa's
development partners to promote trade and investment with
African countries. The outcome of last month's high-level
meeting on the least-developed countries, sponsored by the
World Trade Organization, the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development and the International Trade
Centre, is very encouraging. With 33 out of 48 leastdeveloped countries, Africa stands to benefit greatly from
the integrated framework adopted in Geneva, especially the
market access facilities that have been announced.
The Alliance for Africa's Industrialization, launched
last year, is another important undertaking, in particular
with respect to its focus on partnerships with the private
sector.
The United Nations system — through the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), the
United Nations Development Programme, the Economic
Commission for Africa and other bodies — will continue to
support such ventures. UNIDO, as the only specialized

The President: I would like to remind members that
in 1954 the United Nations General Assembly, at its ninth
session, recommended in resolution 836 (IX) that all
countries institute a Universal Children's Day, to be
observed as a day of worldwide fraternity and
understanding between children and of activity devoted to
promoting the welfare of the world's children. The date of
20 November marks the anniversary of the adoption by
the General Assembly in 1959 of the Declaration on the
Rights of the Child and the adoption in 1989 of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The prominent English writer Charles Dickens said,
“In the little world in which children have their
existence, whosoever brings them up, there is
nothing so finely perceived and so finely felt as
injustice”. [Great Expectations]
We should do our utmost to protect the young
generation all over the world.
Let us remember the words of another English
writer, John Ruskin:
“Give a little love to a child, and you get a
great deal back”. [The Crown of Wild Olives]

3

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997

I thank the Assembly for its attention, and I remind
the Assembly that today, besides marking the occasion of
Africa Industrialization Day, we also celebrate Universal
Children's Day.

If there is no objection, may I take it that the
General Assembly agrees to that procedure?

Agenda item 17

The President: In accordance with existing practice,
the country receiving the greatest number of votes, and
not less than a majority of the votes of those present and
voting, shall be the country selected.

Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other appointments
(j)

Appointment of a member of the Joint Inspection
Unit
Note by the Secretary-General (A/52/110)

The President: In connection with sub-item (j) of
agenda item 17, a note by the Secretary-General has been
circulated in document A/52/110.
As indicated in that document, the General Assembly
is required, during the fifty-second session, to appoint a
member to fill the vacancy in the Joint Inspection Unit that
will arise from the expiration of the term of office on 31
December 1998 of Mr. Raul Quijano of Argentina.
As also indicated in that document, in accordance with
article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint Inspection
Unit, the President of the General Assembly shall consult
with Member States to draw up a list of countries — in this
case, one country — which would be requested to propose
a candidate for appointment to the Joint Inspection Unit.
After holding the necessary consultations, I should like
to communicate to the Assembly the following information
received from the Chairman of the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States: two countries — namely,
Argentina and Colombia — have decided to present their
candidatures for one vacancy from among the Latin
American and Caribbean States.
I should like, in accordance with past practice, to
consult with Member States through the procedure of
holding an advisory vote by secret ballot to select from
among the Latin American and Caribbean States one
country, which would be requested to propose a candidate
for appointment to the Joint Inspection Unit.
Although this advisory vote would not be an election,
we would follow the rules of procedure of the Assembly
governing elections.

It was so decided.

May I also take it that the General Assembly agrees
to that procedure?
It was so decided.
The President: In accordance with rule 93 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, when only
one person or member is to be elected and no candidate
obtains in the first ballot the majority required, a second
ballot shall be taken, which shall be restricted to the two
candidates obtaining the largest number of votes. If in the
second ballot the votes are equally divided, and a majority
is required, the President shall decide between the
candidates by drawing lots.
I take it that the Assembly also agrees to that
procedure.
It was so decided.
The President: Before I request the Secretariat to
distribute the ballot papers, I should like to remind
members of the Assembly that we are now going to
proceed to the selection of one country from among the
Latin American and Caribbean States, which will be
requested to propose a candidate to fill the vacancy in the
Joint Inspection Unit. The Assembly is not — I repeat,
not — appointing a member to the Joint Inspection Unit
at this time. It is only selecting one country which will be
requested to propose a candidate. Therefore, only the
name of a country and not the name of an individual
should appear on the ballot paper.
I should like to repeat the names of the two
countries from among the Latin American and Caribbean
States that decided to present their candidatures:
Argentina and Colombia.
The ballot papers will now be distributed.
May I request representatives to use only those
ballot papers.

4

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997

May I further request members of the Assembly to
write on the ballot paper the name of one State from among
the Latin American and Caribbean States for which they
wish to vote. A ballot paper containing more than one name
from among the Latin American and Caribbean States will
be declared invalid. Any ballots with the name of a State
outside the relevant region or with the name of an
individual shall not be counted at all.
At the invitation of the President, Miss Kalnina
(Latvia), Ms. Han (Singapore) and Mr. Muchanga
(Zambia) acted as tellers.

The meeting was suspended at 10.50 a.m. and
resumed at 11 a.m.
The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
Latin American and Caribbean States
167
3
164
1
163
82
86
77

The President: I thank members for their advice and
assistance. I thank the tellers for their assistance.
In accordance with article 3, paragraph 1, of the
statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, Colombia will be
requested to submit the name of a candidate and a
curriculum vitae highlighting the candidate's relevant
qualifications for the task ahead.
After holding the appropriate consultations described
in article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, including consultations with the President
of the Economic and Social Council and with the SecretaryGeneral in his capacity as Chairman of the Administrative
Committee on Coordination, I will propose a qualified
candidate to the Assembly for appointment to the Joint
Inspection Unit.
We have thus concluded this stage of
consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda item 17.

Towards a culture of peace
Note by the Secretary-General (A/52/292)
Draft resolution (A/52/L.4/Rev.1)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh to introduce draft resolution
A/52/L.4/Rev.1.
Mr. Jele (South Africa), Vice-President, took the
Chair.

A vote was taken by secret ballot.

Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required simple majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Colombia
Argentina

Agenda item 156 (continued)

Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is a pleasure and
an honour for Bangladesh to introduce draft resolution
A/52/L.4/Rev.1, on behalf of my delegation and all the
sponsors listed in the draft resolution, as well as the new
sponsors of this draft resolution: the Central African
Republic, Chile, Jamaica, South Africa and Swaziland.
In this draft resolution, we propose some elements
regarding a culture of peace. The basic thrust of the draft
resolution is to have at the next session a draft declaration
and programme of action on a culture of peace, and we
are requesting the Secretary-General to submit one.
This draft is the outcome of intensive consultations
with all interested delegations. In order to accommodate
the concerns of other delegations, we have made
amendments to the original draft contained in A/52/L.4,
and those have been incorporated into this new text.
I will briefly mention those changes, but before that
let me say that we, the sponsors, very strongly believe
that the subject of a culture of peace is an important one
that covers a broad area and deserves our attention at the
highest level. With that in mind, we requested that this
item be considered in plenary under a new and separate
agenda item, and we hope that this will continue to be the
case in coming sessions of the General Assembly as well.
This subject has attained a level of attention,
importance and comprehensiveness that it is appropriate
that it be dealt with by the apex body of the United
Nations system, the General Assembly. We believe that
it is the desire of the sponsors, and of all other
delegations, that this be done similarly in the coming
years.

our

5

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997

In this revised text, we have added, in operative
paragraph 2, the full text of a paragraph from last year's
resolution on a culture of peace. In operative paragraph 3,
subparagraph (c) has been added, regarding a presentation
of the progress of projects within the framework of the
project entitled “Towards a culture of peace”.
Finally, in operative paragraph 4, we have requested
that any comments made on a culture of peace or relevant
issues at the just concluded session of the General
Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) be included in the
report submitted next year.
With these words, we would like to request that the
draft resolution contained in A/52/L.4/Rev.1 be adopted by
consensus.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/52/L.4/Rev.1.
I call on the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Jin Yongjian (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services): I
should like to inform members that should the General
Assembly adopt draft resolution A/52/L.4/Rev.1, the
Secretary-General does not anticipate that any programme
budget implications would arise.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/52/L.4/Rev.1, entitled
“Culture of peace”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/52/L.4/Rev.1?
Draft resolution
(resolution 52/13).

A/52/L.4/Rev.1

was

adopted

The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to make statements in explanation
of position. May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Kirsch (Luxembourg) (interpretation from
French): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. Estonia, Poland and Norway also align
themselves with this explanation of vote.

6

The member States of the European Union attach
great importance to the concept of a culture of peace. The
European Union participates actively in the
transdisciplinary project on a culture of peace in the
framework of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). I would like to
reaffirm here the European Union's commitment to the
promotion and protection of human rights.
In recent weeks the member States of the European
Union have carefully considered the language of the draft
resolution, the revised version of which is before us. In a
constructive and positive spirit, the European Union
proposed a number of changes to the principal sponsors
of this draft resolution. We thank the sponsors for having
held informal consultations at our request, but we regret
that an agreement on our most important proposals did
not prove possible.
We would have preferred that the further
consideration of the elements of the draft declaration and
programme of action on a culture of peace contained in
the report of the Director-General of UNESCO, submitted
to the General Assembly in document A/52/292, take
place within the framework of UNESCO. We will convey
to the Director-General our ideas regarding his draft
declaration and programme of action.
The European Union has nevertheless decided to join
the consensus on draft resolution A/52/L.4/Rev.1.
Ms. Saiga (Japan): The promotion of a culture of
peace is an important task for the Member States of the
United Nations if our common quest for peaceful
coexistence is to succeed. It is only in a culture of peace
which is rooted in social interaction and sharing, tolerance
and respect for human rights, and a determination to lay
and then maintain the foundation of democracy and
freedom that it is possible to actualize the purposes and
principles of the United Nations, and thus save future
generations from living in terror and fear of violence. It
is for this reason that my delegation joined in the
consensus on draft resolution A/52/L.4/Rev.1.
When the General Assembly requests a report to be
submitted, it expects that that report will genuinely reflect
the views of the Secretary-General or of the organization
to which the Secretary-General has assigned the task of
preparing it. Much to our disappointment, this is not the
case with the report of the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) in document A/52/292. That report, which

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
contains important elements such as a proposal to establish
a special fund, was submitted to the Secretary-General
without any prior consultation with the Executive Board of
UNESCO. That failure to follow proper procedure was
brought to the attention of the members of the Executive
Board at its meeting last October.
My delegation would have liked a genuine discussion
to have taken place within UNESCO before the report was
submitted to the General Assembly so that it could benefit
from the views of member States and, consequently, be
received as a credible basis for future discussion. As this is
not the case, my delegation is of the view that it is
premature to proceed, in accordance with this year's
resolution, to request the Secretary-General to submit a
consolidated report containing a draft declaration and
programme of action on a culture of peace.
My delegation is concerned that the draft declaration
and programme of action will be prepared without any
substantive discussion and on the basis of a report that does
not properly reflect the views of the States members of
UNESCO. Japan therefore expresses strong reservations
with regard to paragraph 4 of the resolution, and it hopes
that when the Secretary-General implements this year's
resolution, in cooperation with the Director-General of
UNESCO, the views of the States members of UNESCO
will be properly reflected.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 156?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 28
Universal Congress on the Panama Canal
Report of the Secretary-General (A/52/435 and
Corr.1)
Mr. Boyd (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
The President of the Republic of Panama, Mr. Ernesto
Pérez Balladares, invited the entities using the Canal,
private-sector shipping concerns and the Governments
interested in the use of the Canal to contribute ideas
regarding the future of the Panama Canal at a gathering
called the Universal Congress on the Panama Canal, which
was held at Panama City from 7 to 10 September 1997.

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
President Pérez Balladares said
“The purpose of the gathering was to gain a clear
vision of what the waterway would be like following
its transfer to Panama. The Canal users, accordingly,
had an opportunity at that forum to provide input
and to discuss what kind of waterway would best
serve their interests in the coming decades. There
can be no doubt that the transfer of the Panama
Canal will stimulate a surge of entrepreneurial
activity that will create new opportunities with the
development of industrial zones, the tourist industry
and the opening up of the real estate market along
the Canal, in what used to be known as the Canal
Zone.”
In 1914 the gates to the Panama Canal were opened
wide to the world. The Canal is 80 kilometres long, from
the Atlantic to the Pacific Oceans, and was dug through
the narrowest and lowest stretch of the mountainous
isthmus that links North and South America. Its principal
features are its two terminal ports, its three sets of twin
locks, Gatún Lake and the Gaillard Cut, also known as
the Culebra Cut.
The locks enable transiting vessels to go up and
come down again. The Panama Canal is a fresh-water
canal. In the Gatún Locks, vessels bound for the Pacific
are lifted to the level of Gatún Lake, a height of 85 feet,
while Atlantic-bound vessels are lowered to sea level. In
Gamboa, the Panama Canal's route leaves the natural
course of the Chagres River and enters the Gaillard Cut.
The Gaillard Cut is man-made. It was excavated, dredged
and blasted through the mountain range known as the
Continental Cordillera. In its day, the digging of the Cut
was the largest earth-moving projet ever attempted. Its
extension reached 9 miles at its highest point, more than
320 feet above sea level. There are three levels of
contiguous locks at Gatún. Ships able to traverse the
Panama Canal locks can be up to 100 feet wide and 950
feet long. The locks are composed of pairs of imposing
gates from 47 to 82 feet in height.
The Miraflores Locks mark the Pacific terminus of
the Panama Canal. The two twin chambers of Miraflores
Lake lead to the port of Balboa at sea level. Miraflores
Lake, at an altitude of 54 feet, was created by damming
the waters of the Rio Grande and Rio Cocolí.
Again, the Canal is a fresh-water canal. Every transit
of any vessel through the Panama Canal creates a loss of
52 million gallons of water, which flow into the oceans.

7

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Fortunately, more than 95 per cent of the merchant vessels
now in service are in line with the Canal's parameters.
Panama's merchant marine ranks first in the world,
and we are now planning a national maritime commission
to bring together under a single body all the elements
required by the new measures.
At this important Congress, the participants included
representatives of chambers of commerce, export-import
associations, port administrators, shipping agents, banks,
insurance companies and all kinds of governmental agencies
that deal with the transport aspects of foreign trade
activities, as well as academic bodies. There were 65
speakers, while 345 representatives of the information
media from 19 countries, as well as some 571 staff from
the local media, covered the event.
Panama is very appreciative of the support given by
Ambassador Edgar Camacho Omiste of Bolivia and
Ambassador Pierre Lelong of Haiti to the initial idea of
holding a Universal Congress on the Panama Canal. On 7
November 1995 and 24 October 1996, respectively, they
spoke in favour of this idea on behalf of the Latin
American and Caribbean Group. Similarly, here at the
United Nations, we wish to acknowledge the support
provided by Ambassador Victor Marrero of the United
States, Mr. Jean-Michel Gaussot of France, Ambassador
Fernando Enrique Petrella of Argentina and Mr. Emilio
Izquierdo of Ecuador.
Both the European Union and the Government of
Taiwan made substantial contributions to this meeting,
taking into account the importance of the Canal for many
countries, in particular those of South and Central America.
For the historical record, document A/52/347 contains
the Declarations of the Eleventh Summit of the Heads of
State or Government of the Rio Group, which was held in
Asunción, Paraguay, on 23 and 24 August 1997. Paragraph
25 of that document states,
“We reaffirm the importance of the Universal
Congress on the Panama Canal, to be held from 7 to
10 September 1997 as a forum open to the entire
international community; this meeting should serve as
a consultation mechanism for specifically examining
the role which the Canal should play in the twentyfirst century and the plans for expanding its services
which the Government of Panama is promoting
through the Board of Directors of the Panama Canal
Authority. We also express our belief that the results

8

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
of the Congress will contribute to the growth of
world trade and to economic growth within the
region and will promote international cooperation on
the basis of the principle that the Interoceanic
Panama Canal will be open, on an equal and strictly
neutral basis, to all the world's users and
economies.”
At the Congress, Mr. Rodney Slater, Secretary of
Transportation of the United States said:
“This is a time of great joy for our region. [We
have] an invaluable opportunity to build a
community of nations. As President Clinton put it,
We are partners, shoulder to shoulder at this
moment in history'. The Panama Canal is a global
asset. It is a vital transport artery recognized by all
sailors as the best way in the world to save time.”
Mr. Thomas F. McLarty, Adviser to the President of
the United States and Special Envoy for the Americas,
added,
“In this changing world, which is also changing the
lives of men and women of the hemisphere, millions
of people are for the first time enjoying
opportunities for growth under democratic
Governments, with free markets and growing respect
for human rights and for law. As an open route for
commerce between the Americas, the Panama Canal
will expand relations, serving as our crossroads. And
it will continue to be a key to the successful
economic growth of our peoples.”
In the course of the meeting, Mr. Jorge E. Ritter,
Minister for Canal Affairs, explained the transfer of
jurisdiction over the management of the Canal. The laws
and regulations of the United States that govern the Canal
until 31 December 1999 will be replaced by Panamanian
laws and regulations that have formed part of our
country's Political Constitution since 1994. Those laws
and regulations guarantee the type of agency that will be
taking over from the United States. It will include an
autonomous administrative and financial commission, and
conditions for Canal workers will not be affected. The
budget for this agency will be separate from the national
budget, and the agency will guarantee that traffic in the
Canal will not be interrupted for any reason.
Mr. Ritter also explained that the Treaty concerning
the Permanent Neutrality and Operation of the Panama
Canal envisages that tolls and tariffs for passage will be

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
fair, reasonable, equitable and in line with the principles of
international law. This ensures that there will never be
exorbitant increases in tolls by Panama. All this was also
reaffirmed by our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ricardo
Alberto Arias.
The Secretary-General of the Organization of
American States, Mr. César Gaviria, talking about the
transition and the domestic growth produced by the use of
the Canal, said that some impressive figures were being
achieved. He announced that trade between Latin America
and the Caribbean had grown by 20 per cent and that trade
between Latin America and the United States had grown by
12 per cent. He added that the volume of trade by Latin
America was increasing by 12 per cent per year.
The Congress bore ample witness to the fact that the
seafaring world recognizes the stability of the Panama
Canal and that international maritime organizations are
confident they can depend on the security of the Canal.
Mr. Alberto Alemán Zubieta, Administrator of the
Panama Canal Commission, stressed the Canal's neutrality
as one of its fundamental aspects, along with other aspects
such as its competitiveness, the need to pursue an
appropriate financial policy and the modernization of the
Canal's locks using new technology and equipment. As to
the possibility of building a third set of locks in 2010, the
Administrator said that
“for a decision of this magnitude we will have to
carry out an appropriate engineering study”.
In years past a tripartite commission, made up of
Japan, the United States and Panama, had already
undertaken studies with Panama regarding possible
alternatives for the future of the Canal.
The gathering held in Panama studied major issues,
such as the importance of the Canal; the Canal's capacity
for meeting future requirements; alternative approaches to
resolving problems of size and capability; the project for
the third set of locks; the Canal's competitiveness;
alternative routes for the Canal; the need to keep the tolls
and service charges as low as possible; the effects of toll
increases on future Canal usage; privatizing operations as
a way of reducing costs and increasing efficiency; operating
the Canal in accordance with sound business principles;
avoiding domestic political interference in order to maintain
the stability of the staff; toll policies consistent with the aim
of making the Canal a magnet for the development of the
maritime sector and other branches of the Panamanian

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
economy; the need to carry out studies to yield
recommendations on fair toll levels; other options for the
Canal; conservation of the Canal basin; prospects for the
future; the importance of a consultative committee of
users to act as an advisory board of the Panama Canal
Authority; changes in the regulations related to
conservation measures and systems; transit costs for
cruise ships; and the need always to consider the rights of
the users.
There was consensus among the participants that
Panama does have the human and technical capital to
manage, operate and efficiently maintain the Canal after
it reverts to the country in 1999. According to official
statistics, 82 per cent of the 8,500 workers on the
waterway are Panamanians. Of 324 management
positions, 148 are held by Panamanians in the operational
units and the naval, engineering and construction front
offices.
The Congress provided a superb and unique
opportunity for representatives of the merchant marine
industry and collateral fields to describe to future
interested parties how the Panama Canal works and thus
give them a complete understanding of what lies ahead
for the Canal. The Government of the Republic of
Panama is in earnest in declaring its desire to remain a
key player in the world maritime industry beyond the year
2000.
In Panama's view, the Congress came to a close
having attained its chief objective of demonstrating to the
international community that the Republic of Panama is
prepared to assume control of the Panama Canal, as
stipulated in the treaties signed between the United States
of America and Panama on 7 September 1977. These
were coined the Torrijos-Carter treaties by my illustrious
predecessor, Mr. Jorge E. Illueca, and by Mr. Fernando
Manfredo, High Commissioner of the Republic of Panama
to the Universal Congress on the Panama Canal, who
worked long and hard to bring the task to a happy
culmination.
Panamanian leaders have always believed that the
Panama Canal is destined to provide an international,
neutral and non-discriminatory public service and that,
accordingly, its uninterrupted and efficient operation is of
special interest to such organizations as the United
Nations. That is the main reason behind our introduction
of this brief report.

9

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 28?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 32
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
Report of the Secretary-General (A/52/462)
Draft resolution (A/52/L.24/Rev.1)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of South Africa to introduce draft resolution
A/52/L.24/Rev.1.
Mr. Bergh (South Africa): It is indeed an honour for
South Africa to introduce the draft resolution entitled “Zone
of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic”, contained
in document A/52/L.24, on behalf of States members of the
zone. The draft is the result of intensive consultations held
with States Members of the United Nations.
The objectives of the zone include the enhancement of
peace and security; the promotion of regional cooperation
for social and economic development; the promotion of
environmental conservation; and the sustained management
of natural resources, and are being actively pursued by
every member State.
Apart from peace, security and the mutual protection
of the environment, each member State has definitive
further benefits to be derived from its association with the
region. These include the promotion of intraregional
tourism, communication, technology and information
exchange, and of shipping and other transport links.
I wish to cite one positive example in this respect. A
resolution on the zone of peace and cooperation in the
South Atlantic — submitted by South Africa as Chair of
the zone and cosponsored by all zone States with
Permanent Missions in Vienna — was adopted at the
fortieth session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
which was held in March 1997 in Vienna. The resolution
calls for the United Nations International Drug Control
Programme to examine forms of assistance which could be
extended to the States members of the zone and for the
Executive Director of the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme to report on progress to the
Commission at its forty-second session in 1998. The

10

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
resolution was sponsored by Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina,
Nigeria, Angola and Namibia and received the
endorsement of the African Group.
One of the zone's principle objectives is to promote
and encourage democratic principles, good governance
and the rule of law and to defend all human rights and
fundamental freedoms. The region has made several
contributions towards peace and security within its
broader area and it fully realizes that the preservation of
peace and security in the region will forever remain one
of the member States' most important joint
responsibilities.
For example, the members of the zone have been
involved, both in a bilateral as well as a multilateral
context, in attempts to achieve a positive outcome to the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. On a regular
basis, the zone has reaffirmed its willingness to contribute
towards achieving lasting peace in Angola. Circumstances
in Sierra Leone and Liberia have also demanded the
attention of zone member States, and the situation in each
of them has been under constant scrutiny.
The zone has readily accepted the challenges posed
by the new global agenda. The region's constant focus on
democracy, good governance, peace, security and nuclear
disarmament; its undertaking to take responsibility for the
proper and responsible management of the environment;
the protection of fish and other marine resources; cultural
and technology exchanges; and economic cooperation and
respect for human rights all stand to prove that the zone
is successfully dealing with a changing global
environment.
Another challenge for the countries of the zone lies
in the multilateral arena. This is to develop more coherent
strategies to engage issues of mutual importance through
a process of dialogue. The zone offers a unique
possibility to create such instruments for dialogue and
exchange of expertise, both on a bilateral and on a
multilateral level.
The South African Mission wishes to express its
gratitude to States members of the various regional groups
for their suggestions in drafting this draft resolution,
which in its amended form should once again provide us
with the necessary consensus text. We therefore urge all
Member States to support the draft resolution, so that it
may be adopted without a vote.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Ms. Ramírez (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): It is with satisfaction that I am speaking today on
agenda item 32, entitled “Zone of peace and cooperation of
the South Atlantic”, to support an initiative which opens up
interesting prospects for us in the area of international
cooperation.
I would likewise like to express the appreciation of the
Government of Argentina to South Africa for its important
contributions to and quite outstanding coordination of the
work of the zone during 1996 and 1997.
Eleven years have already gone by since the General
Assembly adopted resolution 41/11 in 1986, in which it
solemnly declared the region of the Atlantic Ocean, in the
region between Africa and South America, the “Zone of
peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic”. The zone was
born as an area for promoting understanding and improving
cooperation among the countries of the South Atlantic.
As stated in the Brasilia and Somerset West
Declarations, my country attaches particular significance to
fundamental concepts such as democracy and political
pluralism and respect for and defence of human rights and
individual freedoms. We believe that these concepts are
basic elements which form the basis of the purposes and
principles of this initiative.
My delegation is pleased to note that we have made
steady progress towards the objectives which brought about
the creation of the zone. Its member States have already
held four high-level meetings, during which they examined
the various fields open to cooperation during this initial
stage and adopted decisions and declarations with a vision
of the future.
The member States have set themselves clear
objectives in fundamental areas: the strengthening of peace
and security; the promotion of regional cooperation in the
area of economic and social development; the protection of
the marine environment; and the conservation of resources.
With regard to the first of these objectives, Argentina
believes that nuclear-weapon-free zones contribute
significantly to international peace and security by
continuing to restrict the areas where the use or threat of
use of such weapons takes place. The countries that belong
to the zone believe in the need for all the zones which have
been declared free of nuclear weapons to be consolidated.
Likewise, the Republic of Argentina firmly believes in
the need to preserve the marine environment, as well as its

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
living resources, and is pleased that this view is becoming
increasingly widespread throughout the international
community in general and in the countries of the South
Atlantic zone in particular.
In this regard, it is worth mentioning the importance
of the standards adopted in the context of the
International Maritime Organization, which seek to
preserve the marine environment from the spills and
wastes associated with shipping, and the 1995 Agreement
on the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks.
Another issue which my delegation wishes to draw
to the General Assembly's attention has to do with the
transport of irradiated nuclear fuel, plutonium and highlevel radioactive wastes. In this regard, I would like to
place on record the concern felt by the Republic of
Argentina — which is surely shared by the other
countries of the zone — at the risks inherent in the
passage of ships carrying radioactive wastes through the
South Atlantic.
Likewise, we favour the adoption in the waters
subject to our jurisdiction of measures recognized by
international law aimed at safeguarding the health of our
populations and marine systems. We believe in the need
to strengthen international regulation in this area.
With regard to the fight against drug trafficking and
the crimes associated with it, we reiterate our constant
readiness to cooperate in achieving the goals of the South
Atlantic zone, in line with the Somerset West Declaration.
As hosts of the fifth high-level meeting, to be held next
year, we trust that we will be able to make progress in
the consideration of some of the issues related to
cooperation on drugs that will have concrete effects in the
context of the zone.
I would like once again to reaffirm that the Republic
of Argentina shares in the call made annually to all States
by the members of the zone of peace and cooperation of
the South Atlantic to cooperate in promoting its objectives
and to refrain from any action inconsistent with those
objectives, particularly action which may create or
aggravate situations of tension and potential conflict in
the region. The Republic of Argentina extends that call so
that — in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
resolutions of the Organization — all States not only
prevent conflicts but also commit themselves to the

11

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997

peaceful quest, through negotiation, for the lasting and just
settlement of disputes pending in the region.

came to an end with the holding of presidential and
legislative elections on 19 July 1997.

The zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic is an arena where its members have found the
opportunity to express their solidarity and determination to
cooperate on the basis of essential universal principles, such
as the promotion of democracy and political pluralism and
the advancement of human rights and fundamental liberties,
in the conviction that this will bring us closer to the ideals
which bind the international community. In this setting, we
likewise trust that economic and commercial ties across our
common ocean will be significantly expanded in these
favourable circumstances.

Our hope is that, with the support of the countries of
the zone and the United Nations, the current efforts to
restore peace — particularly in Sierra Leone — will
succeed as soon as possible.

Finally, I would like to reiterate our satisfaction and
commitment as we prepare to serve as host to the fifth
high-level meeting of the zone of peace and cooperation of
the South Atlantic in 1998, an event which we hope will
lead to the advancement of the principles and objectives
which prompted us to establish the zone.
Mr. Amehou (Benin) (interpretation from French): In
establishing the zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic by resolution 41/11 of 27 October 1986, the
General Assembly had among its objectives the promotion
of peace and security in the zone and the strengthening of
development cooperation between the countries of Africa
and South America.
The member countries of the zone have worked
towards the progressive achievement of these objectives for
more than 10 years through their successive meetings in
Rio de Janeiro (Brazil) in 1986, in Abuja (Nigeria) in 1990,
in Brasilia (Brazil) in 1994 and in Somerset West (South
Africa) last year. The course thus charted demonstrates the
determination of the countries of the zone to make it a
genuine instrument for the promotion of peace and a
dynamic institution of South-South cooperation.
Benin therefore welcomes the progress achieved,
especially the objectives attained since the holding of the
fourth meeting of member States of the zone in Somerset
West in April 1996.
In this connection, the positive developments in the
situation in Liberia are a source of satisfaction for the
delegation of Benin. Indeed, thanks to the determined action
undertaken by the countries of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) with the support of the
international community, the very long and devastating war
in Liberia — a country which is a member of the zone —

12

In this connection, Benin commends the full support
that the Security Council has given to ECOWAS to
resolve the crisis in Sierra Leone and restore the
democratically elected Government. The Government of
Benin invites all parties concerned to work towards the
effective and speedy implementation of the peace plan
agreed to at Conakry on 23 October 1997.
The maintenance of peace and stability in the South
Atlantic calls for the promotion of disarmament and the
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime for small
arms and weapons of mass destruction throughout the
zone. To this end, the denuclearization of the South
Atlantic must remain a priority objective for the countries
of the zone. In that connection, we must work together to
strengthen measures for a complete ban on nuclear
weapons in the South Atlantic through the implementation
of the Treaty of Tlatelolco for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean and of the
Treaty of Pelindaba, which has made Africa a nuclearweapon-free zone.
Today, on the threshold of the third millennium and
faced with the numerous challenges arising out of the
phenomenon of globalization at the national and
international levels, Benin considers that the time has
come for the countries of the zone to strengthen their
efforts so as to reap greater benefit from the many
economic and commercial opportunities offered by the
zone. We must also strengthen our cooperation in
environmental protection and in activities aimed at
combating drug trafficking throughout the region.
The fifth meeting of States members of the zone, to
be held in 1998 and which Argentina has offered to host,
must be the forum for determining ways and means of
achieving those objectives. My country will spare no
effort in contributing to the implementation of such
initiatives.
Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): In contributing to the debate
on the zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic, the Nigerian delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to States Members of the United Nations and

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
to the international community at large for their continued
support of the zone as a forum designed to further
cooperation among countries of the South in their pursuit of
peace and development.
In confronting the issues of peace and security,
member States of the zone have equally brought to the fore
problems associated with crisis management and conflict
resolution. It is in this connection that one must advert to
the difficult situations in a number of countries members of
the zone. Some of these difficult situations have found
solutions, while others have proved intractable. Liberia is an
example of those crisis situations that have found a solution
— albeit after a protracted effort. Today, Liberia can be
described as a success story. But on the other side of the
coin is the continuing crisis in Angola. Regrettably, Sierra
Leone and the Congo have joined the list of intractable
circumstances that need the collaborative efforts of the
international community in order to find durable solutions
to the problems besetting the two countries.
The member States of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) took the bull by the horns
and, with the support of the international community,
succeeded in solving the Liberian problem. We look
forward to similar cooperation in relation to the solution of
the problem in Sierra Leone in order to reinstate President
Kabbah and restore constitutional order to that country. In
this regard we commend the initiative of ECOWAS and the
action of the Security Council for the embargo which the
latter imposed in its resolution 1132 (1997) of 8 October
1997 on the sale and supply of petroleum and petroleum
products, and arms and related matériel of all types, to
Sierra Leone, along with other measures. We also look
forward to a hitch-free implementation of the peace plan
agreed in Conakry on 23 October between the ECOWAS
Committee of Five on Sierra Leone and representatives of
the junta. We are, of course, glad that the peace plan has
been accepted by President Kabbah himself.
It is appropriate at this point to reiterate the need for
the provision and distribution of humanitarian assistance in
response to local needs in that particular country. It is
equally important that all States and relevant international
organizations continue to assist those countries that have to
grapple with the influx of refugees and displaced persons as
a result of the crisis in Sierra Leone.
Along with other members of the international
community, Nigeria welcomes the return of stability to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has great
implications for broader subregional peace, security and

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
development. We regret, however, that the Security
Council has not been more forthcoming with regard to the
situation in the neighbouring Republic of the Congo. The
crisis in that country has resulted in the displacement of
over two thirds of the residents of Brazzaville and in the
extensive destruction of the city's infrastructure. The crisis
has been further complicated by the involvement of
external forces. We can only plead that all concerned
pursue the logic of peace. In this regard, we commend the
mediatory role of Gabon and other countries in the region
for their efforts in favour of peace in the subregion.
One of the expressed desires of the members of the
zone is for the South Atlantic to be free of nuclear
weapons. The conclusion of the Treaty of Pelindaba,
taken with the authority of the already established Treaty
of Tlatelolco, will, when they both come into full
operation, move us towards the realization of that goal.
These two nuclear-weapon-free-zone treaties, together
with the treaties of Raratonga and Bangkok and the
Antarctic Treaty, are turning almost half of the globe into
a nuclear-weapon-free zone. This is a welcome
development. In order to maintain that state of play, we
call upon the nuclear-weapon States in particular to
respect that status as well as the desire of the inhabitants
of the southern hemisphere to keep the threat of nuclear
weapons out of their horizon, out of their territories and
out of their future.
Argentina has offered to host the fifth meeting of the
zone in Buenos Aires in 1998. We are heartened by this
offer, as it will afford us the opportunity to follow up on
the different projects either envisaged or decided upon at
the fourth high-level meeting of the zone in Somerset
West, South Africa. These include cooperation in the fight
against drug trafficking and protection of the marine
environment for the conservation of marine resources.
Another area of cooperation on which progress has
been made in recent times — aside from trade and the
sharing of industrial expertise and experience — is the
effort to prohibit the dumping of radioactive and
hazardous wastes. We welcome the adoption of the Joint
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and
on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management.
Together with other prohibition agreements that have been
signed and the annual consensus resolutions that have
been recommended by various General Assembly
committees and adopted by the Assembly on the
prohibition of the dumping of radioactive wastes and on
the transboundary movement of hazardous wastes, this

13

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
development has helped to establish accepted international
norms on the subject.
As we look forward to the next high-level meeting of
the zone, to be held in Buenos Aires in 1998, we wish to
express appreciation to the Government of South Africa for
hosting the fourth meeting of the members of the zone. We
would also like to thank the South African delegation, as
well as other members of the bureau of the Permanent
Committee of the zone in New York, for their coordination
efforts, including the preparation of this year's draft
resolution, which is contained in document
A/52/L.24/Rev.1.
In concluding, we wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his report contained in document A/52/462. We also
thank the United Nations agencies which have taken action
in fulfilment of the various mandates given to them in
resolution 51/19 of 1996.
Mr. Felicio (Brazil): The zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic is of great importance to
Brazil. Our country had the honour to host two of the
ministerial meetings of the members of the zone, the first
in Rio de Janeiro in 1986, and the second in Brasilia in
1994. Brazil was present at the meeting in Abuja, Nigeria,
in 1990, and took part in the fourth ministerial meeting,
held in Somerset West, South Africa, in 1996. We look
forward to the meeting to be held in Argentina next year.
The countries of Africa and South America on both
sides of the Atlantic Ocean have taken the initiative to build
a bridge of understanding across that vast expanse of sea
between our shores. The aim is to foster mutual knowledge,
increase cooperation, give new life to old ties, search for
solutions to common problems, learn from each other's
experiences and, where possible, act together in shaping a
common future.
The near completion of the process of decolonization
made it possible for the South Atlantic countries to
establish closer political and economic relations and to
further the endeavour of working towards more effective
ways to build peace and prosperity. The zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic is an attempt in that
direction that is gradually becoming an invaluable
instrument to both African and South American countries.
The initiatives undertaken in the areas of protection of
the marine environment, trade and economic
competitiveness, cooperation against drug trafficking and
prohibition of nuclear weapons point to priority areas where

14

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
the States members of the zone wish to undertake join
action, and where they expect the support of the
international community.
All members of the zone are parties to nuclearweapon-free-zone treaties — the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the
Caribbean (Treaty of Tlatelolco) and the NuclearWeapon-Free Zone Treaty for Africa (Treaty of
Pelindaba) — and are seeking to strengthen the links of
cooperation with the other nuclear-weapon-free zones of
the southern hemisphere and adjacent areas, established
by the South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of
Raratonga) and the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone Treaty (Treaty of Bangkok).
With the aim of assuring protection of the marine
environment, especially the conservation of marine living
resources and the prevention and containment of
environmental accidents, the countries of the zone have
started to exchange relevant information. This exercise
should continue. In this context, the navies of some
member States of the zone have been developing efforts
to improve their capacity to work together.
Brazil has also sought to improve ways and means
of cooperating with other members of the zone in the
combat against the traffic in illicit drugs, a growing
problem on the two sides of the Atlantic, and member
countries have started to coordinate their activities in
multilateral forums.
Another important area for the member countries of
the zone is the promotion of democracy, political
pluralism and national reconciliation. The draft resolution
introduced today makes reference to developments in
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Angola since last year and calls
for increased humanitarian assistance for Liberia and
Angola.
The Brazilian Government, within the limits of its
resources, is committed to continued cooperation with
other South Atlantic countries in all the areas I have
mentioned. For the member countries of the zone, the
approval of this draft resolution by the General Assembly
is an invaluable expression of the international
community's support for peace and security, for
cooperation and for economic and social development in
a democratic environment, as expressed in the Final
Declaration of the fourth meeting of the States members
of the zone.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
The African and South American countries members
of the zone of peace and cooperation aim at erecting
building blocks of cooperation, understanding, stability and
prosperity. The Southern Cone Common Market, the
Southern African Development Community and the
Economic Community of West African States are
organizations that overlap with the zone and reinforce it.
We are confident that, like similar texts in previous years,
draft resolution A/52/L.24/Rev.1, which was introduced by
the representative of South Africa on behalf of the States
members of the zone, will receive general support.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item. The General Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/52/L.24/Rev.1.
I should like to announce that, since the introduction
of draft resolution A/52/L.24/Rev.1, Guinea-Bissau and
Senegal have become sponsors of the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 157 votes to
none, with 1 abstention (resolution 52/14).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Andorra, GuineaBissau, Hungary and Uruguay informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to explain their votes. May I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Richier (France) (interpretation from French):
France, with its partners in the European Union, voted in
favour of the draft resolution. It gives its full support in
particular to the paragraphs relating to Angola, Sierra
Leone and Liberia.
In this context, France wishes, nevertheless, to recall
its traditional reservations as to the concept of zones of
peace in general. I would particularly cite the
geographical limits of such zones, the nature of the
obligations upon States and respect for international law,
particularly the law of the sea.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 32?

15

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
It was so decided.
Agenda item 12
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolutions (A/52/L.15, L.18, L.21, L.22)
The Acting President: I call on the representative of
Côte d'Ivoire to introduce draft resolution A/52/L.15.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d'Ivoire) (interpretation from
French): I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/52/L.15, entitled “Proclamation of the year 2000 as the
International Year for the Culture of Peace”, on behalf of
the following sponsors: Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Brazil, Burundi,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, the Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, the Comoros, Costa Rica, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, the Gambia, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Mali, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, the Niger, Panama, Peru, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Zimbabwe and Côte
d'Ivoire. I must add that a number of other sponsors are to
be included in the list, but for technical reasons their names
do not appear in document A/52/L.15. The additional
sponsors are Bhutan, the Dominican Republic, Georgia,
Guyana, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Myanmar, Nicaragua and
Turkmenistan.
The Assembly will recall that the Economic and Social
Council, on a proposal of Côte d'Ivoire with which some 30
other States associated themselves, adopted at its
substantive session held in July 1997 in Geneva resolution
1997/47 recommending that the General Assembly, at its
fifty-second session, proclaim the year 2000 the
International Year for the Culture of Peace. Now, to follow
up on that recommendation of the Council, the Assembly
has before it this morning draft resolution A/52/L.15.
Among the key ideas that led to the creation of the
United Nations, one must quite rightly give pride of place
to the idea of a culture of peace, as contained in the
preamble to the Charter, reflecting the determination of the
peoples of the world, having emerged from two world
conflicts
“to practice tolerance and live together in peace with
one another as good neighbours”.

16

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
We can thus see the concept of the culture of peace
thus finds its source in the values and aspirations
underpinning the foundation of the universal Organization
that was created — and we can never repeat it often
enough —
“to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold
sorrow to mankind”.
By and large, the idea of the culture of peace rests
essentially on the repudiation of violence. It invokes all
the values, attitudes and behaviours reflecting and
furthering tolerance and solidarity. Its foundations are the
principles of liberty, justice and democracy. The idea of
the culture of peace seeks, lastly, to prevent conflicts at
their source and to resolve problems through dialogue and
negotiation.
The logic of mistrust and confrontation that
characterized the cold war period frustrated the full
expression of the culture of peace. Paradoxically,
however, the end of the cold war, although bringing with
it a multitude of beneficial changes — notably, in
relations among countries — has not after all prevented
the proliferation of explosions of violence, such as we
have witnessed in numerous inter-ethnic conflicts in
recent years.
The reality of this end of the century is all too full
of scenes of armed conflict, civil war, genocide and
wandering masses of refugees and displaced persons
fleeing massacres. All this calls out to conscience and
places the international community face to face with its
responsibility in this arena.
With respect to this situation, we should in all
honesty recognize the proven capability of the United
Nations to manage crisis situations, as shown by its many
successes in many different peacekeeping operations.
Decisive United Nations action in these situations
has contributed to saving many human lives, which gives
us enormous satisfaction, and we hope that everything
possible will be done to enhance the United Nations
capability in the fields of peacekeeping, preventive action
and emergency humanitarian assistance.
Nevertheless, we note that the specific timing of
peacekeeping operations, inasmuch as they are always
rapid responses to emergencies, restricts their long-term
scope. As a result, they must necessarily be

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997

complemented by in-depth activities, especially educational
activities, aimed at inculcating a culture of peace in the
societies in question. Substantive work is therefore required
so that the structures and institutional manifestations of war,
and their deeper roots — namely, the culture of violence
and war — can be transformed into a culture of peace.

We remain convinced that launching an International
Year for the Culture of Peace at the turn of the
millennium can only help stimulate efforts by individuals,
as well as by the international community, aimed at
creating and promoting a culture of peace in people's
minds, beginning with the next century.

The following extract from the preamble to the
Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), reflects precisely
this same concern in affirming that

The proclamation of an International Year for the
Culture of Peace is intended as a force for raising public
awareness, at the dawn of the new millennium, of the
need for a culture of peace in the daily life of societies,
with particular attention to young people.

“since wars began in the minds of men, it is in the
minds of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed”.
The transition from a culture of war to a culture of
peace seems to us, therefore, to be the essential backdrop
to all United Nations activities in dealing with the
numerous challenges emerging on the horizon of the new
millennium.
It is fitting here to pay a resounding tribute to
UNESCO, which, under the dynamic leadership of its
Director-General has set, as a priority goal for its work,
raising awareness to promote the transition from a culture
of war to a culture of peace. But in the final analysis, it is
up to all of us, large and small nations alike, each at its
own level and pace, to work jointly to accomplish this lofty
undertaking that can only foster tolerance, solidarity and
harmony between peoples and between nations.
It is in this spirit that Côte d'Ivoire initiated draft
resolution A/52/L.15, recommending to the General
Assembly the proclamation of the year 2000 as the
International Year for the Culture of Peace. We consider
the choice of the year 2000 to be of fundamental
importance in launching the promotion of the culture of
peace at a global level.
The aim is to harness the symbolism inherent in the
year 2000, as it is an emblem of, inter alia, ideas of
renewal and hope for a more peaceful world. The year 2000
must help us reinvent peace. The beginning of the
millennium should therefore be marked by a mobilization
of national and international public opinion, directed
particularly towards young people, inviting them to make
a difference and encouraging them to break once and for all
with the behaviour patterns and attitudes of the recent and
the more distant past, characterized by crises, wars and
violence.

The programme for and the financing of activities
marking the celebration of the International Year for the
Culture of Peace are in keeping with the guidelines
adopted by the General Assembly. Indeed, UNESCO
intends to take the necessary steps to coordinate a
programme of activities that will be financed entirely by
voluntary contributions.
In taking the initiative of introducing draft resolution
A/52/L.15, Côte d'Ivoire retains the image that the entire
world has of it, as a country of peace, tolerance, solidarity
and shared happiness. The history of our young nation,
fashioned by the enlightened vision of the father of
modern Côte d'Ivoire, the late President HouphouetBoigny, has been a happy succession of victories for
peace that have inevitably given rise to prosperity. Since
1989 Côte d'Ivoire has marked 15 November as a day for
the celebration of peace.
This pact with peace and progress is continuing
harmoniously under President Henri Konan Bédié, who is
furthermore sparing no effort in advancing democracy and
a state of law through the constant practice of dialogue
and consultation. The faithful commitment of
Côte d'Ivoire to the culture of peace was brilliantly
reaffirmed recently by President Henri Konan Bédié in a
speech given on 23 March in Bamako, Mali, on the
occasion of the Week of Peace, when he declared:
“For the Ivoirian, peace is a second religion. It is the
most precious good that President HouphouetBoigny bequeathed to us. In Côte d'Ivoire we think
of peace as something patiently constructed out of
love for others, tolerance, justice and a common
striving for development, all of which are propelled
by constant dialogue and the quest for compromise.
Our philosophy and our political practice, our
actions and our energies, are all centred on the

17

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
continuous and persistent search for peace through
dialogue.”
In 1989 the international dimension of peace was
enshrined in Côte d'Ivoire with UNESCO's creation of the
international Houphouet-Boigny Prize, awarded each year
to
“honour people, institutions or organizations that have
significantly contributed to promoting, seeking,
safeguarding or maintaining peace.”
This prize was awarded for the first time in 1991, to
Presidents Nelson Mandela and Frederik de Klerk. They
were followed in 1992 by The Hague Academy of
International Law. The late Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin,
President Yasser Arafat and Prime Minister Shimon Peres
were honoured in 1993, King Juan Carlos of Spain and
President Jimmy Carter of the United States in 1994, and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in 1995. Most recently, in 1997, it was awarded
to President Alvaro Arzú Irigoyen of Guatemala and
Commander Rolando Morán, head of the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG), both of
whom deserve credit for agreeing to put an end to 36 years
of civil war in Guatemala.
We are delighted to note, as the report of the
Secretary-General in document A/52/292 points out, that the
culture of peace is being implemented by many other
countries throughout the world. I need mention only a few
of the many examples.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, ministerial-level
meetings, seminars and training sessions have been
organized by UNESCO on issues relating to human rights,
democracy, peace and development. The culture of peace
has already been introduced in university curriculums in the
Caribbean. A mayors' prize for peace was awarded for the
first time in the Caribbean and Latin America at the
international congress on cities and education for the culture
of peace, which was held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in
September 1996. The prize was awarded to Mrs. Gloria
Cuertas Montoya, mayor of the city of Apartadó, Colombia.
Activities designed to promote the culture of peace are
being undertaken by countries throughout Asia and the
Pacific with the assistance of UNESCO, furthering
tolerance, dialogue among cultures and cultural diversity.
In Africa, programmes targeting the culture of peace
have been implemented for the demobilized military forces

18

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
in Mozambique, Rwanda and other countries that have
returned to peace after years of war. The teaching of this
subject at schools and universities is also taking place in
Zimbabwe, Namibia and Mozambique.
With regard to Mozambique, a country that has
known the torments of civil war, it is particularly
interesting to note the importance that that country
attaches to the culture of peace, as is evident from the
following extract from the statement of the President of
Mozambique, Mr. Joaquim Alberto Chissano, to the
General Assembly at its fifty-second session on 22
October:
(spoke in English)
“We believe that the promotion and further
consolidation of a culture of peace should be the
next most important challenge to all societies as well
as to each individual citizen.” [Official Records of
the General Assembly, Fifty-second session, Plenary
Meetings, 35th meeting, p. 2]
(spoke in French)
Peace, democracy and development are, today more
than ever, crucial and indispensable elements for human
development within a society committed to progress.
Peace, democracy and development form an interactive
triangle that gains its vitality from the culture of peace.
But peace remains a constant quest, a long-term
endeavour that requires daily effort. We thus prepare for
peace through a long process that takes into account all
generations in society: by training children so that they
can internalize and accept the values of peace; by reeducating adults so that they learn anew to accept racial
differences, respect cultural diversity and live with
tolerance; and by inviting the elderly to reach out in
forgiveness and reconciliation, especially when the
memory of the past is still alive.
We are on the eve of a new millennium.
Globalization and the worldwide spread of all we do are
accelerating thanks to the extraordinary progress of
science and technology and their dissemination.
The world is changing and we must adopt new
behaviour patterns. We must resolutely turn our backs on
the ordeals, horrors and errors of the past. We need to
look to the future with confidence and to see to it that the
twenty-first century is one of non-violence, peace,

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
democracy, progress for all and shared happiness. That is
why we must now move to give the culture of peace a
chance.
I therefore hope that the General Assembly will adopt
draft resolution A/52/L.15, entitled “Proclamation of the
year 2000 as the International Year for the Culture of
Peace”, without a vote.
The Acting President: I call on the representative of
Argentina to introduce draft resolution A/52/L.18.
Ms. Ramírez (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/52/L.18, entitled “Year 2000: International Year of
Thanksgiving”, which is sponsored by Bangladesh, Brazil,
Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras,
Kyrgyzstan, the Marshall Islands, Nicaragua, Paraguay, the
Philippines, Swaziland, Trinidad and Tobago, the United
States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela as well as my
own country, Argentina.
The sponsors of this initiative consider that it makes
a contribution of the most far-reaching importance in order
to give real meaning and depth to the concept of gratitude,
and to lead us to reflect on how to develop and stimulate
all those actions that contribute to understanding and
national reconciliation.
The Republic of Argentina welcomes this initiative
with particular interest as it shares in the concern about the
situation that mankind is experiencing today, particularly
the most disadvantaged and vulnerable. This situation has
prompted our country to work actively in the international
arena in areas afflicted by natural disasters, regional
conflicts or other emergencies.
We live in times of profound global change that
involve the entire world and that give rise to uncertainty
and unease as to the future. In this context, it is a challenge
for us to give new substance to our commitment and
solidarity, leaving behind isolationist and individualist views
of international relations or a memory of the past.
It is necessary, therefore, for there to be consensus as
to the need to build international action in the field of
cooperation and humanitarian assistance, on the basis of a
joint effort by the international community.
In this sense, to proclaim the year 2000 as
International Year of Thanksgiving — beyond the objective

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
of highlighting once again the community of universal
values that link the different peoples of the world — has
a more profound meaning, insofar as the message of
thanksgiving tends to alleviate the suffering and poverty
resulting from natural disasters and warlike conflict
through the search for equity and justice.
Likewise, we believe that this initiative will give
future generations an opportunity to join in projects that
strengthen international cooperation and share in cultural
celebrations generating peace and reconciliation.
More than 50 years after the convening of the San
Francisco Conference, we still have the same trust and
hope in the work of the United Nations. We are
convinced, moreover, that the process of reform the
Organization is now undergoing, under the firm and wellreasoned stimulus of the Secretary-General, will lead to
actions that will contribute to the development and
progress of humanity.
In this context, the declaration of the year 2000 as
International Year of Thanksgiving will provide a unique
opportunity for us to come together again in the spirit
which spurred the Organization's founders. It is this spirit
that should guide our actions in order to realize the high
ideals enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
For all these reasons, we hope that draft resolution
A/52//18 will be adopted.
The Acting Chairman: I now call on the
representative of Japan to introduce draft resolution
A/52/L.22.
Mr. Owada (Japan): It is my great honour to
introduce draft resolution A/52/L.22 entitled “International
Year of Volunteers, 2001”.
The idea of an International Year of Volunteers
originated in a policy forum, held jointly by the United
Nations Volunteer Programme and the United Nations
University in Japan in 1996, where I had the honour of
being a keynote speaker. This initiative was subsequently
endorsed by the 40 volunteer organizations attending the
Conference on International Volunteerism held in
Washington, D.C., in May 1996. At the substantive
session of the Economic and Social Council held in July
this year, a draft resolution recommending that the
General Assembly proclaim the year 2001 the
International Year of Volunteers was submitted by 60

19

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
sponsoring countries, and was adopted as resolution
1997/44 at that session.
Volunteer service — the contributions that individuals
make as non-profit and non-career activities to enhance the
well-being of the less fortunate — has been a part of every
civilization and society. Today, volunteers are active in a
wide range of areas, including welfare, environment,
education, human rights, and disaster relief, where efforts
on a volunteer basis complement governmental activities in
these fields at the grass-roots level. The need for volunteer
efforts is greater now than ever before and likely to grow
greater still. Yet, while the contribution of volunteers is
vast, much of their work often goes unrecognized because
it does not involve the payment of market wages and
because it is often spontaneous, informal and unstructured.
In the field of activities of the United Nations, the
United Nations Volunteers programme has, since its
inauguration in 1971, been sending volunteers to serve in
various areas such as development cooperation,
humanitarian assistance and election support, responding to
the needs of the international community and often
complementing the work of United Nations agencies
operating in these fields, while also extending support to
volunteer activities in the international community. The
programme plays a significant and valuable role that
complements the activities of the United Nations as an
integral part of them, and thereby increases the
effectiveness of the activities of the United Nations as a
whole. As it is the sole organization in the United Nations
system with a mandate to act as promoter of volunteerism,
international support to the United Nations Volunteer
Programme should be further intensified.
The Government of Japan believes that the
proclamation of an International Year of Volunteers would
extend recognition and give increased legitimacy to
volunteering, and as a result would expand significantly the
number of people willing to offer their services. We believe
that the year 2001, the opening year of the new century,
will be a most auspicious moment to assess past
achievements and give volunteer activities fresh
encouragement. I wish to express the hope that all Member
States will reaffirm and support the efforts of volunteers to
contribute to the health and well-being of people
everywhere, and endorse the draft resolution proclaiming
the International Year of Volunteers at this fifty-second
session of the General Assembly.
The specific objectives of the Year would be to
encourage increased recognition, facilitation, networking

20

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
and promotion of volunteer service. As the forms and
status of volunteering vary by country and by region, the
International Year of Volunteers would be engendered
from the locality and grassroots upward, and would not
take the form of a world summit on volunteerism. Under
our draft resolution, the United Nations Volunteer
Programme will be designated as the focal point for the
promotion of the Year in the United Nations system; the
Programme can offer useful service as a facilitator in
preparing for and implementing the Year, in close
collaboration with Governments, the United Nations
system and civil society.
The Assembly has before it two draft resolutions
proclaiming the year 2001 the International Year of
Volunteers. As a matter of procedure, the Secretariat
distributed draft resolution A/52/L.21, which has the same
content as the resolution adopted at the substantive
session of the Economic and Social Council last July.
However, there are 123 sponsors of draft resolution
A/52/L.22; in addition to those countries mentioned in it,
they now include Barbados, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Liberia,
Nepal, Norway, Mali, Paraguay, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Uruguay.
All of them have become sponsors after the submission
of the draft resolution, and would like to propose that
action be taken only on A/52/L.22, the shorter version of
the draft resolution. Draft resolution A/52/L.22 represents
the result of efforts by the sponsors to avoid the repetition
of adopting in the General Assembly a draft resolution
with precisely the same content as the resolution adopted
by the Economic and Social Council. Accordingly,
A/52/L.21 can be seen as a reference to A/52/L.22. I hope
that this proposal of the sponsors, guided by the spirit of
desiring to rationalize the work of the General Assembly,
will be accepted in that spirit by all Member States.
The Acting President: In view of the statement by
the representative of Japan, may I take it that the General
Assembly decides not to take action on draft resolution
A/52/L.21?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolutions A/52/L.15, L.18 and L.22,
one by one.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
We turn first to draft resolution A/52/L.15, entitled
“Proclamation of the year 2000 as the International Year
for the Culture of Peace”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/52/L.15?
Draft resolution A/52/L.15 was adopted (resolution
52/15).
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution A/52/L.18, entitled “Year 2000: International
Year of Thanksgiving”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/52/L.18?
Draft resolution A/52/L.18 was adopted (resolution
52/16).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution A/52/L.22, entitled “International Year of
Volunteers, 2001”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/52/L.22?
Draft resolution A/52/L.22 was adopted (resolution
52/17).

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
The Acting President: Before we begin to take
action on the recommendations contained in the reports of
the Fifth Committee, I should like to advise
representatives that we shall proceed to take decisions in
the same manner as was done in the Fifth Committee.
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/670)
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee
recommends in paragraph 8 of its report that the General
Assembly should appoint the following persons as
members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 1998: Mr. Ioan Barac, Mr. Hasan
Jawarneh, Mr. Mahamane Amadou Maiga, Mr. E. Besley
Maycock and Mr. C. S. M. Mselle.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to appoint
those persons?
It was so decided.
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/671)

The Acting President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 12.
Agenda item 17
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other appointments
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: In view of recent
developments pertaining to sub-item (e), “Appointment of
members of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal”,
the consideration of that sub-item is postponed to a later
date to be announced.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of
procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly decides
not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee which are
before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.

The Acting President: In paragraph 7 of the report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly should appoint the following persons as
members of the Committee on Contributions for a threeyear term of office beginning on 1 January 1998:
Mr. Uldis Blukis, Mr. David Etuket, Mr. Ihor V.
Humenny, Mr. David Leis, Mr. Prakash Shah and
Mr. Kazuo Watanabe.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint the persons recommended above?
It was so decided.
(c) Appointment of a member of the Board of
Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/672)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of the report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General

21

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Assembly should appoint the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland as a member of the United Nations Board
of Auditors for a three-year term of office beginning on 1
July 1998.

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-items (a) to (d) and sub-item (f) of
agenda item 17?
It was so decided.

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to appoint this
person?

(g) Appointment of members and alternate members
of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee

It was so decided.
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/676)
(d) Confirmation of the appointment of members of
the Investments Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/673)
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee, in
paragraph 4 of its report, recommends that the General
Assembly should confirm the appointment by the SecretaryGeneral of the following persons as members of the
Investments Committee for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 1998: Mr. Ahmad Abdullatif,
Mr. Fernando Chico Pardo and Mr. J. Y. Pillay.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
confirm the appointment of those persons?
It was so decided.
(f)

Appointment of members of the International Civil
Service Commission
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/675)

The Acting President: In paragraph 5 of the report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly should appoint the following persons as
members of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee
for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January
1998: Mr. Tadanori Inomata, Mr. Gerhard Kuntzle,
Mr. Vladimir V. Kuznetsov, Mr. Philip Richard Okanda
Owade, Mr. Carlos Dante Riva and Ms. Susan Shearouse.
May I take it that the General Assembly appoints
these persons?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee also
decided to postpone to a later meeting the remaining two
appointments, from the group of African States and the
group of Asian States, respectively.
We have concluded this stage of our consideration
of sub-item (g) of agenda item 17.

The Acting President: In paragraph 5 of the report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly should appoint the following persons as members
of the International Civil Service Commission for a fouryear term of office beginning on 1 January 1998:
Mr. Mario Bettati, Mr. Joao Augusto de Medicis,
Ms. Lucretia Myers, Mr. Alexis Stephanou and Mr. Ku
Tashiro.

Agenda item 34

In the same paragraph, the Fifth Committee also
recommends that the General Assembly should appoint
Mr. Alexei Fedotov to fill the remainder of a four-year
term of office expiring on 31 December 2000.

The Acting President: I call on the representative
of the Islamic Republic of Iran to introduce draft
resolution A/52/L.20.

May I take it that the General Assembly appoints these
persons?
It was so decided.

22

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization
Report of the Secretary-General (A/52/313)
Draft resolution (A/52/L.20)

Mr. Asadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me first
express our sincere gratitude and appreciation to the
Secretary-General for the report contained in document
A/52/313, which was prepared in response to paragraph
7 of resolution 51/21 of 27 November 1996. It is a very

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
good, interesting and informative report, which renders it
unnecessary for me to go into details.
The Islamic Republic of Iran attaches great importance
to regional cooperation. We believe that the current trend
towards strengthening regional cooperation will certainly
contribute not only to the well-being of the people of
regional countries but also to the growth of the world
economy. From our perspective, the United Nations in its
entirety, and its specialized agencies and funds and
programmes in particular, can indeed play a very active and
constructive role in this regard. The United Nations system
can, inter alia, contribute to identifying areas of, and
exploring potential for, subregional, regional and
interregional cooperation. The important and valuable
activities currently being undertaken in this regard by the
regional commissions deserve to be commended. In this
particular connection, the Islamic Republic of Iran
welcomes and supports the efforts of the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) in
promoting cooperation between major subregional
organizations in Asia and the Pacific, including the
Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO). The third
consultative meeting of the heads of ECO, the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), which
was coordinated by ESCAP and held at Tehran, Iran,
constitutes a prominent example of the effective
contribution of regional commissions to the promotion of
regional-development cooperation.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, as one of the founders
of the Economic Cooperation Organization, which
comprises 10 countries from West, South and Central Asia
and the Caucasus, spares no efforts for the realization of
ECO objectives. As host to the ECO headquarters in
Tehran, Iran continues to contribute to the strengthening
and expanding of ECO's role and activities in various fields,
in accordance with the development policies and priorities
of its member States. We are happy to note that ECO has
been able to register impressive achievements in such
varied fields as communications, land, sea and air
transportation, networks of transnational oil and gas
pipelines, energy, trade, exchange of information and
human-resource development.
Development of infrastructure in the ECO region is
considered a vital area for enhanced regional economic
cooperation. Transport and communications, along with
energy and water supplies, are of particular importance to
ECO members. With the inauguration in 1996 of the
Mashhad-Sarakhs-Tajan railroad linking Iran and

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
Turkmenistan the long-cherished dream of access to free
waters by the landlocked countries of Central Asia finally
came true. This new facility opened a valuable window of
opportunity to the Central Asian landlocked countries to
embark on the expansion of their trade ties with the
outside world through the Iranian nationwide railroad
system, providing those countries with the shortest and
most economical access to the major seaports of the
Persian Gulf in the southern direction and to Europe in
the western direction.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
subregional and regional organizations, as recognized and
encouraged by the Charter, is bound to have a positive
impact not only on the daily lives of the peoples in the
regions but also on the promotion of peace and stability
at all levels. The Islamic Republic of Iran is fully
cognizant of the multidimensional, positive impact of
regional economic cooperation and also of the
constructive role of the United Nations system in this
process. We support the current cooperation between the
United Nations and ECO and encourage the relevant
United Nations bodies, agencies, funds and programmes
to strengthen further their consultation, cooperation and
coordination with ECO in various fields and areas. Higher
and better utilization of the enormous potentialities in the
ECO region in different fields and areas will certainly be
beneficial, both within and outside the region.
I should now like to introduce, on behalf of the
sponsors, draft resolution A/52/L.20 and to point out a
number of changes, which I shall present orally at the end
of my introduction.
Representing the delegation of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, the current coordinator of the ECO contact group
in New York, I have the honour to introduce to the
General Assembly, on behalf of its sponsors the draft
resolution under the agenda item entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Economic
Cooperation Organization”. The report of the United
Nations Secretary-General on the agenda item under
consideration shows that cooperation between the United
Nations and ECO has evolved in a satisfactory manner
and presents a very promising outlook. Optimal utilization
of the existing potentialities in the ECO region in various
fields and areas will indeed be much facilitated and
rendered more efficient and effective through the
assistance of the United Nations system, in particular its
specialized agencies involved in the field of operational
activities.

23

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
Draft resolution A/52/L.20 is, as a matter of fact, an
updated version of a similar resolution adopted by the
General Assembly last year, with, of course, a few
additions. It reflects the state of cooperation between the
two organizations. While laying out the background of that
cooperation and taking stock of the achievements so far, the
draft resolution is also forward-looking in its approach to
the future.
Addressing the future of a positively evolving
relationship between the United Nations and ECO, the draft
resolution spells out the areas of general cooperation with
the United Nations system and also puts forward a number
of areas of priority for ECO and its member States. I shall
underline just a few of the salient points in this regard.
The draft resolution invites the Secretary-General of
the United Nations to continue his efforts, in consultation
with his ECO counterpart, to promote and expand
cooperation and coordination between the two
organizations. It urges the United Nations specialized
agencies and other organizations and programmes of the
system to continue and increase consultations and
cooperation with ECO. It invites relevant international
financial institutions to give appropriate consideration to
ECO's projects and programmes, including those in the
ECO priority areas of transport and communications, and it
invites ESCAP to play a more active role in promoting
cooperation with ECO.
I should now, on behalf of the sponsors, like to
indicate some changes to the text, which I shall present
orally.
In the second line of the fourth preambular paragraph,
which begins “Bearing in mind,” the year “1997” should be
corrected to “1977”, and the year “1977” farther along in
that line should be changed to “1996”.
In paragraph 6, the words “Calls upon” at the
beginning of the paragraph should be replaced with the
word “Invites”. In the second line of the same paragraph,
the first word, “favourable,” should be replaced with the
word “appropriate”.
Lastly, in paragraph 8, line 5, the words “inter alia”
should be inserted after the words “technical assistance”.
To conclude, let me just add on behalf of the sponsors
of draft resolution A/52/L.20, as orally amended, that this
draft resolution represents a humble effort on the part of a
dynamic regional organization in a sensitive area of the

24

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
world. It reflects the dedication of ECO to the further
promotion of regional cooperation and the attainment of
higher levels of economic well-being and development for
its member States and the region at large.
Having said that, on behalf of the sponsors, I invite
the General Assembly to adopt by consensus the draft
resolution contained in document A/52/L.20, as orally
amended, as the Assembly did in the case of a similar
draft resolution last year.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 48/2 of 13 October 1993, I now call
on the Secretary-General of the Economic Cooperation
Organization, Mr. Onder Ozar.
Mr. Ozar (Economic Cooperation Organization): As
the Secretary-General of the Economic Cooperation
Organization (ECO), it is my privilege and honour to
address this body on an agenda item which is of vital
importance for the member States of our organization.
The Economic Cooperation Organization is a
regional grouping devoted to the socio-economic wellbeing of its 10 member States, which are located in a
region that encompasses more than 7 million square
kilometres and is inhabited by nearly 320 million people.
In this richly endowed region, ECO is playing a pivotal
role to promote economic cooperation among member
countries and provide the framework for an infrastructural
network connecting the newly independent Republics of
Central Asia and Azerbaijan to the rest of the world
through the road, maritime and air links of the
neighbouring countries: Iran, Pakistan and Turkey.
I would like to inform representatives that soon after
its expansion in November 1992 from three to 10 member
States, ECO embarked upon a comprehensive
restructuring and reorganization. Two plans of action
were adopted in 1993, namely the Quetta Plan of Action
and the Istanbul Declaration, both stipulating concrete
targets to be achieved in the next 10 years, as well as a
project-oriented Almaty Outline Plan for the Development
of Transport Sector in the ECO Region. Lately, at the
Fourth ECO Summit Meeting in Ashgabat in May 1996,
an overall strategy for the ECO region and several
documents on the reorganization and restructuring of ECO
were adopted. Moreover, steps have been taken to
establish regional institutions. Currently, ECO is in the
process of implementing those decisions.

General Assembly
Fifty-second session

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997

So as to pursue our objectives in a coordinated manner
and in harmony with the global trends, we are working
closely with the United Nations and its specialized agencies
towards the attainment of our common objectives in the
ECO region. ECO acquired observer status at the United
Nations on 13 October 1993 through resolution 48/2.
Cooperation between the United Nations and ECO has been
further strengthened through the adoption of resolutions
50/1 and 51/21, adopted respectively on 12 October 1995
and 27 November 1996. These resolutions are helping to
facilitate and strengthen ECO's relations with the major
agencies of the United Nations system. We have established
cooperative relationships with several United Nations
agencies and funds and programmes that are now carrying
out joint activities with ECO. They include the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO), the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO), the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the United Nations International Drug
Control Programme (UNDCP) and the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA). ECO has jointly held three
important conferences with UNFPA and four workshops
with UNICEF. Our cooperation with the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) has
also grown considerably and is expanding. Currently,
several projects are being carried out jointly. UNDCP has
also worked out a project proposal to assist in the
implementation of ECO's plan on drug control. Similarly,
UNDP is preparing a study on the economies and resource
complementarities of ECO member States, a draft of which
has already been circulated among member States. The
holding of a workshop, with the participation of UNDP, to
discuss the outcome of this study is under consideration.
Also, another study on enhancing the effectiveness of the
new wing of the ECO secretariat comprising research and
project units has been carried out by a UNDP senior
consultant. We are grateful to have received the working
draft of this study, which has been circulated among
member States for consideration.

In my view, we have now reached a stage where we
need to evolve a joint strategy for closer cooperation and
coordination between ECO and the United Nations
agencies to pursue the optimum utilization of
opportunities offered by the vast human and resource
potential of the ECO region. The draft resolution
submitted under this agenda item reflects this need and
also provides a number of proposals and guidelines for
future courses of action. I seek the cooperation of all
members in supporting the draft resolution that is before
the General Assembly, which, among other things, calls
upon the relevant international financial institutions to
give favourable consideration to helping to implement
regional infrastructural plans and projects, including ECO
programmes spelt out in the important Declaration
adopted at the Extraordinary Summit Meeting held in
Ashgabat in May 1997. That Declaration, inter alia,
provides for the establishment of a comprehensive
transport and communications infrastructure and a
network of transnational oil and gas pipelines in the ECO
region. In fact, this programme aims at providing the
landlocked countries in the region with greater mobility
to promote interregional trade and to establish mutually
beneficial economic and commercial interaction with
other regions for greater cooperation between the two
organizations in the years ahead.

In view of the growing trend towards interregional
cooperation, ECO is also part of an annual consultative
process with Asia's major subregional organizations, which
is coordinated by ESCAP. The third consultative meeting
of the heads of these organizations was held in Tehran last
May. Details of these joint efforts of ECO and United
Nations agencies are reflected in good measure in the report
of the Secretary-General of 29 August 1997, which is
contained in document A/52/313 and has been submitted
under the present agenda item.

The Acting President: At the request of the
sponsors, action on draft resolution A/52/L.20 is
postponed until tomorrow morning.

Before I conclude my statement, I wish to thank
Mr. Kofi Annan, the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, for extending his full cooperation to our
organization in promoting our shared aims and economic
development objectives in the region. Let me also express
our earnest hope that the cooperation between the United
Nations and the Economic Cooperation Organization will
further expand and strengthen in various fields and areas,
inter alia, through effective liaison between the two
organizations.
I wish the General Assembly every success in its
deliberations.

Programme of work
The President in the Chair.
The President: I should like to make an
announcement concerning agenda item 20, entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and

25

General Assembly
Fifty-second session
disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including
special economic assistance”, which is scheduled to be

50th plenary meeting
20 November 1997
taken up next week, on Monday, 24 November, in the
morning.
The Assembly will consider agenda item 20 together
with its sub-items, with the exception of sub-item (c) on
“Emergency international assistance for peace, normalcy
and reconstruction of war-stricken Afghanistan”. Sub-item
(c) will be considered together with agenda item 43 at a
later date.
In view of the large number of draft resolutions
expected under this item and of the possible need to hold
consultations on them with a view to reaching consensus,
I would urge members to submit those draft resolutions
as soon as possible, and in any event not later than
Monday, 1 December. In this regard, I should like to
inform members that the next meeting of the informal
consultations on this item will take place next week, on
Wednesday, 26 November, in the morning, in Conference
Room 8.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

26
