S/PV.8054

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8054th meeting

Monday, 25 September 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-29825 (E)
*1729825*

S/PV.8054

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

50 years, after a protracted legal battle. The building
is located in a section of the neighbourhood in which
several settlement plans were among those promoted
in July. Eviction proceedings are under way for some
180 Palestinian families in East Jerusalem, over 60 of
whom reside in Sheikh Jarrah.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, who is joining this meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

25/09/2017

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: Today I devote my regular briefing
to the Security Council to reporting, on behalf of the
Secretary-General, on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) during the period from 20 June to
20 September. In this third briefing, I will once again
focus on developments on the ground in accordance with
the provisions of the resolution, including on regional
and international efforts to advance the peace process.

Meanwhile, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the destruction
of Palestinian-owned property across the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, continued, albeit at a
significantly lower rate. Overall since the beginning of
2017, 344 structures have been demolished, a third of
them in East Jerusalem, displacing some 500 people.
In Area C of the occupied West Bank in August, three
educational facilities, serving 175 children, were
demolished or confiscated, citing the lack of building
permits, which are virtually impossible for Palestinians
to obtain.
On 25 July, in the city of Hebron, 15 Israeli settler
families illegally occupied the Abu Rajab/Machpelah
House, despite ongoing legal proceedings over its
ownership. On 27 August, the Israeli Government
notified the High Court of Justice that it would evict
the settlers within one week. However, that process has
been put on hold by a temporary injunction issued by
the Court.

During the reporting period, Israel did not cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, or fully respect all
of its legal obligations in this regard, as called for by
the resolution. Since 20 June, Israel’s illegal settlement
activities have continued at a high rate — a consistent
pattern over the course of this year. Activity during
this period was concentrated primarily in occupied
East Jerusalem, where plans were advanced for over
2,300 housing units in July, 30 per cent more than for
the whole of 2016. That includes plans for some 1,600
units expanding a ring of settlements north of East
Jerusalem, as well as in the Palestinian neighbourhood
of Sheikh Jarrah, adjacent to the Old City. While no
plans were advanced in Area C during the reporting
period, in early September construction resumed
on the new settlement of Amihai, in the heart of the
West Bank.

In other related developments, on 26 July an
amendment to the Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital of
Israel passed a first reading in the Knesset. If approved,
the law would further cement Israeli control over East
Jerusalem. On 17 August, the High Court of Justice
issued a temporary injunction formally postponing
the application of the so-called regularization law. On
31 August, a military order was issued establishing a
civil services administration that upgrades the status
of settlements in the H2 area of Hebron, further
consolidating Israeli presence there and reinforcing
the existing separation and division in this highly
volatile area, where some 500 Israelis live among some
40,000 Palestinians. The United Nations considers all
settlement activities to be illegal under international
law and an impediment to peace. Resolution 2334
(2016) states that the international community will not
recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including
with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed to by
the parties themselves through negotiations.

The reporting period witnessed the eviction of a
Palestinian family in Sheikh Jarrah, residents for over

I will now turn to the issue of violence, which
persists as one of the main obstacles to resolving the

2/8

17-29825

25/09/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8054

conflict. Resolution 2334 (2016) calls on all sides
to prevent such acts and to strengthen efforts to
combat terrorism, including through existing security
coordination. Although the reporting period was
characterized by relatively low levels of fatalities, a
number of incidents occurred, particularly related to
the unrest following the fatal 14 July attack against two
Israeli policemen in Jerusalem’s Old City.

were subsequently released, these arrests raise strong
concerns that the law is being used to curtail freedom
of expression. In Gaza, a social media activist was
arrested by Hamas on 3 July and detained for almost
two weeks on charges of incitement against the de facto
authorities, while a journalist was detained for more
than two months on unclear allegations of collaboration
with the authorities in Ramallah.

During the reporting period, 19 Palestinians, five
of whom were in Area A of the West Bank, were killed
in attacks, clashes and Israeli military operations.
Eight Israelis were killed in clashes and attacks,
including the three Israeli-Arab perpetrators of the
14 July attack, who were killed by the security forces.
Of the 19 Palestinian fatalities, five were killed during
protests and subsequent clashes related to the unrest in
Jerusalem. On 21 July, a Palestinian brutally murdered
three members of an Israeli family in a terrorist attack
in the West Bank settlement of Halamish.

Resolution 2334 (2016) called upon both parties
to refrain from acts of provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric, and to condemn all acts of
terrorism. At the height of the July crisis around the
holy sites of Jerusalem, officials and representatives
on all sides employed provocative rhetoric. In the
midst of what were largely peaceful protests, Hamas
and senior Palestinian Authority officials called for
an escalation and a day of rage across the occupied
Palestinian territory. Hamas and others continued to
openly glorify terror attacks, describing the murder of
three Israelis at their home in Halamish as “heroic”.
Meanwhile, President Abbas explicitly condemned the
14 July attack and, in an attempt to calm tensions at
the holy sites, some Palestinian leaders and religious
authorities on both sides called on protestors to avoid
violence and provocation.

In a reaction to the events at the Holy Esplanade, on
21 July Palestinian President Abbas declared a freeze of
all contacts with Israel at all levels, including security
coordination. After three months of quiet, on 26 June,
23 and 24 July and 8 August Palestinian militants fired
rockets towards Israel, with no injuries reported. In
response, the Israel Defense Forces conducted five
airstrikes in Gaza, resulting in three Palestinians being
injured. On 17 August, one Palestinian was killed by
a suicide bomber, who was also killed, close to the
Egyptian border in Gaza. This appears to have been the
first suicide bombing affecting Hamas forces in Gaza.
During the reporting period, settler-related
violence also continued. Some 26 incidents were
documented, the majority involving the vandalization
of Palestinian agricultural property around Nablus, and
assaults against Palestinians in and around Hebron.
Meanwhile, at least 26 Palestinian attacks also took
place against Israeli settlers, resulting in casualties or
property damage. Punitive demolitions also continued
during the reporting period, with Israeli authorities
demolishing five homes belonging to families of
Palestinian perpetrators of attacks.
The reporting period also witnessed a shrinking
space for civil society and freedom of expression. On
24 June, the Palestinian President issued, by decree, the
Cybercrime Law. Since then, at least six journalists,
one human rights activist in Hebron and a number
of others have reportedly been arrested. While most

With regard to settlements, Israeli officials
continued to use provocative rhetoric in support of
expansion. On 3 August, the Israeli Prime Minister
delivered an inauguration speech at the launch of the
construction of 1,000 new housing units in the Beitar
Illit settlement, in which he praised the achievements of
his Government in promoting settlement construction.
On 28 August, he said that
“there will be no more uprooting of settlements in
the land of Israel ... . We will deepen our roots,
build, strengthen and settle”.
Other senior Israeli politicians also made repeated calls
for annexation of the West Bank, with one Member of
the Knesset expressing his desire to “destroy” hopes
for Palestinian statehood, and stating that “there is
room to define and realize the national aspirations of
one people only — the Jewish people”.
Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated the call of the
Middle East Quartet on both parties to take steps
to reverse negative trends on the ground that are
imperiling the two-State solution. On 10 July, an
interim power-purchasing agreement was signed
between the Palestinian and the Israeli electricity

17-298253/8

S/PV.8054

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

companies, energizing the first Palestinian-owned
and operated sub-station in Jenin and allowing for an
increase in electricity supply in the northern West Bank.
On 13 July, the United States facilitated an agreement
between the Palestinian Authority and Israel, allowing
for an increase in water supply for Palestinians in the
West Bank and Gaza as part of the 2013 Red Sea-Dead
Sea Water Conveyance project.
In Gaza, the situation remains extremely fragile.
The chronic energy deficit has been substantially
worsened by the decision of the Palestinian Authority
to reduce electricity supply to the Strip. While
Egyptian fuel has enabled the Gaza power plant to
resume operations, electricity supply is still down to
about four hours per day. Basic services in some 190
health, water and sanitation facilities continue to rely
on back-up generators powered by United Nationsprovided fuel. As part of the Gaza emergency appeal
issued in July, an additional $4 million from the United
Nations Central Emergency Response Fund has been
released to support critical services. The appeal is now
51 per cent funded.
To end the standoff, the Palestinian Authority has
remained firm in its demands for Hamas to dissolve the
administrative committee it established in March and
allow the Government of National Consensus to take up
its responsibilities in Gaza. On 17 September, Hamas
officially accepted these conditions. It now remains to
be seen whether the agreement will be implemented
and electricity supply to Gaza restored.
I have just returned from a trip to the Gaza Strip,
and I am happy to brief the Security Council in
closed session on developments related to Palestinian
reconciliation and the Government returning to Gaza.
During the reporting period, there were no
developments related to Member States’ distinguishing,
in their relevant dealings, between the territory of
the State of Israel and the territories it occupied in
1967. Meanwhile, the international community has
continued its efforts to advance the goal of peace. The
envoys of the Middle East Quartet continue to meet to
discuss current efforts to advance peace, as well as the
deteriorating situation in Gaza. In August, a United
States delegation travelled to the region and met with
regional interlocutors, with a focus on reviving the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process. All parties agreed to
continue working towards a sustainable peace and to
promote security and stability across the region.
4/8

25/09/2017

Shortly thereafter, on 27 August the SecretaryGeneral arrived in the region for his first official visit to
Israel and Palestine. He strongly reaffirmed the United
Nations position that there is no alternative to the twoState solution and suggested a three-track approach
to end the occupation and advance the prospects for
peace: first, a serious political process with a clear
end goal of two States living side by side in peace and
mutual recognition; secondly, a simultaneous effort to
improve the socioeconomic conditions of Palestinians;
and thirdly, active engagement with regional partners.
He conveyed his personal commitment to helping the
parties return to meaningful negotiations, based on
relevant United Nations resolutions, international law
and prior agreements.
In September, Egypt hosted delegations from
Hamas and Fatah in an effort to advance Palestinian
unity, which led to the breakthrough decision by the
de facto Gaza leadership to dissolve the administrative
committee and invite the Government to return to
the Strip.
On 18 September, Norway convened the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians in New York
with Palestinian Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Ziad
Abu Amr; Palestinian Authority Minister of Finance
and Planning, Mr. Shukri Bishara; and Israeli Minister
of Regional Cooperation, Mr. Tzachi Hanegbi, in
attendance. Those at the meeting agreed that additional
concerted action was needed to make progress on
fiscal sustuinability, economic development and
Gaza’s reconstruction and recovery. It was also noted
that socioeconomic conditions cannot be adequately
addressed without progress in the peace process.
In conclusion, I would like to share some broad
observations on the reporting period.
Continuing settlement expansion, most notably
during this period in occupied East Jerusalem, is
making the two-State solution increasingly unattainable
and undermining Palestinian belief in international
peace efforts. In addition to illegal settlements, the
practice of demolishing Palestinian structures in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and displacing
Palestinians undermines the prospects of peace.
Continued violence against civilians and incitement
perpetuate mutual fear and suspicion, while impeding
any effort to bridge the gaps between the two sides.
I once again urge both parties to demonstrate their
17-29825

25/09/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

commitment to rejecting violence, inflammatory
rhetoric and provocative actions.
The Jenin agreement was an important first step
towards a comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian powerpurchasing agreement that would lead to greater
Palestinian energy autonomy. I encourage the parties
to fully implement the Red Sea-Dead Sea agreement to
enable the delivery of much-needed water to the West
Bank and Gaza.
While all initiatives to improve the Palestinian
economy are welcome, much more needs to be done
as part of a political process aimed at establishing a
Palestinian State. Economic development, as critical as
it is, is no substitute for sovereignty and statehood. As
the Secretary-General has called for, efforts aimed at
achieving both sovereignty and statehood must proceed
in parallel.
Intra-Palestinian reconciliation remains critical to
preventing the continuing militant buildup and restoring
hope for the future. In that regard, I welcome the recent
statement by Hamas announcing the dissolution of
the administrative committee in Gaza and agreement
to allow the Government of National Consensus to
assume its responsibilities in Gaza.
I commend the Egyptian authorities for their
tireless efforts in creating such positive momentum.
All parties must seize the opportunity to restore unity
and open a new page for the Palestinian people. That
should facilitate the removal of Israeli closures on
Gaza, in line with resolution 1860 (2009). The United
Nations stands ready to assist all efforts in that respect.
It is critical that the grave humanitarian situation in
Gaza, most notably the crippling electricity crisis, be
addressed as a priority.
In closing, I would like to emphasize that collective
and determined action on the part of the parties, the
region and the international community is needed in
order to initiate a serious political process, drawing
upon all relevant United Nations resolutions, that will
realize a two-State solution and end the occupation and
resolve all final status issues. As the Secretary-General
said on his recent visit,
“the international community cannot simply turn
away and allow the situation to deteriorate. We
have a role and a responsibility to support the
parties in resolving this conflict”.

S/PV. 8054

With that responsibility comes an obligation to do
what is necessary in order to establish a peaceful,
prosperous and secure future for Palestinians, Israelis
and the entire region.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
for his informative briefing, and to reiterate once again
the total support of Uruguay for his work.
Uruguay appreciates the submission of the third
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
We reiterate our interest in ensuring that such reports,
like all other reports submitted to the Security Council
on the topics that form part of our work’s agenda, be
circulated in writing before meetings in a manner that
enables members to analyse and comment more in
detail on their content.
We are concerned at the lack of progress in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which has humanitarian,
political and security implications in both countries
and the region as a whole. In the nine months since the
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), little progress has
been made in its implementation, with announcements
by Israel of expanding construction of settlements in
the occupied territories. We reiterate that settlements
are illegal under international law and constitute a
serious obstacle to peace and the two-State solution.
August will also be remembered, unfortunately, by
100 children and their families as a time when three
schools in the West Bank were demolished or damaged
by the Israeli authorities on the orders of the Coordinator
of Government Activities in the Territories. The Jubbet
al-Dhib school, which lies east of Bethlehem and which
was paid for by the European Union and completed
three weeks earlier, was demolished on the same day
that school began. A kindergarten in the Bedouin
community of Jabal Al-Baba was also demolished and
a primary school room in Abu al-Nawar lost its only
source of electricity, solar panels. Such actions clearly
do not contribute to de-escalation. Additional measures
are necessary.
Until a few days ago, the parties had taken no
steps to reverse the trends threatening the two-State

17-298255/8

S/PV.8054

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

solution, according to the latest report of the Middle
East Quartet. In that context, we appreciate the
announcement made last week by Hamas, offering the
Palestinian Authority the resumption of control of the
Gaza Strip after a decade. The tragic and worrisome
situation of the 2 million inhabitants of Gaza, who are
permanently on the verge of a serious humanitarian
crisis, constitutes a serious threat to peace and carries
the risk of provoking another armed conflict.
The reunification of Palestine under a single,
legitimate and democratic Government is essential
in order to address the aspirations of the Palestinian
people. Such reunification could substantially improve
living conditions in that area. If that agreement is to
be successfully implemented, it will be essential that
measures be accompanied by agreements on security,
the disarmament of Hamas and the renunciation of both
violence and the destruction of Israel as a declared
objective.
On every occasion that the Security Council has
met to consider the Palestinian question, we have
insisted on the need to abandon the rhetoric of hatred
and incitement. Peace will come through negotiations
we reiterate that getting on the path of negotiation will
come through gestures. In addition to moving away
from hatred, we must humanize relations between the
two contenders. Additionally, dead enemies on both
sides must be returned. For example, the families of
Hadar Goldin and Oron Shaul have been waiting since
2014 to be able to give them a dignified burial.
As Secretary-General Guterres expressed during
his recent visit to the region, Uruguay understands
that there are no alternatives to the two-State
solution. Uruguay maintains its strong support for the
establishment of two independent States and the right
of Israel and Palestine to live in peace within secure
and recognized borders and within a renewed field of
cooperation that is free from any threats or acts that
breach peace, including acts of terrorism. Agreements
must be reached with respect to Jerusalem and other
issues, such as equitable access to drinking water and
respect for sacred sites.
It is time to reinvigorate a political outlook that will
bring the parties back to the negotiating table, which
is a process that must be supported by economic and
social measures that will improve the living conditions
and development of the Palestinian people. To that
end, it will be necessary for the Israeli and Palestinian
6/8

25/09/2017

authorities to make every effort to avoid unnecessary
provocations that would increase tensions and violence,
which hamper all the efforts of the international
community to bring about the resumption of bilateral
negotiations.
In conclusion, as we have been doing since 1947, we
wish to reiterate Uruguay’s unwavering commitment to
peace in the Middle East. In order to achieve this longsought-after goal, the parties need to resume direct
bilateral negotiations with a view to achieving a twoState solution, which is the only option that will allow
for the peaceful coexistence of Israel and Palestine, an
end to the long and illegal occupation, and the wellbeing and security of their peoples.
We are just two months from the seventieth
anniversary of the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), which established the partition of
Palestine and the creation of two States, one Arab and
one Jewish. This solution was decisively supported
by Uruguay, out of the conviction that it would make
it possible for Israel and Palestine to live together in
peace and with secure borders. Yet despite constant
efforts, this process unfortunately remains unfinished.
The international community continues to hope that the
leaders of Israel and Palestine will take every measure
to move this process forward towards a genuine and
lasting peace.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Ethiopian
presidency for convening today’s briefing.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia, as a pacifist
country, believes that the only way to guarantee a
just and lasting peace in the conflict between Israel
and Palestine is through sincere dialogue and clear
expressions of political will on both sides with a
view to achieving the two-State solution. Based on
that conviction, we reaffirm our full commitment to
multilateralism and a debate on a level playing field
in the framework of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.
The present context requires that we, from the seats
that we occupy, put an immediate halt to the expansionist
policy of Israel, which insists on continuing to move its
inhabitants into Palestinian territory, in clear violation
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War and resolution 2334
(2016). It continues to reject the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice of July 2004 on the
17-29825

25/09/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

construction of walls in occupied territories. It refuses
to recognize that Israeli settlements in occupied
Palestinian territory have been established in breach
of international law, as concluded by the International
Court of Justice.
On 22 November 1967, resolution 242 (1967) was
adopted precisely as a result of Israel’s cruel occupation
of Palestinian territories. The resolution refers to
the fact that one of the fundamental principles for
achieving peace in the Middle East is the withdrawal
of the Israeli armed forces from the territories they had
occupied during that conflict. To date, this resolution
has still not been implemented.
The humanitarian situation continues to unravel
due to the electricity crisis in the Gaza Strip. In order
to maintain a minimal level of emergency service,
generators that are at constant risk of fuel shortages
or excessive use are relied upon, and spare parts and
replacement generators cannot be obtained because
of restrictions. We hope that this dire situation will
come to an end immediately and that the Palestinian
civilian population that inhabits these territories will
have access to more humane living conditions. We
again urge the Security Council to enforce the demand
that Israel, the Power occupying the Gaza Strip,
immediately and completely halt its illegal blockade of
the territory, which is a collective punishment of the
civilian population of Palestine, through, inter alia,
the immediate, ongoing and unconditional opening
of border crossings in order for humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to move in and out of
the Gaza Strip.
As we have said on previous occasions, we
request that the Secretary-General’s quarterly report
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) be
presented in written format, which will allow us to
analyse the resolution’s implementation in detail,
and that it include updated maps of all settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory. Bolivia wishes to
express its commitment to the rapid implementation of
the resolution without further delay, and we encourage
all members of the Security Council to join forces to
make this happen right away. We believe that all the
resolutions of the Council should be implemented with
the same rigour and commitment that they require,
with the sole objective of guaranteeing international
peace and security.

S/PV. 8054

In conclusion, Bolivia reaffirms its support for the
self-determination of the Palestinian people and its right
to a free, sovereign and independent State within the
pre-1967 international borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We wish to express
our appreciation to Special Coordinator Mladenov for
his comprehensive and objective update.
On the political track, we have already expressed
our position on the expansion-of-settlements issue
several times before, and our generic position remains
unchanged, balanced and consistent, so I will not take
the Security Council’s time to voice it again. I would
just add that the principle of two States for two peoples
is generally accepted by both Israel and Palestine,
along with the entire international community, and
should be taken into account as one of the foundations
for establishing a lasting peace in the Middle East.
We call on the parties to refrain from taking any steps
that could impede the resumption of the PalestinianIsraeli negotiations. By saying the foregoing, we stand
for the taking of concrete steps that will preserve the
possibility of peaceful coexistence between the two
States and strengthen the prospects for peace based
on the inalienable right of Palestinians to Statehood
and Israel’s right to security. We propose to start from
encouraging confidence-building measures between
the parties consistent with the United Nations pillar
related to development.
On the other hand, Kazakhstan welcomes the
United States diplomatic efforts aimed at resuming
the peace process and United States President Trump’s
talks with the leaders of both countries at the time of the
general debate of the General Assembly at its seventysecond session. We call on the Middle East Quartet
to revive its work on the Palestine-Israel track in the
context of the American side’s efforts in that direction.
We also welcome the Russian Federation’s and Egypt’s
efforts to ensure intra-Palestinian consolidation and
urge all Palestinian political parties and movements to
integrate into one national political structure.
On the humanitarian track, we continue to observe
the difficult situation in the Gaza Strip, which we
believe contributes to the instability and frustration
that can fuel conflict and terrorist activities. In this
regard, we urge the official authorities of both Israel

17-298257/8

S/PV.8054

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Palestine to help resolve the humanitarian crisis in
the Gaza Strip.
Finally, in the interest of peace in this long-suffering
region, we shall collect and synthesize the best we can
find. We should undertake a collective search for the

8/8

25/09/2017

best way to meet the contemporary challenges facing
this part of the globe.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

17-29825
