246 (ID). International facilities for

246 (III). Mesures internationalee pro•

the promotion of training in public
administration

pres a favoriser la formation pro•
fessionnelle en matiere d'adminis•
tration puhlique

L 'Assemblee generate.

TIii' General Assembly,
Recognizing the need for international facilities
which will provide adequate administrative
training for an increasing number of candidates
of proved ability recruited on a wide geographical basis, but mainly from the countries in
greatest need of access to the principles, procedures and methods of modern administration,

R«onnaiB&ant la necessite de creer Sur le plan
international des moyens propres a procurer,
dans le domaine de l'administration, une formation technique adequate a un nomhre croissant
de candidats d'uue valeur eprouvee et recrutes
sur une large base geographique, mais principalement dans les pays qui ont plus particulierement besoin d'~tre mis au courant des principes,
des procedes et des methodes de l'administration
moderne,
Decide

Resnlves that
I. An International Centre for Training in
Public Administration shall he established under
the direction of the United Nations;

1. Qu'un institut international d'administration publiquc sera cree sous la direction de l'Organisation des Nations Unies;

2. The Secretary-General shall report detailed
arrangements for such a centre to the Economic
and Social Council for consideration;

2. Que le Secretaire general presentera a
l' examf'n du Conseil economique et social un
rapport detaille sur les dispositions a preN.dre
en vue de la creation de cet institut;

3. The Secretary-General shall include in his
budget estimates for the financial year 1950 a
programme implementing the objectives of the
present resolution.

3. Que le Secretaire general fera figurer dans
ses previsions de depenses pour l'exercice financier 1950 un programme ayant pour hut
d'atteindre les objectifs de la presente resolution.

Hundred and seventy-first plenary metJling,

4 December 1948.

247 (III). Proposal for the adoption
of Spanish as one of the working
languages of the General Assembly

The General Assembly
Resolves that Spanish should be included as a
working language of the General Assembly and
that rule 44 of the rules of proredure should he
modified accordingly.
Hundred and seventyfourth plenary meeting,

7 December 1948.

Cent-sm·xante et onzieme seance pleniere,
le 4 decembre 1948.

247 (Ill). Proposition d'adopter l'espagnol comme l'une des langues de
travail de l' Assemhlee generate

L 'Assemblee generate
Decide que l' espagnol devrait figurer parrni ies
langues de travail de l'Assemblee et que l' article 44 du reglement interieur devrait ~tre
modifi<~ en consequence.

Cent-saixante-quatorzit!me seance pleniere,
le 7 decembre 1948.

248 (III). Regulations for the United

248 (III). Statuts de la Caisse com•

Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund

mune des pensions du personnel
de
l'Organisation des Nations
Unies

The General Assembly
.Resolves that the following regulations shall be
adopted for the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund.

111~111.'red and aeventy-{ourt/1 11ue1i11g.
7 Deceml,er 194 8.

L 'Assemblee ge11erale
Decide d'adoptrr ies statuts ci-apres de la
Caisse commune des pensions du personnel
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Cl'llt-S0/.1'(11/lt•-quatur~ihne seance pfeniel'l',
le 7 d, 1Cl'lubre J 9/JB.
