160

General Assembly- Thirty-fifth Session

Law has welcomed the recommendation of the Working
Group on the New I nternati~:rnal Economic Order concerning subject-matters to be included in the prog_n_imme_
of work of the Commission and endorses the dec1s1on of
the Commission that preparatory work be carried out in
respect of contracts on supply and construction of large
industrial works and on industrial co-operation:''
8. Reaffirms the mandate of the United ~ations
Commission on International Trade Law 111 coordinating legal activities in the field of international
trade law;
9. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should:
(a) Continue its work on the topics included in its
programme of work;
(b) Continue its work on training and ~ssistance in
the field of international trade law, taking into account
the special interests of the developing countries;
(c) Maintain close collaboration with the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the International Law Commission and the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization and continue to
collaborate with international organizations active in
the field of international trade law:
(d) Continue to maintain liaison with the Commission on Transnational Corporations with regard to th_e
consideration of legal problems that would be susceptible of action by the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law:
I 0. Expresses its apprec{atio_n to all States which
have offered to make contnbut1ons to the holding at
Vienna in 1981 of the second symposium on international trade law of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the occasion of the fourteenth session of the Commission;
11. Appeals to other States and to organizations_, institutions and individuals to make similar contributions
so that the number of participants in the second symposium from developing countries might be increased:
12. Reaffirms the importance of the legal work that
is being undertaken by the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law and of the increased role of
the International Trade Law Branch of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat as the substantive secretariat of the Commission and, in this connexion:
(a) Recognizes the relevance of summary records for
the legislative history of United Nations treaties. conventions and other texts of a legal character and emphasizes the advisability of continuing the prac_tice of
drawing up complete summary records for meetmgs of
the Commission that are devoted to the preparation of
draft conventions or other legal instruments:
(b) Requests the Secretary-General to earmark, out
of the funds allocated to the common library of the
Vienna International Centre, such an amount as is necessary for the maintenance of the law library of the
Commission and for the acquisition of materials that are
required in the context of the programme of work of the
Commission;
(c) Appeals to Governments to contribute to the \aw
library of the Commission at Vienna legal matenals
which are relevant to the work of the Co1Pmission. including official journals, gazettes and legislative texts:
(d) Further appeals to Governments to provide _the
secretariat of the Commission with relevant matenals
pertaining to arbitration procedure so that it can complete its work on a model law on arbitral procedure:

13. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on lnternat1onal Trade
Law the records of the discussion at the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly relating to the report of
the Commission on the work of its thirteenth session.

8 I st plenary meeting
4 December 1980

35/52.

Conciliation Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the value of conciliation as a method _of
amicably settling disputes arising in the context of international commercial relations,
Convinced that the establishment of conciliation rules
that are acceptable in countries with different legal,
social and economic systems would significantly contribute to the development of harmonious international
economic relations,
Noting that the Conciliation. Rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law were
adopted by the Commission at its thirteenth session 11 after consideration of the observations of Governments
and interested organizations,
I. Recommends the use of the Conciliation Rules of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law in cases where a dispute arises in the context of international commercial relations and the parties seek an
amicable settlement of that dispute by recourse to conciliation:
2. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the
widest possible distribution of the Conciliation Rules.

8 I st plenary meeting
4 December 1980

JS/ 160.

Peaceful settlement of disputes between States

The General Assembly.
Having examined the item entitled "Peaceful settlement of disputes between States",
Deeply concerned at the continuation of conflict situations and the emergence of new sources of disputes and
tension in international life, and especially at the growing tendency to resort to force or the threat of force and
at the escalation of the arms race, which gravely endanger the independence and security of States, as well
as international peace and security,
Reaffirming its resolution 34/102 of 14 December
1979. in which it urged all States to co-operate in the
elaboration of a declaration of the General Assembly on
the peaceful settlement of disputes between States,
Considering that the elaboration of a declaration on
the peaceful settlement of disputes between States could
contribute to the elimination of the danger of recourse
to force or the threat of force and, therefore, to the
strengthening of international peace and security,
Noting with satisfaction the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 11 containing the opinions, suggestions and proposals of States regarding the declaration on the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States,
.\ 35 1 J9 l and Add.

IX.

Noting also the report of the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization,'" especially the
work done on the draft Manila declaration on the
peaceful settlement of international disputes, 11
Taking into account the suggestions and opinions expressed during the examination at its current session of
the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes between States,
Bearing in mind the wide consultations that have
taken place in connexion with the content of the declaration on the peaceful settlement of international disputes and the fruitful activity in the Working Group,
established at the current session of the General
Assembly, which continued the elaboration of the declaration,
l. Calls again upon all States to adhere strictly in
their international relations to the principle that States
shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
means in such a manner that international peace and
security and justice are not endangered:
2. Considers that the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes should represent one of the central concerns for States and that, to this end, the efforts for
examining and further developing the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States and the
means of consolidating its full observance by all States
in their international relations should be continued:
3. Considers also that the elaboration, as soon as
possible, of a declaration of the General Assembly on
the peaceful settlement of international disputes is likely
to contribute to the strengthening of the role and the efficiency of the United Nations in pn:venting conflicts
and settling them peacefully:
4. Requests the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization to continue the elaboration of
the draft Manila declaration on the peaceful settlement
of international disputes with a view to submitting it for
further consideration to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session;
5. Refers to the Special Committee the report of its
Working Group on the Peaceful Settlement of
Disputes, 1x as well as the views expressed at the current
session of the General Assembly on the contents of the
declaration;
6. Expresses the hope that the States which have not
yet transmitted to the Secretary-General their opinions
on that matter will do so as soon as possible in order to
contribute, in this way also, to the elaboration of the
declaration;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Peaceful settlement of disputes between States".
95th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
35/161.

261

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Consideration of the draft articles on mostfavoured-nation clauses

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33 / 139 of 19 December 1978
relating to the report of the International Law Commis" Official Records of the General A.uemhly. Thirty-Jijih Session.
Supplement No. 33 (A/35/33 and Corr. I)_
11
Ibid., para. 159.
1
' A/C.6/35/L.21.

sion on the work of its thirtieth session, in particular section II of the resolution,
Having considered the item entitled "Consideration of
the draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses", including the report of the Secretary-General submitted
pursuant to resolution 33/139, 1"
Bearing in mind the importance of facilitating international trade and development of economic cooperation among all States on the basis of equality,
mutual advantage and non-discrimination in the establishment of the new international economic order,
A ware of the fact that more replies from States and interested intergovernmental agencies are needed,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General:
2. Requests the Secretary-General to reiterate his
invitation to Member States, organs of the United
Nations which have competence in the subject-matter
and interested intergovernmental organizations to submit or bring up to date. not later than 30 June 198 I,
their written comments and observations on chapter II
of the report of the International Law Commission on
the work of its thirtieth session 211 and, in particular, on:
(a) The draft articles on most-favoured-nation
clauses adopted by the Commission:
(b) Those provisions relating to such clauses on
which the Commission was unable to take decisions:
and also requests States to comment on the recommendation of the Commission that those draft articles
should be recommended to Member States with a view
to the conclusion of a convention on the subject:

3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate, before the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly,
the comments and observations submitted in accordance with paragraph 2 above:
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to bring
up to date, in view of the comments and observations
mentioned in paragraph 2 above, the analytical compilation of comments and observations from Governments, organs of the United Nations which have
competence in the subject-matter and interested intergovernmental organizations:
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Consideration of
the draft articles on most-favoured-nation clauses" and
to consider it at an early stage.

95th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
35 / 162.

Review
process

of the

multilateral

treaty-making

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that multilateral treaties are an important primary source of international law,
Conscious, therefore, that the process of elaboration
of multilateral treaties, directed towards the progressive
development of international law and its codification,
forms an important part of the work of the United
Nations and of the international community in general,
Recalling its resolution 32/48 of 8 December 1977, by
which it requested the Secretary-General to prepare a
'A/3\'20J and:\dd. i-J.
'" Official Records of !he General Assembly. Thirty-third Session.
S111,pleme111 .\'o 10 1 \ _11 10).
