S/PV.7940

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7940

th meeting
Tuesday, 16 May 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rosselli. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uruguay)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Audouard
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2017/387)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-13911 (E)
*1713911*

S/PV.7940

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

accused one another of provocation whereas the process
of normalization of relations requires cooperation.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2017/387)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Serbia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister of Justice of the Republic
of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Vlora
Çitaku to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/387, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tanin.
Mr. Tanin: The Security Council has before it the
report (S/2017/387) of the Secretary-General covering
the period of January to April 2017. Much has transpired
since the reporting period ended on 15 April, and I will
share the main facts and some observations about the
more recent developments.
The last quarter witnessed fluctuating tensions
and fragility; however, the situation remains generally
stable. Escalation has been avoided in several instances
as a result of external diplomatic interventions, but the
necessary level of trust in Pristina and Belgrade has
been further eroded by a number of irresponsible and
inflammatory statements. Both sides have repeatedly
2/24

16/05/2017

The decision to call an early parliamentary
election in Kosovo in June following the collapse of the
governing alliance, and the lines painstakingly forged
in 2014 were a significant development. The outcome
of the election may draw a different future for Kosovo.
The next Government, regardless of its composition,
will nonetheless continue to face numerous pressing
challenges. Elections provide opportunities for the
renewal of political will and direction, as well as for
greater diversity in leadership and representation — for
example, greater engagement with youth.
I must express my shock, shared by many in Kosovo,
at the attack this past weekend on Arbana Xharra, a
prominent media figure who recently entered electoral
politics. Regardless of the motives of the perpetrators, I
cannot sufficiently stress the importance of a swift and
full investigation, this terrible incident having taken
place at the outset of the political campaign.
It is my responsibility to inform the Council
of progress made and the challenges that remain,
identifying dangers and dissecting the complexities
of the current situation. It is important to note that the
Mitrovica wall dispute was resolved peacefully through
negotiations, and that the initial determination to form
a Kosovo army via legislative amendments has calmed.
However, the relations between Pristina and Belgrade
are still not at ease. The frequent electoral cycles are
part of a continuum of distraction that is not helping
to advance the European Union-led dialogue or the
implementation of its central agreements, such as the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo. In practical terms, the dialogue has been at
a standstill for some months now; its resumption is of
the greatest importance.
Besides the limited progress seen in the dialogue
process, public communications during this reporting
period unfortunately slid back into intolerant and
ethno-nationalist sloganeering. This tendency should
be followed closely and is a matter of deep concern.
Instead of elaborating on this trend, I would like to
review what we have heard from different leaders
during this period.
In relation to Serbia’s request for the extradition
from France of Ramush Haradinaj, leader of the
political party Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, prior
to the decision of the French authorities, the Kosovo
17-13911

16/05/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

S/PV.7940

Assembly, on 9 March, adopted a resolution calling for
suspension of the European Union-facilitated dialogue
with Belgrade until Mr. Haradinaj had been released. It
is hoped that the resolution will now be rescinded.

In reaction, Serbian Cabinet Minister Aleksandar
Vulin stated that Greater Albania “can only be
accomplished by a great Balkan war”. He further stated
that

In a television interview in early April, prominent
Assembly Member Daut Haradinaj, the brother of
Ramush Haradinaj, warned of an “ethnically clean
Kosovo” if judicial authorities in France were to rule
in favour of Serbia’s extradition request for his brother.
Upon his return to Kosovo, on 27 April, Ramush
Haradinaj himself referred to Serbia’s extradition
request as “a call to war”, referred to the “enemy,
Serbia” and threatened “we will do to them far worse
than we did back then,” referring to the highest point
of the war, in 1999. Outgoing Serbian President Nikolić
compared Haradinaj to a “rabid dog that has tasted
human flesh”.

“Albanians must be aware that they will have to
fight their own wars and that they will pay for the
wars Haradinaj is trying to cause with the heads of
their own children”.

Such statements directly and negatively affect the
atmosphere among the communities in Kosovo. Are
these responsible statements? Such incitements to hatred
fall outside the realm of civil political discourse. They
throw us into a situation where, as has been said, reason
would be consumed in the flames of irresponsible and
unnecessary behaviour.
Another issue that has received a great deal of
attention is the question of regional and subregional
unions, should the enlargement of the European
Union stall. Again, I will report to the Council on
what we have heard from different leaders during the
reporting period.
In a mid-April interview the Prime Minister of
Albania, Edi Rama, stated,
“[e]veryone would like to unite in the big union.
But if there is no hope, no perspective, no space,
then, of course, smaller unions may happen”.
Other politicians seized the moment to shape this
statement into an expression of nationalist intent.
President Hashim Thaçi remarked,
“[if] the EU continues with the delay and the unclear
approach”, then “all Albanians in the region will live in
one unified State in order to proceed with integration
into the European family”. The President of Serbia’s
National Council of Albanians went further, saying,
“now is a key moment for Albania and Kosovo to show
Serbia that this is a part of Albania that must not be
touched”, referring to mixed-ethnicity municipalities in
southern Serbia.

Whatever the real intent behind such remarks,
some issues have moved from a more academic or
semi-academic debate to the political level. Such
suggestions can also fuel fears and tensions and lead to
something much worse. One must ask, what place does
such rhetoric have in 2017? What should any person, be
they Albanian or Serb, make of such statements? Such
language and such thinking produces real effects on
the ground.
There were a notable cluster of security incidents
centred on the city of Mitrovica, including physical
assaults, including some in which weapons were
used. Under the important agreements brokered by
the European Union, a long-anticipated and positive
development is the expected opening of the city’s main
bridge to vehicular traffic. Yet in the current climate,
expectations are tinged with anxiety and fear, rather
than optimism.
Constructive engagement continues to be possible,
and we witness this fact on the ground every day. I have
continued meeting municipal and community leaders
throughout all parts of Kosovo. In this past quarter, I
had the opportunity to meet and talk with municipal
mayors in Gjilan/Gnjilane, Pristina, north Mitrovica
and south Mitrovica. I witnessed real commitment to
promoting cooperation between the communities and
to resolving real issues in the daily lives and needs of
people. I have been exposed not to political rhetoric, but
rather to serious work aimed at building a tolerant and
inclusive society.
Particularly encouraging is the establishment,
by the associations of Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo
Serb families of missing persons of a shared resource
centre. Supported by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
centre brings the families of missing persons together
to encourage dialogue and common efforts. The
missing persons issue is an open wound that inhibits
societal reconciliation, but I have been struck by the
spirit of unity at the centre, which is calling for better

17-139113/24

S/PV.7940

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

performance by politicians and public institutions in
both Belgrade and in Pristina in order to bring answers
to those who have already suffered too long without
such answers.
On 15 March, UNMIK hosted a Global Open Day
on Women and Peace and Security, which convened
more than 100 dignitaries, journalists and political
and civil society leaders to foment a debate about the
role of women in societal reconciliation. The event’s
keynote address was delivered by former Kosovo
President Atifete Jahjaga. We were highly impressed
by the diversity of the participants and the constructive
manner in which they were willing and able to discuss
difficult issues. We will continue to support women
who take courageous stands to shape a better future
for Kosovo.
Furthermore, UNMIK has worked to implement
resolution 2250 (2015), focusing on youth. On
11 May, UNMIK hosted the second in a series on
meetings entitled “Stories from the other side”, which
brings together young people from Kosovo’s diverse
communities. Identifying their shared perspective,
they come up with new ideas for tackling current social
problems in Kosovo.
I wish to make special mention of the efforts of
the EU Special Representative in Kosovo aimed at
reinvigorating the Implementation and Monitoring
Council for the protection of cultural heritage, which
reconvened during this reporting period after a long
hiatus. This mechanism is crucial for implementation
of the Law on the Special Protective Zones and is a
platform for discussion of the full range of issues in
the area of protecting cultural heritage. Included among
those is the continuing obstruction by the Deçan/Dečani
authorities of the Kosovo Constitutional Court’s ruling
on property belonging to the Visoki Dečani Orthodox
Monastery. The central authorities have yet to cancel
the procedure for privatizing the formerly disputed
land, despite the clear legal decision by Kosovo’s
highest court.
Improving the situation in Kosovo and the region
requires leadership that transcends ethno-national
divisions, rather than amplify them. Overcoming such
destructive challenges is the European spirit to which
all regional actors aspire. I hope the members of the
Council can continue to use their considerable influence
to encourage democratic institutions to serve the real
needs of the people and to encourage leaders in Belgrade
4/24

16/05/2017

and Pristina to proceed with visionary dialogue, in their
own and their people’s true common interest.
Our Mission continues to work to support those
ends with all our means and in full partnership and
cooperation with local and international partners. The
Council’s authority remains absolutely indispensable
for ensuring accountability and for recognizing the
leaders who understand that their political success is
measured through the well-being of the people.
I take this opportunity once again to thank all
members of the Council for their ongoing support of
our Mission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Tanin
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Serbia.
Ms. Kuburović (Serbia): I would like to express my
gratitude to Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his engagement in
the implementation of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) mandate
under Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), and
the members of the Council for their attention to this
issue. I wish to underline the importance of continued
Council meetings on this topic every three months — in
the context of contributing to the creation of conditions
for the unimpeded implementation of the UNMIK
mandate and supporting the dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina with the facilitation of the European Union
(EU).
Serbia attaches particular importance to the work
of UNMIK and believes that the Mission requires
adequate personnel and an increase in staff and
financing if it is to meet all the needs related to the
implementation of its mandate. At the same time, we
are aware that the Mission is operating in an unfriendly
environment, often characterized by the animosity
of the Albanian community. It is in those terms that
we understand UNMIK’s endeavours to portray the
situation on the ground in more moderate tones,
refraining from assessments that would inevitably have
to be very critical of Pristina, which in turn could lead
to erroneous and simplified conclusions.
Despite numerous challenges, Serbia continues to
participate in the dialogue in a constructive, responsible
and dedicated way, with the aim of addressing
outstanding issues within a status-neutral framework,
contributing to the stabilization of the situation and
17-13911

16/05/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

creating the ideal conditions to facilitate EU membership
for the Western Balkans. Pristina’s treatment of the
dialogue and the process of normalization of relations
as a means of blackmailing Serbian and its European
partners is unacceptable. Such an attitude culminated
at the beginning of March, when its Assembly adopted
a resolution on suspending the dialogue tying it,
de facto, to the destiny of one person, who has been
charged with committing the most heinous crimes. That
was followed by the overt threats of regional Albanian
political leaders of redrawing borders and creating the
so-called “greater Albania”, unless their ambitions
regarding European integration are met expeditiously.
Despite the fact that the agreement on the
establishment of an association/community of Serb
municipalities in Kosovo constitutes the most important
part of the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations and is the key question for the
survival of the Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija,
no significant progress was made on that matter during
the reporting period. The problem will not be resolved
by sporadic public criticisms of Pristina made in the
West. It is necessary to hear the unified voice of our
European partners and the voices of the members of the
Security Council demanding that Pristina expeditiously
fulfil its commitments association/community of Serb
municipalities in Kosovo. Similarly, the Republic of
Serbia stresses the importance of holding quarterly
Council meetings to send a message to both sides,
especially Pristina, that agreements are not and cannot
be dead letters. Empty words no longer suffice; specific
acts must follow.
Serbia is genuinely committed to the preservation
of peace. Its primary interest is to save the lives and
protect the property of all residents of the province, and
to enable the sustainable return of internally displaced
persons. Regrettably, we must note that the current
situation in Kosovo and Metohija is quite ill-suited in
that regard — a fact that is also borne out by SecretaryGeneral reports. The absence of a proper systematic
response by the Pristina institutions to the multiple
problems facing non-Albanian communities, as well
as an intensive anti-Serbian campaign, has contributed
to continuing ethnically motivated attacks against the
Serbs. A case in point is the recent horrifying threat by
Daut Haradinaj, a member of the Assembly of Kosovo
from the opposition party Alliance for the Future of
Kosovo, that not a single living Serb will remain in
Kosovo and Metohija if the results of the proceedings

S/PV.7940

against his brother, Ramush Haradinaj, are contrary
to the wishes of the Albanians. Mr. Tanin’s reaction to
that statement was commendable. Moreover, the justice
system in Kosovo and Metohija must not remain silent
in the face of hate speech and new threats regarding the
ethnic cleansing of the remaining Serbs.
There can be no genuine reconciliation without
the prosecution of all crimes, without exception, nor if
there is unwillingness to hold perpetrators within one’s
own ranks accountable. The fact that not a single killer
of any of about 1,000 Serbs killed since the end of the
conflict has been convicted with a legally enforceable
sentence speaks for itself. That cannot be the path to
genuine reconciliation; it leads only to the simulacrum
of reconciliation, as directed by the promoters of the
Kosovo project.
Impunity for crimes must not be allowed or
tolerated. The entire United Nations membership is
being challenged; it must show that law and justice are
above politics and that all victims are equal. It is exactly
for that reason that we consider the decision of the
French court of Colmar to refuse to extradite Ramush
Haradinaj — a man suspected of the most serious war
crimes — shameful, illegal and scandalous. The court
did not present any fact to prove that the requirements of
the 1957 European Convention on Extradition, ratified
both by France and Serbia, have not been fulfilled. The
court decision is a violation of the universal principles
of international law on preventing impunity for war
crimes, while its contention that the extradition of
Ramush Haradinaj to Serbia would have very serious
consequences for him is unacceptable and unfounded.
Outrageous crimes and atrocities committed
against Serbian civilians, as well as against unloyal
Albanians, committed by the terrorist organization
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), one of whose leaders
was Ramush Haradinaj, are frightening, to say the
least. The testimony of brutal and repeated rapes,
torture, beating and ruthless killings by KLA members
are shocking. All those who believe that the decision
of the French court is a victory for the Albanians of
Kosovo and Metohija are wrong. It is not they who are
the victors, but crime, and it is not our defeat, but the
defeat of law and justice. For the sake of the victims, it
is our moral obligation to continue our fight for justice
and truth. We shall not give up; our victims are no
less valuable.

17-139115/24

S/PV.7940

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Yet the message of that politically motivated
decision and of those who welcomed the criminal
Ramush Haradinaj to Pristina with fireworks is that the
killing of Serbs is not and should not be punishable.
Albanian political leaders in Pristina must finally
understand that punishing war criminals is part of
the process of normalizing relations, and that backing
a man who is suspected of crimes against the Serbs
and the Roma, as well as against his own compatriots,
only serves to widen the inter-ethnic gap in Kosovo
and Metohija and to undermine the rule of law and
democracy for residents of the province.
As if the crimes committed in 1998 and 1999 had
not sufficed, Ramush Haradinaj continues to make new
threats — to seize the territory of Serbia and rewrite
its constitution by force. Moreover, he promises that if
the United States will not help, then the Albanians will
finish the job themselves. I would recall that everything
in Kosovo and Metohija began with the lies told by
people such as William Walker; today he does not
even bother to conceal his affinity for greater Albania
ambitions and projects. He is also known to oppose
the Specialist Chambers, established to try the crimes
committed by the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army.
In this context, I wish to recall that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia agreed, under the agreement of
16 October 1998, that 2,000 members of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Kosovo Verification Mission would be deployed on
part of its territory, Kosovo and Metohija. The validity
of the agreement was confirmed by resolution 1203
(1998), of 24 October 1998, and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia fulfilled all its obligations under the
resolution and the agreement. However, William
Walker, who headed the OSCE Kosovo Verification
Mission and was, as an official of the organization,
obliged to act objectively and impartially, abused his
mandate and the OSCE mission in order to promote the
goals that have been unveiled lately and consisted of the
creation of an independent Kosovo and greater Albania.
The Verification Mission headed by William
Walker never acted in its full capacity, and all its
verifiers were withdrawn on the basis of his decision of
20 March 1999, immediately before the aggression on
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The failure to realize the OSCE Mission under
the agreement of 16 October 1998, the pressure put on
Helena Ranta to tailor her forensic findings to William
6/24

16/05/2017

Walker’s wishes and the dispatch of a false report on the
alleged massacre of civilians committed in the village
of Račak speak volumes, especially in the context of
the recent statements by William Walker regarding the
project of creating a greater Albania. They indicate in
clear terms that he acted in a way that was abusive of
the OSCE mandate and, by the same token, violated
resolution 1203 (1998).
In this context, the role played by William Walker
can be characterized only as an abuse of his position
in a respectable international organization such as the
OSCE to create the political conditions for the adoption
of a decision on the aggression against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. This is also corroborated by
the recent statement of Victoria Nuland to the effect
that the United States has invested in the independence
of Kosovo for 20 years.
The actions of William Walker and the use of armed
force against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are
nothing other than a flagrant violation of the principles
on which the United Nations is based, in particular the
principle on refraining from the threat of force against
the territorial integrity and political independence of
any State, and a violation of the imperative clause of
Article 53 of the United Nations Charter to the effect
that no enforcement action shall be taken under regional
arrangements or by regional agencies, which includes
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, without the
authorization of the Security Council.
The decision to use force against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia was taken and carried out
without the authorization of the Security Council
by those same countries that continue to this day to
advocate recognition of the independence of Kosovo.
The sovereign rights of Serbia are thus being violated,
and the authority of the Council in the performance of
its main duty of the maintenance of peace and security
is being undermined.
The illegal decision on the aggression against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia resulted primarily
from the report of William Walker, although there was
neither a humanitarian disaster nor any persecution
of Kosovo and Metohija Albanians in the province
in 1998-1999. For instance, at the time when William
Walker was heading the Verification Mission, a
communication from the German Ministry of Foreign
Affairs dated 12 January 1999 to a court in Trier stated
that the operations of the Yugoslav and Serbian security
17-13911

16/05/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

forces were not directed against Kosovo Albanians as
an ethnic group but against the militant opponents and
their alleged followers.
The position on the alleged humanitarian
intervention in Kosovo and Metohija was not that of the
Security Council or any other credible body. The facts
underlying the assessment that a military intervention
was required at the time were contradictory and tailored
to suit the needs of NATO, with the goal of launching
an armed aggression against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Invoking a humanitarian intervention as the
basis for the use of armed force is in sharp contrast with
the practice of the International Court of Justice — for
example, the case of Military and Paramilitary Activities
in and against Nicaragua — and other documents
developed under United Nations auspices. That the socalled humanitarian intervention has never become part
of international law was made clear by, inter alia, the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), which
confirmed in its paragraph 79 that
“the relevant provisions of the [United Nations]
Charter are sufficient to address the full range of
threats to international peace and security”,
and further reaffirmed
“the authority of the Security Council to mandate
coercive action to maintain and restore international
peace and security”,
emphasizing
“the importance of acting in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter”.
The aggression against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia resulted in large-scale destruction and loss
of life and the expulsion of a huge number of Serbs
and other non-Albanians from the territory of Kosovo
and Metohija. The facts provide ample evidence
today that the action against Serbia was planned and
that it was calculated and not aimed at satisfying
international justice.
Resolution 1244 (1999) does not constitute, nor can
it constitute, a post factum approval of the use of armed
force against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, nor
can it change the legal qualification of the NATO
intervention as an aggression. That resolution, as stated
by the International Court of Justice in its advisory
opinion on the accordance with international law of
the unilateral declaration of independence in respect of

S/PV.7940

Kosovo (see A/64/881), forms part of international law,
as does UNMIK regulation No. 2009/1, which defines
Kosovo and Metohija as a territory within the Republic
of Serbia under international administration.
It is evident that the human rights of non-Albanians
continue to be systematically threatened all across
Kosovo and Metohija. Numerous incidents provide
ample evidence of the fact that security in Kosovo and
Metohija remains unstable and subject to an escalation
of violence. As a rule, returnees in ethnically mixed
communities are the most vulnerable. This issue
should be accorded greater attention in the reports of
the Secretary-General. On average, 10 to 15 ethnically
motivated attacks are recorded every month, followed
by an ever-present intimidation campaign against Serbs.
None of the perpetrators has yet been punished. Let me
mention only the protest by a group of Albanians in
the village of Ljubožda, near Istok, to which 13 Serbian
families returned recently, as proof that Kosovo and
Metohija still has a long way to go before it becomes a
multi-ethnic society in which all its residents are treated
equally. The lack of proper institutional response
represents tacit approval of, and even support for, the
continuation of such practices.
There can be no harmonious coexistence where
the rate of IDP returns, only 1.9 per cent, is lower
than in the most traumatized post-conflict areas.
Let me remind the Council that there are still more
than 200,000 IDPs living in central Serbia. The key
obstacles to their return include continuous attacks
on Serbian and other non-Albanian returnees, looting,
the desecration of cultural and religious heritage, and
politically motivated criminal proceedings against
IDPs, as well as their inability to exercise the right to
property restitution.
In this context, it is necessary that all actors
involved in the resolution of the question of IDPs work
together to create conditions conducive to unimpeded
and long-term sustainable returns, a key element of the
UNMIK mandate. In a memorandum issued following
his mission to Kosovo and Metohija, the Council of
Europe Commissioner for Human Rights
“notes with concern the existence in Kosovo
of many obstacles to the voluntary return of
displaced persons.”
He goes on to say that “[a]lthough the Stabilization
Association Agreement”, signed by the European Union
and Pristina in October 2015,

17-139117/24

S/PV.7940

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

“reaffirms refugees’ and displaced persons’ right
to return and the protection of their human rights,
[...] progress in this field has been very modest.”
The Commissioner expresses his particular concern
“about the reported negative impact on voluntary
returns of acts of hostility or flagrantly ethnically
motivated violence”
and the lack of classification by the police of
“ethnically motivated crimes as such and [...]
systematic monitoring of the situation in this field”.
A special threat to the security of the southern
Serbian province recently has been the trend of the
continuation of the process of the return of foreign
terrorist fighters from Middle East battlefields and the
escalation of political and religious extremism.
Serbia is strongly opposed to the establishment of
the so-called Kosovo Army, contrary to resolution 1244
(1999) and the Constitution of the Republic of Serbia.
Efforts to establish the so-called Kosovo Army are
but an attempt to create new tensions at an extremely
sensitive moment, marked by dangerous statements
on redrawing internationally recognized borders and
creating a greater Albania, an idea that we had believed
belonged to the dark past of this part of the Western
Balkans during the Second World War.
Guided by the interests of regional stability, Serbia
is firmly committed to the continuation of the dialogue,
aimed primarily at resolving the everyday problems
of the people living in Kosovo and Metohija without
prejudice to the future status of the province and with
full respect for resolution 1244 (1999). This resolution
continues to be the basis and framework for the solution
to the question of Kosovo and Metohija with guarantees
for the territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia.
We consider that the dialogue, with the facilitation of
the European Union, is the most appropriate vehicle to
build confidence between the Serbs and Albanians in
Kosovo and Metohija, and an important mechanism for
supporting the efforts of the European Union to solidify
peace and stability and further the process of European
integration in our region.
Yet it is hard to push aside the impression that
the dialogue is not yielding results at the moment,
which could be due to the non-constructive position of
Pristina to implement the agreements. For the dialogue
to be genuinely meaningful, it must not be abused as a
8/24

16/05/2017

platform for the imposition of the interests of one side,
based on unrealistic expectations that normalization
should amount to nothing other than the recognition
of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence
by Serbia. The positive results achieved thus far in
areas such as telecommunications and the freedom of
movement are eloquent proof that there is no alternative
to the dialogue and that it should be continued with
more responsibility and a genuine commitment
to compromise.
We hope that Pristina will realize that it should and
must find mutually acceptable solutions with Belgrade
for all outstanding issues, which cannot be based on
diktat and fait accompli. In the quest for such solutions,
it is necessary to avoid unilateral acts — which are,
in many ways, harmful — such as attempts to admit
Pristina to various international organizations and
the unlawful decisions, which are null and void for
the Republic of Serbia, such as that of 1 March to
appropriate the property of the Republic of Serbia.
Such decisions needlessly pollute the atmosphere of the
dialogue. To give the dialogue a chance, it will certainly
be necessary that the facilitator demonstrate stronger
leadership, primarily in the area of the implementation
of reached agreements.
I will conclude my statement with a call to those
countries that have not recognized the unilaterally
declared independence of Kosovo to remain consistent
in their principled respect of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. At the same time,
I call on those countries that have recognized Kosovo
to reconsider their decision and contribute accordingly
to efforts to finding a mutually acceptable solution to
this question, proceeding from the unacceptability of
unilateralism as a way of solving any issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ms. Çitaku.
Ms. Çitaku: I am honoured to be here today, and I
sincerely appreciate the opportunity given to me by the
members of the Security Council, whose time is very
valuable. I know that, as we speak, the world has many
pressing challenges and problems to address.
It was in 1993 that members of the Council in
this Chamber spoke about Kosovo for the first time.
At that time, when based solely on our ethnicity we
were exposed to apartheid, imprisoned for our political
beliefs and expelled from our schools and rightful
jobs, the Security Council members in this chamber
17-13911

16/05/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

spoke up. Later in 1998 and 1999, as we were living the
nightmare of brutality, the Security Council adopted
seven resolutions calling for peace and the end of
ethnic cleansing. For that we will be forever grateful.
All members spoke on our behalf. They were with us
when approximately 1 million Kosovars — half of our
population — were deported, while assisting us in the
refugee camps in Albania and Macedonia. And they
were with us when we returned home. Although we
found everything in ashes, we rebuilt our homes and
lives with their help and support. They were there for
us during the most difficult days, but now it is simply
unnecessary, counterproductive and, frankly, cynical
to come here every three months, repeat the same old
stories just for purely political reasons and a power play.
Resolution 1244 (1999), adopted 18 years ago,
expired a long time ago. First of all, it refers to a union
that no longer exists. I am sure that the members of
the Council have heard about Montenegro’s recent
accession to NATO. According to the resolution,
however, Montenegro is part of a union called Serbia
and Montenegro. Secondly, it was precisely in this
Chamber that on 24 October 2005 the Council adopted
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2005/51) calling
for the beginning of a political process to determine
Kosovo’s future status.
It was precisely the Secretary General’s Special
Envoy, the wise President Ahtisaari, who, after a
very intensive and extensive process of negotiations,
proposed independence for Kosovo as a final solution.
It was precisely the International Court of Justice
that, at Serbia’s request for review, specifically and
unambiguously stated that Kosovo was within its
rights when it declared independence and that its
independence did not violate the international law. I
invite everyone to come to Kosovo and see the reality,
because — trust me — the discussions in this Chamber
do not correspond to it.
I have said it before, and I will say it again: just
because Serbia does not recognize us as a State does
not mean that we are not within our rights to be an
independent State and people. Just because we are not
yet a State Member of the United Nations — because
of purely geopolitical power plays beyond our
control — does not make us any less of a State. And,
yes, we are not a perfect State. We face many challenges.
We have much that remains to be done. But we all know
that the reason that we came and sat here today — and

S/PV.7940

why we do so every three months — is not because we
are not perfect.
Let us take the example of minority rights. If the
situation of minorities in any given country were to
be the criterion for meeting here every three months,
believe me when I say that Kosovo would be far down
on the list, not because the situation concerning the
integration of minorities is perfect but because we
have gone to great lengths to accommodate their
needs. Serbs in Kosovo are the most privileged
minority in Europe. Does anyone know where the most
discriminated community in Europe lives? The answer
is in Serbia — Presheve, Medvegje and Bujanoc, where
every day the Albanian community is faced by all forms
of harsh discrimination. I am not talking only about
high levels of intolerance or hidden discrimination,
which has always existed, but the visible and constant
discrimination of ethnic Albanians, especially in the
areas of the economy and education, including their
underrepresentation at the local and central levels
of employment in the public sector and many other
restrictions that they face on a daily basis.
I know that because I visited them myself. Yet
there is no Security Council meeting or discussion
concerning their rights. The bottom line is that
Serbia uses this platform and somehow insists on an
asymmetrical representation. It insists that we are
somehow not equal, that somehow they are superior. Let
me to say it again, loud and clear. We are independent,
equal and confident, and we are not inferior. There
is something inherently racist in that attitude. Serbia
has always tried to portray us as an unworthy class of
people with no culture, a second class. Try saying that
to Majlinda Kelmendi, our Olympic gold medallist;
or Petrit Halilaj, who was honoured last week at the
Venice Biennale; or Mergim Cahani, who three years
ago had an idea and today is running the fastestgrowing information and technology company in the
region; or the brand-new graduates I met the other day
at the American University in Pristina, who were full
of hopes, dreams and curiosity, no different from their
peers in Europe and America.
What I am trying to say is that although Kosovo has
many challenges, this Chamber is not where we should
address them. Furthermore, spending the Security
Council’s precious resources on a Mission that no
longer serves a purpose is an injustice to all the people
who do need its help. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has no

17-139119/24

S/PV.7940

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

role in Kosovo, which is why we were surprised to see
that its budget and staff for next year are increasing.
The Council may choose to keep an expensive Mission
in Kosovo, but there is no role for it to play in its
current form.
The most recent Security Council debate on
peacekeeping missions (see S/PV.7918), initiated by
the United States delegation in the presence of the
Secretary-General and supported by the members of
the Council, highlighted conclusions that the Council’s
approach to peacekeeping missions should change,
which is precisely what we have been calling for a long
time now. Without undermining the vital importance
that peacekeeping missions have for security in
general, I should point out that the mandates of some
missions — UNMIK being a good example — were
drafted years, sometimes even decades, ago. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassadors Haley and Delattre for saying that this
was the right time to close the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
The second thing I want to talk about is the
dialogue with Serbia. While we will remain committed
to it, we are tired of double standards, double games
and ambiguity. On the one hand Serbia tells us that it is
for peace and reconciliation; on the other, every day it
misuses the INTERPOL Red Notice system and issues
warrants against our leaders and freedom fighters who
defended their homes from atrocities, as the Council
and the entire world are well aware. That seems to be
part of the old pattern of brutality mixed with fake
bureaucracy that tormented Kosovars for decades.
After beating, humiliating, killing or, in the best cases,
expelling them from Kosovo, Serbian police would
draw up terrorism charges against them to prevent them
from returning home or having a normal life.
By the way, those subject to these kinds of fake
bureaucratic tactics and fake allegations were not just
Kosovars. Many were leaders from other countries,
including a former United States President, a Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom and Prime Ministers
of Italy and Germany, as well as Foreign Ministers and
Ministers of Defence were included on Red Notices. The
most recent episode, involving Mr. Ramush Haradinaj,
the former Prime Minister of Kosovo, has thankfully
ended, and although it took a few months, he has finally
been released by the French authorities. What happened
to him says a lot about the state of mind that prevails in
10/24

16/05/2017

Serbia today. Mr. Haradinaj was acquitted not once but
twice by the Tribunal in The Hague.
Serbia knows very well that it has lost the battle
with Kosovo. Militarily, it was lost in 1999; politically
in 2008; juridically in 2009, with the ruling of the
International Court of Justice. And it is now clear
that Serbia wants to win the moral challenge by
trying somehow to artificially create a moral parity
between itself and the rest of the countries of the
former Yugoslavia. That is simply false. There was one
aggressor in the former Yugoslavia, and it was Serbia.
There was one military that fought for expansion
and committed genocide. The rest of us — Slovenia,
Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo — were
fighting for freedom and our lives. Even today, Serbia
refuses to accept historical responsibility for what
happened. Even today we heard a representative of
Serbia’s Government deny a massacre that happened
before the eyes of the world. The point I am trying to
make is that for reconciliation to happen, Serbia has to
accept Kosovo as an equal and as a State. And it also
has to accept its historical responsibility. Would the
reconciliation between France and Germany have ever
happened if Germany had denied its responsibility for
the Second World War?
Serbia has failed to deal with its own past. It has
failed to deal with the real — not fictional, but real and
well-documented — crimes that were committed in
Kosovo during the war. The Centre for Human Rights
in Serbia published a horrifying report with facts and
figures that illustrate the unprecedented measures that
Serbia undertook to hide traces of its war crimes, going
as far as to erect buildings on top of mass graves. Imagine
the feelings of the thousand families in Kosovo that
are demanding answers and a proper burial. Instead of
finding the strength to deal with its own past, instead of
seeking catharsis, Serbia has chosen the path of denial.
The number of Serbians charged with or convicted for
crimes committed in Kosovo is zero. Rather, they are
being promoted to high-level positions, as in the case of
General Diković, whose responsibility for killing 1,400
civilians is documented.
Regardless, however, we will not allow Serbia to
deter us from our own commitments. Between 2009
and 2015 alone, Kosovo institutions issued more than
20 indictments for war crimes. Every life is important
and every death should be properly investigated. We
will remain committed to peace and dialogue, just as
we have always been. And we will work harder and
17-13911

16/05/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

harder to become a responsible member of the family
of the free nations of the world.
We also want to become contributors to regional
and global security. In accordance with our laws
and Constitution, therefore, we have initiated the
establishment of a Kosovo army. We will engage in an
intensive and serious effort to convince the local Serbian
population to support this project. All other minorities
in Kosovo support it. But we will not allow anyone to
hold us hostage, nor will we give veto power to anyone
in that regard. We will push for constitutional changes,
but if it becomes obvious that Serbia is interfering and
not allowing local Serbian members of Parliament to
decide on their own, then we will move ahead with
legislative changes.
We are not buying MIGs, so there is no room
for panic. This is a small defensive force, which
will complete our State security infrastructure, in
accordance with the security sector review that we
conducted together with NATO.
As Council members may have already heard, after
the no-confidence motion last week, Kosovo will hold
early parliamentary elections in June this year. We have
invited international observers to monitor the process.
For Kosovo, the credibility of the electoral process is
far more important than the outcome. Way too many
challenges lie ahead this year, and the new Government
will need full credibility and legitimacy to push forward
the agenda.
Furthermore, while there are obvious differences
between the political parties in Kosovo, just like in any
democracy, there is a fundamental agreement and a
broad social consensus about the Euro-Atlantic future
of Kosovo. There is no Great Kosovo or Great Albania;
there are Albanians living in Kosovo, Albanians living
in Albania, Albanians living in Macedonia — our
common goal and shared objective is to be equal citizens
of the European Union.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to members of the Security Council who wish
to make statements.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I extend my thanks to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his comprehensive briefing to
the Security Council on the report (S/2017/387) of the

S/PV.7940

Secretary-General. Egypt reiterates its full support to
Mr. Tanin in the performance of his duties. We also
welcome Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister of Justice of the
Republic of Serbia, and Ambassador Vlora Çitaku and
thank them for their statements.
Egypt stresses its concern with regard to promoting
security and stability in the Western Balkans region,
which is affected by the situation in Kosovo. We highly
value the efforts deployed by the Kosovo authorities
recently with a view to achieving that objective and the
reforms it has begun to implement. We commend the
progress achieved in the economic, security and rule-of
law-fields, which were reflected in higher development
rates, lower unemployment and a general improvement
in the investment environment. We call upon the new
Kosovo Government to continue that approach of
settling differences through constructive dialogue.
At the same time, we are concerned by the
information contained in the report of the obstacles
facing the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
and the implementation of the agreements achieved
between them. Egypt stresses that high-level
dialogue between the two sides under the auspices
of the European Union remains the most appropriate
framework to settle differences peacefully between
them. We call upon the two sides to exercise restraint
and to refrain from unilateral steps that may exacerbate
the situation between them. We therefore urge leaders
in both Belgrade and Pristina to continue the high-level
dialogue with a view to achieving agreed and sustainable
solutions that are acceptable by both sides and lay the
foundations for peace and stability in the region.
We also express our concern at the surge of ethnic
and nationalist tendencies, and also stress the need to
avoid instigations that may exacerbate the situation
and internal divisions. We welcome the decision by
the political powers representing the Kosovo Serbs
to end their boycott and resume their participation
in the Government and the Assembly. We call upon
all parties in Kosovo to also adopt the approach of
dialogue, understanding and the establishment of State
institutions, and stress the importance of achieving
progress in the establishment of local Serb-majority
municipalities in Kosovo, which we believe is vital to
ensure the institutional protection of the Kosovo Serbs.
Lastly, and in view of the importance we attach
to regional peace and security as one of the pillars of
our foreign policy, we stress the importance that the

17-1391111/24

S/PV.7940

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Kosovo Assembly should accept the border demarcation
agreement with Montenegro in order to expedite the
integration of Kosovo in Europe.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Tanin for today’s update on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We appreciate the efforts
of the United Nations over 18 years to help Kosovo build
multi-ethnic democratic institutions that uphold the
rule of law and respect human rights. We are pleased
that those efforts have largely been accomplished. The
situation in Kosovo today is very different from when
UNMIK was first created, and also different from
2008, when the Secretariat last restructured it. Given
how Kosovo has progressed and has developed over
the years, the United States and a growing number of
Council members have urged the Secretariat to continue
the work of winding down the mission, recognizing that
it has fulfilled its mandate.
While UNMIK should go down in history as a
model of the value of the United Nations, it increasingly
risks being memorialized as an example of a programme
lingering beyond its relevance and a bureaucracy not
sure of how to deal with closure. Seemingly, without
regard to the realities on the ground, UNMIK continues
to be overresourced and overstaffed in comparison with
its limited responsibilities. Even more puzzling, the
Mission is requesting new funding for programming
that is largely redundant: $2 million dollars in additional
resources, primarily for human rights and rule-of-law
programming, despite the leading role of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in that area, and despite
a demonstrated ability of the Government of Kosovo
to effectively govern and administer those and other
functions with complete independence.
In response to those realities, the United States
supports considering the phasing out of UNMIK to
better reflect the significant progress and development
made in Kosovo. Any proposed alternative would need
to reflect the reality on the ground and reduce the
footprint of the United Nations in Kosovo. The United
States repeats its call for the Council to adjust the
reporting and briefing period for UNMIK from three
to six months, or even longer, which would reduce
the burden on the Secretariat and the Council, both of
which face competing priorities of far greater urgency.
The United States greatly appreciates and supports
the vital role the European Union (EU) as facilitator
12/24

16/05/2017

of the Brussels dialogue, in particular EU High
Representative Mogherini’s personal leadership of the
process. We call on leaders in both Belgrade and Priština
to continue taking the needed steps to revitalize the
talks and to exercise restraint as provocations arise. We
also call on both Serbia and Kosovo to fully implement
dialogue agreements without further delay and to work
more actively towards the normalization of relations.
In relation to the comments about the events at
Račak by the Minister of Justice of Serbia this morning,
I would just say that the bodies at Račak are testimony
to the atrocities and violence that took place there. The
forensic work produced by international observers at
the time was clear and unambiguous on that. All the
countries in the Balkans must undertake a full, honest
accounting of the events that transpired during the
break up of Yugoslavia and the conflicts of the 1990s
and refrain from that type of historical revisionism
that sows distrust and fear. Rather then attempting to
relitigate the past with falsehoods, leaders need to focus
on the hard work necessary to promote dialogue and
reconciliation and pursuing more stable, prosperous
and secure Balkan region on the road to Euro-Atlantic
integration. We call on all leaders in the region to avoid
careless inflammatory rhetoric that incites backlash and
instead, focus on addressing the fundamental political
and economic reforms necessary to advance their
further integration into Euro-Atlantic institutions. The
borders of the Balkan countries are defined and firm.
The United States reaffirms its support for Kosovo’s
efforts to develop into a prosperous and peaceful
multi-ethnic democracy. We continue to strongly
support the full international recognition of Kosovo
and Kosovo’s membership in all relevant international
organizations, including the United Nations. We
encourage States Members of the United Nations that
have not yet done so to join the more than 110 United
Nations Members that have already recognized Kosovo
as an independent State.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to congratulate the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Zahir Tanin,
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), on his excellent briefing
and to assure him once again of the full support of the
Senegalese delegation as he carries out his duties
Secondly, I would like to pay tribute to Ms. Nela
Kuburović, Minister of Justice of the Republic of Serbia,
17-13911

16/05/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

S/PV.7940

and to Ms. Vlora Çitaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the
United States.

previously registered to predecessors or administrative,
military, social or political organizations, have subsided.

My delegation remains concerned about the
continuing tensions that somewhat hamper the
substantial progress noted since the end of the conflict.
In that regard, and with a view to restarting the process
of building and preserving lasting stability that extends
beyond Kosovo to all entire region of the Balkans,
first, we strongly encourage Kosovar political actors to
work towards maintaining a peaceful political climate
on which the quality of the dialogue with Belgrade
greatly depends; and secondly, we encourage Serbian
authorities to maintain and strengthen their commitment
to participating in a constructive and peaceful dialogue
with Priština.

On a positive note, my delegation commends the
unhindered participation of Kosovo Serbs in Serbia’s
presidential election at polling stations throughout
Kosovo, as well as the smooth running of the elections,
which received support from the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Force.
We also welcome the high-level meetings organized
by Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, on 24 January and 6 February in Brussels. The
Presidents and Prime Ministers of Serbia and Kosovo
participated in the meetings. They have all committed
to resuming dialogue at the highest level, under the
auspices of the European Union, and to refraining from
making provocative or belligerent statements.

That said, Senegal welcomes the progress made
thus far by both parties in the dialogue conducted under
the auspices of the European Union and encourages
countries and partners with influence to continue to
use that influence to revive and support the talks. In
order to build on the results achieved in that context, we
believe that it is essential that the agreements reached
thus far be implemented and that political leaders
on both sides be fully committed to pursuing, in a
constructive spirit, the dialogue as it is the only viable
way to normalize relations.
Recent developments outlined in the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (S/2017/387),
including the proposal by the President of Kosovo to
transform the Kosovo Security Force into an armed
force, through legislation and not via referendum, have
sparked controversy. Fortunately, that draft law was
withdrawn on 7 March, with a statement from President
Thaçi promising that no unilateral action would be
taken on that issue and that the transformation process
would be transparent and inclusive and carried out in
cooperation with the country’s international partners.
On another note, the adoption by the Assembly
of Kosovo of the resolution calling for the suspension
of dialogue between Belgrade and Priština, which is
facilitated by the European Union, in protest at the
detention of Mr. Ramush Haradinaj, became another
source of tension, which we hope has abated now that
he has been released. Senegal also hopes that fears
arising from the decision of the Government of Kosovo
to transfer to Kosovo the ownership of all property

We share the view of the Secretary-General that the
issue of missing persons, which should remain a top
priority, requires that leaders on both sides have a firm
and genuine political will in order to provide families
with the answers they have been awaiting for so long.
On another note, my delegation would like to
commend the efforts of the Kosovo Security Force in the
fight against violent extremism in Kosovo. In addition,
the activities carried out under the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, whose mandate was
extended until 14 June 2018, appear to be advantageous
in that they help to build on the achievements made in
the areas of defence and the promotion of the rule of
law, human rights and the fight against terrorism and
organized crime. In addition, we welcome the activities
of UNMIK in promoting reconciliation, transitional
justice, human rights and in providing support for
the normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Priština.
Senegal would like to express its appreciation
regarding the important milestones reached in the
dialogue between Belgrade and Priština and encourages
the strengthening of the dynamics to normalize
relations between the two parties, as well as enhanced
cooperation, which is in the interest of their people and
fosters peace in the subregion.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking our friend Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing today and for
the work he is doing with the Mission. I would also like

17-1391113/24

S/PV.7940

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

to thank Minister Kuburović and Ambassador Çitaku
for their statements to the Council today.
Sweden has long stood with the people of Kosovo
in their efforts to leave behind the legacy of war and
to build a peaceful and prosperous society. Sweden’s
Foreign Minister, Margot Wallström, visited Kosovo
only two weeks ago to reiterate our firm support of
Kosovo’s European perspective. She also stressed
the need for continuing reforms and normalization
of Pristina’s relationship with Belgrade as part of the
process. We stand ready to help and will continue to
support Kosovo’s reform efforts through our bilateral
development cooperation.
Delivering on Kosovo’s European perspective and
that of the wider western Balkans region remains a top
priority of the European Union. Regional cooperation
and good neighbourly relations are prerequisites for a
stable, peaceful and prosperous western Balkans. We are
therefore concerned about the hardened rhetoric in the
region in recent months, as exemplified by the Special
Representative today. We call on both sides to redouble
their efforts for peace by refraining from rhetoric or
actions that risk undermining trust and instead working
actively to build confidence and mutual understanding
across the region.
It is clear that the future of both Serbia and Kosovo
lies within the European Union. For that reason too,
normalization of relations is essential. The European
Union-facilitated Kosovo-Serbia dialogue provides
an important framework for finding pragmatic and
mutually acceptable solutions to the concerns of both
sides. It is an irreversible process that requires a
firm commitment.
We expect Pristina and Belgrade to engage
constructively in the dialogue and to implement their
respective parts of the agreement. That includes, most
notably, the dismantling of parallel structures in Serbmajority areas and the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities. In
addition, it is essential that the status issue not hinder
Kosovo’s European perspective or membership in
international organizations.
To achieve the aspirations of the Kosovar people,
national leaders must find ways to work together
so as not to undermine efforts to achieve the crucial
reforms needed to benefit all of the people living
in Kosovo. It is regrettable that the current political
impasse has hindered concrete and meaningful reform
14/24

16/05/2017

efforts. We hope that the forthcoming elections will
lead to strengthening the democratic institutions
and continued reforms, especially on rule of law and
socioeconomic development.
The United Nations and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) have
made invaluable contributions to achieving the level of
peace and security that we see in Kosovo today. Kosovo
will continue to need the support of the international
community. However, the present challenges faced by
the country must be dealt with, primarily within the
framework of the European Union integration process,
including through the work of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. In light of that, we
would be interested to receive the views of the Special
Representative and the Secretary-General on the
possibility of further downsizing UNMIK’s structure,
size and tasks, as well as on adjusting the reporting and
briefing period from three to six months.
The frameworks are in place to realize the vision
of a stable and prosperous Kosovo with a normalized
relationship with Serbia. However, to fully realize that
vision, a more consistent and sustained effort by both
Pristina and Belgrade is needed. Doing so will have
positive effects across the Western Balkans region.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Minister of Justice of Serbia, Ms. Nela
Kuburović, and share the serious concerns she has
expressed with regard to the state of affairs in Kosovo.
We are also grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, and his
team for their work, and we thank Mr. Tanin for his
objective briefing on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). It shows
that there ongoing serious, profound problems in the
province that require immediate solution, as well as
outside monitoring.
Indeed, the scope of ongoing challenges in the
province is not decreasing but assuming new forms. As
a result, the goal of creating a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo is further away than ever. The problem lies in
the obvious lack of desire on the part of the Kosovo
authorities to fulfil the obligations undertaken within
the framework of the dialogue with Belgrade. This
is taking place against the background of the blatant
condoning of the situation by outside actors.
17-13911

16/05/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The Brussels mediation process is biased in allowing
the Kosovo-Albanians to behave in such a manner. As
a result, the relationship between Belgrade and Pristina
is deteriorating and trust is losing ground. The dialogue
has faced an impasse for many months. There has
been no major breakthrough on the main track of the
negotiations — the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities — despite
the fact that an agreement was drafted more than four
years ago.
We consider it unacceptable and destructive to
attempt to impose a self-governing system on the Serbs
that would reduce their own powers to an absolute
minimum. It is obvious that the genuine goal of such
dead-end initiatives is to blame the Serbs for the
dialogue’s impasse, whereas in fact the situation is
exactly the reverse. The lack of pressure from Brussels
means that Kosovo’s political leaders feel that they
can do anything. They no longer refrain from using
the language of open provocation. Very recently,
Mr. Thaçi threatened to resign from the post of the
so-called President if his initiative to transform the
Kosovo Security Force into a fully-fledged army is
not implemented. At the same time, we are convinced
that the implementation of his proposal would have
been a very serious violation of international law,
particularly resolution 1244 (1999) and inevitably led
to further destabilization in the region and even greater
conflict potential.
Of course exerting relevant pressure on Pristina
must continue. At the same time, the Kosovo Assembly
has adopted a resolution to suspend the dialogue until
such a time when France releases someone who is
suspected of very serious crimes, namely, the Kosovo
Liberation Army fighter Ramush Haradinaj. Moreover,
his brother, who is a representative in the Assembly,
has threatened ethnic cleansing and issued ultimatums.
On 27 April, a French court made an illegitimate and
politicized decision to release Mr. Haradinaj, who was
apprehended in January by INTERPOL at the request
of Serbia. That demonstrates the double standards used
in the case of the parties to the Yugoslavian conflict.
Once again, we underscore that those who are guilty
of carrying out war crimes, regardless of their actual
status or position, must be punished.
We are also not surprised by the fact that the
investigation of the crimes committed by the Kosovo
Liberation Army has been postponed. Allow me
to recall that Mr. Marty briefed the Council of

S/PV.7940

Europe Parliamentary Assembly on the crimes he
had investigated, including the trafficking of human
organs, more than six years ago. We hope in the very
near future to see the initial results of the Specialist
Chambers in The Hague and that that body will lack
the flaws of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). It is important to ensure that such
actions be as transparent as possible.
The European Union, through the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), which plays
a key role in organizing the workings of the Specialist
Chambers, must ensure an unbiased and professional
approach, which the ICTY was lacking at the time.
Mr. Haradinaj was acquitted twice. Moreover, dozens
of witnesses in his case were threatened and attacked.
This problem becomes all the more evident against
the background of the ongoing deterioration we have
observed in the region due to provocations made in
the name of greater Albania, which is a threat to the
security and territorial integrity of a number of States.
Let us try to understand the regional scope of this
issue. In Kosovo, Mr. Thaçi stated in an ultimatum
that all Albanians will live in the same State unless the
European Union fulfils his expectations for integration.
A similar sentiment has being expressed by the Prime
Minister of Albania, Mr. Rama. In Macedonia,
Albanians are gathering around the infamous Tirana
platform, and similar signals are being conveyed by
Albanian leaders living in the south of Serbia.
Against this background, let me be candid.
We are aware that the former head of the Kosovo
Verification Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, Mr. Walker, distinguished
himself by speaking in favour of the project of bringing
together the Albanians in Albania, Kosovo and the
diaspora and calling upon Albanians to take the final
step towards this goal. We call on the European Union
and Western capitals to undertake measures as soon as
possible to stop these provocative statements, which
must be replaced by expressions of a desire to live as
good neighbours with mutual respect.
Another example of the weakness of the provincial
governmental institutions include the political crisis
in Kosovo, whose outcome we can easily predict.
Moreover, the freedom of movement agreed by Belgrade
and Pristina was undermined by the actions of Kosovo
law-enforcement bodies in preventing supporters of
Mr. Vučić’s Serbian Progressive Party from attending

17-1391115/24

S/PV.7940

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

an electoral rally in the municipality of Leposavić,
thereby violating principles that seemed inviolable in
Europe, such as the freedom of speech, movement,
peaceful assembly and participation in elections.
Similarly, there was an incident on 9 May when the
head of the Serbian Government Office for Kosovo and
Metohija, Mr. Djurić, was barred without explanation
from going to a Victory Day meeting in Gračanica.
Pristina’s acts aimed at appropriating Serbian
State property are unacceptable. Equally unacceptable
is the Kosovo Government’s decision to transfer all
community-owned enterprises to State ownership.
We continue to witness ongoing physical attacks
on Serbs. We see their property burned down. We
see refugees and internally displaced people thwarted
in their attempts to return home, not to mention the
desecration of property belonging to the Serbian
Orthodox Church, in particular the land of the Visoki
Dečani Orthodox Monastery, despite the fact that its
rights had been upheld by the Constitutional Court in
Kosovo. The cathedral church of Christ the Saviour in
Pristina is in a deplorable state. The Serbian Orthodox
Church has been unable to gain access to its religious
objects there, which is necessary for their restoration
after attacks by vandals.
The need to combat the spread of radicalism and
terrorism in Kosovo is increasingly pressing. We are
concerned by the fact that the province is being used
to recruit foreign terrorist fighters who fight alongside
extremists in the Middle East and to prepare terrorist
acts elsewhere in the world. Under these circumstances,
we think it untimely and counterproductive to plan to
reduce the UNMIK staff and the budget parameters.
The situation in the province means that decisions such
as these are inappropriate, especially in the absence of
real dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. Therefore,
we need to set aside any request to downsize the Mission
or even to close it all together.
Instead, we need to undertake constructive work
and interaction with that important United Nations
operation. I would like to remind the Council that
UNMIK is working despite having minimal resources
at its disposal. Even so, it is playing a key role in Kosovo
affairs and remains an irreplaceable international
monitoring tool designed to help normalize the situation
in Kosovo, pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999), which
remains fully valid.
16/24

16/05/2017

In the light of the foregoing, we see no reason to
review the practice of having quarterly Security Council
briefings on the situation in Kosovo, which, as we have
seen during the discussions today, continues to require
very close international attention and monitoring.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Tanin, for his briefing. China welcomes the presence
of Her Excellency Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister of
Justice of Serbia, and thanks her for her statement.
I have also listened attentively to the statement of
Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, understands the country’s legitimate
concerns on the question of Kosovo and appreciates its
positive efforts to achieve a political settlement of the
question of Kosovo. At present, the security situation
on the ground remains relatively stable, although some
underlying complex issues remain unresolved. China
welcomes the holding of another high-level meeting
between Belgrade and Pristina. We hope that the
parties will remain committed to the general direction
of a political settlement, work in a spirit of mutual
understanding and trust, and implement all agreements
already reached as soon as possible.
Resolution 1244 (1999) provides the important
legal basis for resolving the question of Kosovo. All
sides should uphold the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, work under the
framework of relevant Security Council resolutions
and find a solution acceptable to all through dialogue
and negotiation.
National reconciliation is in the common interest
of all sides. We hope that parties will always put the
welfare of people first, take concrete measures to protect
the legitimate rights and interests of all communities
in Kosovo, and safeguard the peace, stability and
development of the Balkans. The Security Council
should keep its attention focused on the question of
Kosovo, remain committed to promoting its proper
settlement and send a clear signal to the public.
China appreciates the work carried out by UNMIK
under the leadership of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Tanin. We support UNMIK as it
continues to discharge its duties in accordance with its
mandate and cooperate constructively with all sides.
17-13911

16/05/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

We hope that UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force will work in
close collaboration, make steady headway in improving
the situation on the ground and play a positive role for
the early settlement of the question of Kosovo.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank Mr. Zahir
Tanin for his briefing and Minister Kuburović and
Ambassador Çitaku for their detailed statements.
For Italy, the prospect of European integration is
a crucial driving force in efforts aimed at reform that
the States of the western Balkans are expected to carry
out with the goal of making stability in the region a
lasting achievement together with the institutional
consolidation in and economic and social development
of the area. A few days ago, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Ms. Federica Mogherini, spoke very clearly about the
European Union commitment to those objectives (see
S/PV.7935).
We firmly believe that the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina, which is crucial to the
stability of the entire region, can be accomplished only
through tangible progress in the process of dialogue
facilitated by the European Union (EU). Important and
concrete results have been achieved, and we appreciate
the commitment reiterated by the parties to the process.
At the same time, we share the Secretary-General’s
hope of seeing more consistent and sustained efforts
from both parties to reactivate the talks and deliver
more substantial results.
In that respect, with the perspective of the
anticipated elections coming up in Kosovo, we call on
Pristina to focus on the swift implementation of all
measures agreed in the framework of the European
Union facilitated dialogue, with special regard to the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities.
Also, it is important for Pristina to continue along the
path of reform, from strengthening the rule of law
and the fight against corruption to socioeconomic
development. We hope those reforms will be swiftly
pursued by the new elected Government, with the
constructive cooperation of all parties.
Underscoring the priority of the European track
and acknowledging the substantial progress achieved
by Kosovo in recent years, we encourage the Security
Council to consider a review of the United Nations
presence in Kosovo, including a reconfiguration of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission

S/PV.7940

in Kosovo (UNMIK) that is consistent with overall
peacekeeping reform. That, in our view, will obviously
have to be done in close coordination with other
international organizations in the region, notably,
the European Union, NATO and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We would like to once again request that the
Secretary-General make recommendations in that
regard, given that UNMIK is already refocusing its
efforts on confidence-building and collaboration
among communities, and to draw his attention, and that
of the Council, to the opportunity to improve UNMIK’s
synergy with the European Union and its coordination
with other international actors. We equally support
the proposal to revise the frequency of the Secretary
General’s briefings and reports submitted to the
Security Council in order to better reflect the current
situation on the ground.
I conclude by highlighting the relevance of the
regional dimension. As Chair of the Berlin process in
2017, Italy will work with all western Balkan countries
to identify priorities to boost regional integration,
stability and economic growth. Both Belgrade and
Pristina are actively participating in that process.
On 24 May, the six Ministers of the western Balkan
countries will visit Rome to meet with the Italian
Minister for Foreign Affairs in preparation for the
summit we will host in Trieste on 12 July. The summit
will provide added value to the regional cooperation
process and to the European integration path of the
western Balkans.
Italy will continue to be proactively engaged in
the western Balkans — in Kosovo, with our longstanding contribution to the activities of the United
Nations, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force, as well as at th
bilateral level. The future of the region matters to all of
Europe, particularly Italy. For that reason, we strongly
condemn the nationalist and divisive rhetoric recently
reignited throughout the region. In order to avoid
political instability inside countries of the region, and
to counter any further deterioration of the relations
among the western Balkans, we call on all parties to
refrain from any unilateral initiative or declaration that
could hinder common efforts to improve cooperation
and consolidate stability. We believe that it is time for
all western Balkan countries to turn the page and work
together in the interest of all of their people.

17-1391117/24

S/PV.7940

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative Tanin for his substantive and
comprehensive briefing. We thank all of the briefers for
their updates on recent developments.
My delegation would like to offer some
observations. The developments of the past months
highlight the need for the increased engagement of both
sides so as to facilitate constructive dialogue, as set
forth in the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations. The parties need to focus on
confidence-building measures and political, military,
economic, environmental and human dimensions, in
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) and under the
auspices of the United Nations, with the involvement
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and other relevant regional organizations in
order to maintain comprehensive and durable security
and stability in Kosovo.
At the same time, no initiative should cause further
tensions and instability. The situation in Kosovo still
needs the continued attention of the Council as a matter
on its current agenda. There are yet a number of difficult
issues, such as the lack of intercommunal trust and
cooperation, increased hatred, missing persons and the
right of each — the Serbs in Kosovo and the Albanians
in Serbia — to use its native language. The full
implementation of language laws, with the protection
of minority communities, is critical to ensuring equal
rights for all and preserving the cultural diversity of
Kosovo and Serbia.
Both sides should take measures to implement
language laws and show full respect for each other’s
cultural heritage. The protection of religious and cultural
heritage should be a priority policy, so as to build trust
and confidence among communities in Kosovo and
Serbia. We commend the additional measures and
initiatives of civil society to foster dialogue between
Serbia and Kosovo. All interested parties must boost
and encourage steps that promote the liberation of the
people of Serbia and Kosovo, and convince the local
population in Kosovo to accept their outcome.
It is critical to communicate extensively and
accurately, with both parties and communities, the
kinds of social and economic benefits gained by the
local population in Kosovo. Residents need to know
that dialogue is the only means to bring about good
governance and the rule of law, and to tackle the issues
of unemployment, education, health care, pensions and
18/24

16/05/2017

other entitlements. All of those activities will assist in
gaining the much-needed support.
On the topic of human rights, we need to focus
on implementing resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security, and subsequent resolutions
for enhancing gender equality and empowerment.
Furthermore, social stability is achievable only with
the full engagement of the United Nations country
team, regional and subregional organizations and civil
society groups working to achieve sustaining peace and,
thus, further peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
mediation in Kosovo. Progress and the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia remains of crucial
importance for regional and international security. We
call on both sides to exert great political will to overcome
differences through genuine political dialogue, so as to
ensure peace and security in the region.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): Please allow me to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his informative briefing
and continued service. I should also like to thank
Minister Kuburović and Ambassador Çitaku for their
extensive remarks.
It has been nearly 18 years since resolution
1244 (1999) established the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), which
played an essential role in restoring peace and stability
to Kosovo and the region. Kosovo subsequently achieved
independence in 2008. The European Union (EU) has
supported the rule of law in many ways, including
through the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo. The picture in Kosovo today is vastly different
from that of1999, and the centrality of UNMIK’s role
has undeniably diminished.
Japan fully supports peace, stability, democracy and
the economic development of Kosovo. Also, we need to
be clear about our priorities in the Security Council, in
order to make its work more efficient and effective.
The Council today is faced with serious conflicts
and crises in the Middle East, Africa and other parts
of the world. The Council’s workload is greater than it
has ever been. By contrast, while the risk of violence
in Kosovo has not completely diminished, it is far less
than in these other regions. The Secretary-General’s
most recent report (S/2017/387) notes that there were
no violent incidents in Kosovo surrounding the recent
Serbian presidential election or any major incidents
in northern Kosovo over the past three months. We
17-13911

16/05/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

therefore believe that we are long overdue to modify
the briefing cycle that has remained in place since 1999.
We believe that a half-year cycle or longer should be
more than sufficient.
With this in mind, Japan believes that limited
peacekeeping resources must be redirected to address
the most acute needs and crises. The time is ripe for the
Council to undertake a review of UNMIK in order to
assess the functions that UNMIK alone can provide, as
well as possible personnel reductions.
None of this is to deny the outstanding issues that
Kosovo faces; reconciliation between the Albanian and
Serb communities is by far the most important. The
Secretary-General’s report notes that many Kosovar
Serbs remain unable to return. It will be important for
the EU-facilitated high-level dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade to continue. For Kosovo to become a truly
multicultural society, ongoing efforts are needed to
expand reconciliation and tolerance, including via the
establishment of the Association/Community of Serbmajority municipalities.
Japan also hopes that Kosovo will become an
increasingly responsible member of the international
community. We thus welcome the entry into force last
year of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
between Kosovo and the EU. At the same time, we
noted the adoption of the no-confidence motion
against the Cabinet on 10 May and urge leaders to
ensure that Kosovo continues its steady progress
towards EU membership while avoiding any narrow
nationalist appeals.
Finally, I should like to take note of Kosovo’s peace
and stability, its democratic progress and last year’s
4 per cent economic growth. It is my strong belief that
Kosovo will become a diverse, multicultural country
through community reconciliation, just socioeconomic
policies and tireless efforts by each citizen. While the
presence of the United Nations in Kosovo should be
scaled down in future, our unwavering support for this
young nation’s continued development and democracy
will remain unchanged.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I should like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), our colleague
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, for his comprehensive
briefing on the latest developments in Kosovo, which
has highlighted how the use of language could cause

S/PV.7940

real problems and how loose talk, some would say
rhetoric, could lead to a dangerous situation.
I also welcome the presence of Minister Nela
Kuburović at today’s meeting and would like to
thank her for her statement. I also thank Ambassador
Ms. Vlora Çitaku for her remarks.
At the previous debate (see S/PV.7891), we made
our position very clear with respect to the need to
ensure that all the issues surrounding Kosovo are
resolved in a just and fair manner, without ignoring the
interests of any, big or small. We would like to reiterate
our support for the peaceful and amicable resolution of
all outstanding issues between Belgrade and Pristina in
accordance with the Brussels Agreement.
We also welcome the ongoing efforts being made
by the European Union in facilitating dialogue between
the two parties, including the convening of the two
high-level meetings by the High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy in the reporting period.
We note the latest political and security
developments in relations between Belgrade and
Pristina, and we are concerned by the slow progress in
the practical implementation of dialogue agreements
between the two parties during the reporting period.
In this regard, the lack of concrete steps towards the
establishment of the Association/Community of Serbmajority municipalities in Kosovo as well the delay in
completing judicial integration in northern Kosovo,
as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/387), should be seen as a source of concern.
We also note the controversy in relation to the
proposal on the transformation of the Kosovo Security
Force and the strong reaction that it has created. On
the other hand, however, we recognize some of the
positive developments as highlighted in the report,
including the resumption by members of the Kosovo
Serb political grouping of their participation in official
activities of the Assembly and Government of Kosovo,
the conduct of voting for the Serbian presidential
election throughout Kosovo without any incident, and
the lessening of tension in northern Kosovo.
Ethiopia also fully supports the work that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has been undertaking in the discharge of
the mandates bestowed on it within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999), particularly its good offices to

17-1391119/24

S/PV.7940

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

defuse tensions and promote consensual solutions to
problems on the ground. It is our hope that UNMIK
will continue to promote political dialogue and human
rights, strengthen community reconciliation, and
ensure security and stability in Kosovo and the region.
In concluding, I should like to state that security
and stability in Kosovo and the region will ultimately
be ensured when there is the necessary resolve on
the part of all parties to address the real challenge
they face. In this respect, we encourage both parties
to remain committed to dialogue and negotiation in a
spirit of understanding and compromise on mutually
acceptable ways.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing. Let me join
others in welcoming Ambassador Çitaku and Minister
Kuburović to the Council.
It has been less than three months since the Council
met to discuss the situation in Kosovo. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/387) makes clear, it has been
a comparatively quiet period, one that does not warrant
the Council’s attention so soon after our last meeting.
This period of calm is welcome. A de-escalation
in tension between Kosovo and Serbia, whether in this
Chamber or in the region, is something that I am sure
we would all like to see sustained. We particularly
welcome the withdrawal of the proposal to transform
the Kosovo Security Force into an army. We encourage
the Government of Kosovo to continue to engage with
communities in Kosovo and NATO partners on any
such moves.
Despite the stability of the reporting period, we
are concerned by the slow progress in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. We all know that the
future of Kosovo will be determined in Brussels and
not in this Chamber in New York. So it is vital that
both sides re-engage and live up to their commitment
to the dialogue following elections in Serbia and the
forthcoming elections in Kosovo in June.
As Kosovo prepares to go to the polls, let me say
that we look forward to free and fair elections and to a
Government that reflects the will of the people. Once it is
formed, there will be plenty to do, including continuing
efforts on issues such as the Association/Community of
Serb-majority municipalities. In that effort, they will
have the fullest support of the United Kingdom.
20/24

16/05/2017

While it was not captured in the report of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), it is important to recognize in this Chamber
the progress that Kosovo has made internationally since
we last met. Diplomatic relations have been established
with Brunei and Samoa, and Kosovo opened its first
embassy in Africa, in Senegal. And in a further sign
of ever-increasing international integration, Kosovo
became the 181st member of the World Customs
Organization, a move that will bring economic benefits
for all who call Kosovo home.
This is progress that we rarely hear about in the
Council. Instead, every three months, we are transported
back nearly 20 years to a time of ethnic division and of
fluid lines on maps, but, in truth, those lines have long
since been set. These meetings do not reflect Kosovo
now but as it was. Let me reiterate, therefore, that it is
long past time for the Council to decrease the frequency
of these meetings. And just as these meetings must
adapt, so too must UNMIK, so that it better reflects the
present situation.
We recognize the important work that UNMIK
has done during many years for the benefit of Kosovo,
and welcome its activism on the women and peace and
security agenda during the reporting period. But it is
time for the Mission to take a step back. As such, we
are disappointed by the move to increase the budget of
UNMIK this year, particularly after numerous calls
at the past two meetings for a down-scaling of the
Mission and especially given that additional funds are
earmarked for projects that focus on issues on which
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo is
already engaged.
Given the pressures placed on the peacekeeping
budget and Kosovo’s continued move away from
instability and insecurity, the United Kingdom believes
that it is long past time for UNMIK to undergo some
form of reconfiguration. We look forward to receiving
proposals from the Secretariat in due course.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I join others in thanking
Mr. Tanin, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for
his briefing.
I also express my gratitude to Her Excellency
Ms. Nela Kuburović, Minister of Justice of the
Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Çitaku, for their
respective statements.
17-13911

16/05/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Unfortunately, the negative sequence of events
that have caused instability and could generate further
tensions in Kosovo continued during the reporting
period. Ukraine regrets that, despite the concerns
expressed by Security Council members during
their discussion in February (see S/PV.7891), Kosovo
institutions attempted to move ahead on transforming
the Kosovo Security Force into an armed force. We
consider such an approach to establish facts on the
ground as having the potential to lead to heightened
tensions in the region. We are worried that an attempted
conversion of the Kosovo Security Force into a Kosovo
army, coupled with rising ethno-nationalist sentiments,
could be an explosive cocktail. That definitely does
not contribute to confidence-building both among
communities inside Kosovo and between Belgrade and
Pristina. We commend the quick reaction by the NATO
and the United States to that development and welcome
the decision by Kosovo institutions to withdraw
that initiative.
We have also witnessed further disturbing
developments with regard to property issues, hate
speech implying ethnic cleansing, incidents involving
travellers from Kosovo, resistance to the process of
peaceful returns, as well as the resolution of the Kosovo
Assembly calling for the suspension of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. My delegation is frustrated
by the reported obstruction of returns, particularly in
Istok. During the first visit of the Security Council to
Kosovo in 2000, in which Ukraine participated, Istok
was presented as a prospective area for Serbs’ returns.
Seventeen years later, nothing has changed, and those
who oppose returns are using same old arguments.
All those developments do not contribute to the
spirit of restraint and cooperation needed to achieve the
necessary progress on the implementation of the agreed
commitments. Against that backdrop, we welcome
the efforts of the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO and
UNMIK to preserving peace and stability in Kosovo.
Their actions are vital for diffusing tensions and averting
any further deterioration of the situation. We reiterate
our call on political leaders in Belgrade and Pristina
to actively work to avoid provocation, confrontation,
and escalation leading to a conflict. It is important to
continue the implementation of their commitments,
thereby bringing benefits for all people living in the
region and enhancing their European perspective.

S/PV.7940

Ukraine would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the peaceful holding of the Serbian presidential
elections in Kosovo. We are glad that, despite some
difficulties, according to the report of the SecretaryGeneral,
“no security incidents were reported in connection
with the voting, collection or transportation of
votes” (S/2017/387, para. 12).
We fully agree with the Secretary-General’s
observations that
“the European Union-facilitated dialogue is the best
available mechanism for the peaceful resolution
of differences, to the benefit of both sides” (ibid.,
para. 47).
We support the European Union’s enhanced role
in the region, which has proved to be constructive
and has contributed to the stabilization and peaceful
development of countries in the Western Balkans and
Europe in general.
Finally, we support, as we have before, the call of
many other delegations to reconsider the regularity of
the Council’s briefings on Kosovo and to begin focused
discussions on UNMIK’ reconfiguration.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I am grateful to Mr. Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing on the
current situation in Kosovo.
I also express my gratitude to Her Excellency
Ms. Kuburović, Minister of Justice of the Republic of
Serbia, and Ms. Çitaku for their statements.
Bolivia calls for compliance with resolution 1244
(1999), including full respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty, and independence of Serbia. We believe that
the attempt to establish a Kosovo army runs contrary
to that resolution and poses a threat to the progress
made between the parties. Accordingly, that type of
action or, indeed, any action leading to an escalation
of violence, is not conducive to fostering a peaceful
solution and must therefore be avoided. We believe that
a constructive environment must be established so as
to achieve solutions leading to progress and stability.
We therefore commend the European Union-facilitated
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade, which opens
a way to a lasting solution so as to end the conflicts

17-1391121/24

S/PV.7940

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

affecting the region. To that end, parties must refrain
from making statements containing bellicose and
inflammatory rhetoric.
Bolivia encourages the parties to continue
working together, in particular on the agreement
concerning the establishment of the association of
Serbian municipalities covered in the Brussels dialogue
leading to security and human rights of Serbians in
Kosovo and Metohija in which they are the majority
of the population. We underscore the voluntary return
of 90 members non-majority communities, especially
the Roma-Ashkali-Egyptian community. Moreover,
Bolivia deplores the hindering of the return of internally
displaced persons in certain regions in Kosovo. We
call on the parties to join efforts to ensuring their safe
return to their homes.
With regard to UNMIK, we highlight the work and
efforts made in cooperation with the Kosovar authorities
to approve legislation strengthening capacity ensuring
the protection of cultural and religious heritage, as well
as its work in holding an open roundtable discussion on
women and peace and security in Kosovo, on the theme
“The role of women in reconciliation: building peace
and security in Kosovo”. We believe that women are
key actors in long-term confidence-building and peace
in the region.
We call on the parties to refrain from committing
acts of aggression running contrary to the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We
call on the parties to reach a peaceful resolution to the
conflict through the dialogue and the duty to negotiate
in accordance with the provisions of international law.
Such efforts must be made so as to achieve lasting
peace that, over the long-term, will benefit the region
if the Serbs and Kosovars show the will to resolve their
differences with the help of regional organizations.
Bolivia appreciates the efforts made by the
European Union and agrees with the statement made
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/387),
according to which,
“[t]he European Union-facilitated dialogue is
the best available mechanism for the peaceful
resolution of differences, to the benefit of both
sides. Progress, for each party, can be achieved
only by peaceful means and, regardless of electoral
cycles and daily politics ... ”. (S/2017/387. para. 47)
22/24

16/05/2017

Finally, Bolivia appreciates the work and efforts
made by UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, and by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We encourage
continued confidence-building efforts, as well as the
use of peaceful means and dialogue with a view to
promoting peace, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mrs. Audouard (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank Mr. Tanin for his briefing, as
well as the representatives of Serbia and Kosovo for
their statements.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate, once again,
and as others before me have done, our wish that the
Security Council review how frequently it considers
the situation in Kosovo. With the Council facing
an ever-increasing workload, there is no longer any
justification for maintaining quarterly briefings on the
Kosovo issue, which is not comparable to that of crises
for which the Council’s robust engagement is essential.
We believe that the positive developments in
Kosovo in recent years in terms of institution-building
also justify efforts to refocus the actions of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) as well as their coordination with other
international actors in Kosovo. We once again call
on the Secretary-General to make recommendations
on this issue in his next report. The current standstill
is unacceptable given that it is our responsibility as
members of the Security Council to ensure that the
measures taken by the United Nations are fully adapted
to the situation on the ground. Unfortunately, that is no
longer the case at present.
France is convinced that the future of Kosovo is no
longer an urgent Council matter; rather, it falls within
the context of the European-Union-led political dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. In that regard, it is
important that the parties demonstrate the highest level
of proactive commitment. Beyond mere declarations
of intent, we expect that all of the agreements reached
will be effectively implemented as soon as possible,
including the agreement on the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo, which is a key aspect of the dialogue. We
therefore call on the Kosovo and Serbian authorities to
intensify their efforts, particularly on that last point, in
order to produce more concrete results in the months
17-13911

16/05/2017

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

to come. That is a subject that we will continue to
follow closely.
The normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina remains, in general, a prerequisite for their
respective progress on the path to European integration,
which was again encouraged at the European Council
on 9 and 10 March.
After the episodes of unrest in recent months, we
expect more than ever that all actors show responsibility
and restraint, a point that is all the more important in
view of the upcoming elections in Kosovo. France is
convinced that the resurgence of nationalist discourse,
sometimes tinged with community-based references,
poses a threat to the stability of the region, to which the
peoples of Kosovo and Serbia both aspire.
In that regard, the agreement recently reached at
the local level as to the demolition of the Mitrovica
wall is a positive example, showing that concrete
solutions can be found to foster coexistence between
communities, free from political provocation and any
divisive rhetoric. The fact that the recent involvement
of Serbian citizens living in Kosovo in the Serbian
presidential election was not accompanied by any
serious incidents, thanks to the work of the Kosovo
and Serbian electoral institutions and the support of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
is another encouraging development that we welcome.
Lastly, President Thaçi’s choice to favour an inclusive
approach with regard to a possible transformation of the
status of the Kosovo security forces is also one likely
to avoid an escalation of tensions, which would be as
unnecessary as it would be dangerous.
Continued efforts by Kosovo to consolidate the
rule of law must also remain a priority. That includes
the fight against radicalization in all of its forms. We
welcome the unconditional commitment of Kosovo in
that regard, both locally and within the global coalition
against Da’esh.
Finally, I conclude my remarks by recalling
France’s commitment to the relationship of trust that
we have traditionally maintained with Serbia and
Kosovo, as well as our support for reconciliation in the
region and the implementation of the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. In that regard, allow me to point
out that the French judiciary independently rendered
a decision in the Haradinaj case. French authorities
cannot comment on that judicial decision, but it should
in no way be interpreted politically.

S/PV.7940

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.
I thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his comprehensive briefing. Likewise, I should like
to thank the Minister of Justice of Serbia, Ms. Nela
Kuburović, for her intervention. I take note of the
statement made by Ms. Vlora Çitaku.
Allow me to begin by stressing, as I have
mentioned on other occasions, that Uruguay advocates
for compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) as the legal
basis for a resolution of the situation in Kosovo. Strict
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States is a fundamental principle of Uruguay’s
foreign policy.
We believe it is essential that the dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade being facilitated by the European
Union move forward and, in that regard, we express our
full support for that process. The interruption in the
dialogue and the delays in the implementation of the
international agreements are a source of tensions and
distrust in the region.
In view of the political situation that Kosovo
currently faces, we encourage leaders to work in a
constructive manner and to seek the speedy resumption
of the Belgrade talks and the implementation of the
agreements concluded. Progress on the commitments
already made will contribute to the achievement of
stability at the domestic and international levels, and to
the improvement of the conditions and development of
the people to their highest potential.
We firmly believe in the path of reconciliation. To
that end, it is necessary to move toward truth and justice.
Despite years of work, 1,664 cases of missing persons
remain unsolved, and major questions still remain. It is
imperative to make progress in that area. The families
of the disappeared deserve to have access to information
about the fate of their loved ones. It is a fundamental
matter concerning the defence of human rights.
Furthermore, addressing the situation of internally
displaced persons is essential for reconciliation. Efforts
by local officials to hamper returns are worrying.
Moreover, efforts should be made at the local
level and in neighbouring countries to combat
ethno-nationalist discourse and incitement to hatred

17-1391123/24

S/PV.7940

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

and resentment. Discrimination and ultranationalism
have been the cause of great misfortune for humankind.
Respect for the religious and cultural specificities of
each community, as well as policies oriented towards
minority groups, are essential to consolidate peace.
UNMIK undertakes important work for the
population of Kosovo, via collaboration with the
leaders of Pristina and Belgrade. UNMIK also works
at the regional, municipal and community levels where,
among other activities, it spearheads activities directed
at minority groups and young people. I specifically wish
to highlight the Global Open Day on Women, Peace and
Security, the theme of which was “The role of women in
reconciliation: building peace and security in Kosovo”,
held on 15 March under the auspices of UNMIK.
Uruguay believes that the participation of women at all
levels is indispensable for the achievement of sustainable

24/24

16/05/2017

peace processes. Truth, justice, reconciliation, security,
equal rights, guarantees and inclusive processes are the
foundations of sustainable peace.
In addition to the work of UNMIK, I wish to
recognize the role of the European Union as facilitator
of the dialogues and as a cooperating partner, the work
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Kosovo Force and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, as well as the support
of the entire United Nations system.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

17-13911
