48

General Assemhly-Twenty-se,·cnth Se~sion

development of developing countries as defined by the
United Nations;
3. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
discharge its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations and section I, paragraph 3, of General
Assembly resolution 2997 (XXVII), in such a way
as to enhance the attainment of the goals and objectives
of the International Development Strategy for the
Second United Nations Development Decade and to
ensure that the development priorities of the developing
countries set out in the International Development
Strategy are in no way adversely affected or distorted;
4. Recommends respect for the principle that resources for environmental programmes, both within
and outside the United Nations system, be additional
to the present level and projected growth of resources
contemplated in the International Development Strategy,
to be made available for programmes directly related to
developmental assistance;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a report providing
a comprehensive picture within the United Nations
system of the distribution and patterns of growth of
resources and programmes in various fields, including
funds for special purposes, in order to permit an evaluation of their conformity with the over-all policies and
priorities of development as established in the relevant
decisions of the Council and the Assembly.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

(XXV) of 7 December 1970 and 2850 (XXVI) of
20 December 1971 on the preparations for the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment,
Noting with appreciation the report of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment, 60 in
particular the recommendation on the establishment nf
the environment secretariat,
Noting also the report of the Secretary-General on
the location of the proposed environment secretariat,7°
Considering that the headquarters of the United
Nations and of the specialized agencies arc all located
in the developed States in North America and Western
Europe,
Convinced that in order to employ international
machinery for the promotion of the economic and social
advancement of all peoples, in accordance with the
Preamble of the Charter of the United Nations, the·
activities and headquarters or secretariats of Unite!
Nations bodies or agencies should be located having
regard, inter alia, to equitable geographical distribution
of such activities, headquarters or secretariats,
1. Decides to locate the environment secretariat in
a developing country;
2. Further decides to locate the environment secretariat in Nairobi, Kenya.
2112th plenary meeti11g
1 5 December 1972
3015 (XXVII).

3003 (XXVII). International prize for the most
outstamlin~ <'ontrihution in the field of the
environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling recommendation 38 of the Action Plan for
the Human EnvironmentG 7 adopted by the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment,
Recalling also that one main purpose of the Conference was to increase the awareness among Governments and public opinion about the importance and
urgency of the problems of the environment,
Recognizing that effective international co-operation
in the field of the environment should be firmly based
on action at the national level,
Welcomes the initiative of the Government of Iran
in setting aside an area constituting an ecosystem of
global importance to be placed in joint trust with an
international agency and in establishing an annual prize
by that Government for the most outstanding contribution in the field of the environment to be awarded
through the United Nations.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972
3004 (XXVII). Location of the environment
secretariat68

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2398 (XXIII) of 3 December 1968, 2581 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969, 2657
'"• Sec A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.1, chap. II.
,;s See resolution 2997 (XXVII), sect. II.

United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Having considered the section of the report of the
Economic and Social Council dealing with the United
Nations Children's Fund, 71
1. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1709 (LIii) of 28 July 1972 on the United
Nations Children's Fund;
2. Reiterates its appeal to Governments and other
donors to make every effort to increase their contributions to the Fund so as to enable it to reach its target
figure of $100 million by 1975.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3016 (XXVII). Permanent sovereignty over natural resources of developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 626 (VII) of 21 December
1952, 1803 (XVII) of 14 December 1962, 2158
(XXI) of 25 November 1966, 2386 (XXIII) of 19
November 1968 and 2692 (XXV) of 11 December
1970 concerning permanent sovereignty over natural
resources,
Rcaffin11i11g the need for further examination of the~.:
vital issues by the General Assembly,
Emphasizing the great importance for the economic
progress of all countries, especially the developing
Go A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.I.

,o A/8783/ AJd.l and Corr.1 and Add.2.
71 Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Twent\'-sc,·1·111/,
Session, Supp/cmeflt No. 3 (A/8703), chap. VII, sect.· D.

Resolutions adopt<'d on the repo1·ts of the Second Committee

countries, of their fully exercising their rights so as
to secure the maximum yield from their natural
resources, both on land and in their coastal waters,
Taking into account principles II and XI of resolution 46 (III) of 18 May 1972 adopted by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its
third session, 72
A Isa taking into account resolution 45 ( III) of 18
May 1972, adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its third session,'~ entitled "Charter of the economic rights and duties of
States", and having regard to the relevant principles of
the Declaration of the United Nations Conference on
the Human Environment, 73
1. Reaffirms the right of States to permanent
sovereignty over all their natural resources, on land
within their international boundaries as well as those
found in the sea-bed and the subsoil thereof within
their national jurisdiction and in the supcrjacent waters;
2. Further reaffirms its resolution 2625 (XXV) of
24 October 1970, containing the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, which proclaims that no State may use or encourage the use of
economic, political or any other type of measures to
coerce another State in order to obtain from it the
subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights
and to secure from it advantages of any kind;
3. Declares that actions, measures or legislative
regulations by States aimed at coercing, directly or
indirectly, other States engaged in the change of their
internal structure or in the exercise of their sovereign rights over their natural resources, both on land
and in their coastal waters, are in violation of the
Charter and of the Declaration contained in resolution
2625 (XXV) and contradict the targets, objectives
and policy measures of the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade; 74
4. Calls upon Governments to continue their efforts
aimed at the implementation of the principles and recommendations contained in the aforementioned resolutions of the General Assembly and, in particular, of
the principles enunciated in paragraphs 1 to 3 above;
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on permanent sovereignty over natural resources 75 and
requests him to supplement it with a further detailed
study on recent developments, taking into account the
right of States to exercise permanent sovereignty over
their natural resources, as well as the factors impeding
States from exercising this right;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to accord high priority, at its fifty-fourth session, to the
item entitled ''Permanent sovereignty over natural
resources of developing countries", together with the
report of the Secretary-General and the present resolution, and to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-eighth session.
2113th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
,2 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Sessinn. vol. I. Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4),
annex I.A.
7 3 See

A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.I, chap. I.

3017 (XXVII). Outflow of trained personnel from
developing to developed countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2083 (XX) of 20 December
1965, relating to the development and utilization of
human resources, 2090 (XX) of 20 December 1965
and 2259 (XXII) of 3 November 1967, relating to the
training of national technical personnel for the accelerated industrialization of the developing countries,
and 2320 (XXII) of 15 December 1967 and 2417
(XXIII) of 17 December 1968, relating to the outflow
of trained personnel from the developing countries, and
Economic and Social Council resolution 1573 (L) of
19 May 1971,
Bearing in mind that an acceleration of the rate of
economic growth of the developing countries and a
rapid improvement of their social structures through the
eradication of mass poverty, inequality and illiteracy
require, inter alia, an over-all strategy for technological
development,
Conscious that the technological development of developing countries, even though concentrated on
research and its practical applications with a view to
the promotion of local and adapted technologies,
should, in the most favourable conditions, benefit from
a large-scale transfer of appropriate technological
knowledge accumulated mainly in the developed countries,
Considering how decisively important it is for the
developing countries to have technically and scientifically trained local personnel in order to:
(a) Take advantage of the facilities offered by access to the technology of the developed countries,
( b) Use that technology by adapting it to national
conditions,
( c) Develop techniques suited to their production
structures,
( cl) Create their own national technologies,
Considering further that the objectives mentioned
in the preceding paragraph have been adequately enunciated in the World Plan of Action for the Application
o.f Science and Technology to Development prepared
by the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development,7 6
Taking into account that not only has this largescale transfer of the store of technological knowledge
not taken place, but that what has in fact been witnessed in recent years is the opposite phenomenon,
namely, a constant diminution of the store of technological knowledge in the developing countries through
the outflow of trained national personnel who emigrate chieily to some of the market-economy countries,
thus obviously affecting the capacity of the developing
countries to cope with the tasks of development through
the utilization of trained national personnel,
Rl'Cognizing that the outflow of trained personnel
from the developing countries has its roots in the
phenomenon of under-development itself and that any
measures to overcome it must take into consideration
that fall. as well as an understanding of the reasons
for the outllow.
I. lnvitrs the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with 1hc organizations of the United Nations system

74 Resolution 2626 (XXV).

75 E/5170.

49

711 Unitcci

Nation~ publication, Sales No.: E.71.II.A.18.
