;4"11nited Nations

312tb

.GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Monday, 20 November 1950, a'S p.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Flushing Meadow, New York

OlJiciol Recorth

----------------------------------------"

CONTENTS

Page

Order of the consideration of agenda items

487

Economic development of under-developed countries: repol"t of the Second .
Committee (A/lS24) ."'............................................ .487
Development of a twenty-year programme for achieving peace through the
United Nations: memorandum of the Secretary-General (A/1304)
( concluded) ......•..........•..•...•••..• ~ ••...•••••••••• eo • • • • • • ~7

President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEzAM (Iran).

Order of the'consideration of agenda items
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The Second Committee, which is dealing with the
question of the economic development of under-developed cmmtries, will be holding a meeting tonight. That
Committee's report appears as the second item on our
agenda. In order to save our colleagues on the Second
Committee the trouble of having to wait here until
the second item is discussed,· we could, if you agree,
proceed to the second item and then return to the first.
If, however, the Assembly should decide to hold a
discussion on the second item, my request would lose
its point and we should continue the consideration of
the: first item.
.
2. If there are no objections, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with my suggestion.
It was so decided.
Economic development of under-developed countries: report of the Second Committee (A/I524)
[Agenda item 28]
.
3. The PRESIDENT (translated f-rom Frend,,):
Before calling 9n the Rapporteur, r shall ask the Assembly to indicate whether it wishes to discuss the
Second Committee's report.
It Was decided flot to disctlSs the report.
Mr. Vi/fan (Yugoslavia), Rapporteur, presented the
report of the Second Committee and the accompanying
draft resolutions (Aj1524).
4. Mr. VILFAN (YugJoslavia), Rapporteur of the
Second Committee: I shouid like to stress the fact
th"t all the draft resolutions were approved unanitnously by the Second Co:ntnittee.
5. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I shall put to the vote, in turn" the draft resolutions

A, B, Cl D, E and F contained in the Second Committee's report.

The draft resolutions were adopted unanimously.

Development of a twenty-year p~ogranune for
achieving peace through the United Nations:
memoranduJb. of the Secretary.General

(A/ISM) (concluded)

[Agenda item 60]

6. Mr. SIROKY (Czechoslovakia) (translated from
Russian): The People's Democratic Republic of Czechoslovakia, whose policy is based on 'Work, peace, a.nd
the friendly and peaceful co..existeli\Ce of nations,
welcomes every honest pian which may result in a
step forward. in the effort to preserve and strengthen
peace. It welcomes every peaceful plan designed to
provide effective and concrete measures to guarantee
the security of the nations.
.
7. In the consideration, therefore, of the twenty-year
programme by the General Assembly, the Czechoslovak
delegation is· guided by a strong desire to contribute
towards the successful solution of the basic problems
of the struggle against aggression and war and on
behalf of peace. My 'delegaiion, it is true, takes a"
critical attitude towards the various points of the plan
which has been submit~,ed, and also towards its general conception; for the so-called programme for
achieving peace through the United Nations is an
idea of the Anglo-Atnerican bloc, which is attempting
to convert the United Nations into an effective instrument of its policy.
8. It was no accident that during the discussion of
the Secretary-General's programme,. the representative of the United States said [310th meeting] that
the three resolutions already adopted at this session
of the General Assembly of the United Nations on

487
'!

~.~

',-

.

4 '"

..

•

I ••

A/PV.312

«

u

4

I

. ..

"United action for peace" [302ntl ."Ilng] t "Duties of
18. Two things are obvious in this eonnexion·. The
States in the event of the outbreak of hostilities"
first is that in its present form Trygve Lie's programme
[308th ffleeting] and "Peace through deeds" [308th
does not contain these definite principles. It contains
M,eting] - represented an imP9rtant step forward only ~ list of the questions which must be settled. The
towards the realization of the principles set forth in
second is that it is the General Assembly itself which
the memoftl.ndum. All these resolutions to which refermust work out and adopt these definite guiding rules
ence is made here in connexion with the memorandum
for further work. The questions~ which the memoranwere adopted at the initiative of the States of the
dum enumerates but does not solve, are important
North Atlantie Treaty and. whatever else they may
political questions, a.~d they are among the basic quesbe••they are n~t an effective weapon in the struggle
tions of international political significance. If these
agamst aggressIOn and war.
questions are to 00 successfully and thoroughly dealt
with. it is obvious that the General Ass~mbly must
9. What is the real meaning of these resoluiions from
first establish the political principles on the basis of
the point of view of the international campaign to secure
which
they can be effectively settled.
peac~? We are profoundly convinced that they are
intended to serve a number of ends.
19. For these reasons the Czechoslovak delegation
cannot agree with the nine-Power draft resolution
10. In the first place. they are intended to sUPIXlrt
[A/1514]. We shall not vote for that draft resolution,
the foreign policy of the prime mover in the Anglofor in our opinion the present international situation
American bloc, the United States, which has replaced
requires a very definite and concrete formulation of
the principle of d6110cratic collaboration by acts of
all measures for strengthening peace and security
interventionist aggression and an attempt to secure
among the nations.
mastery of the world.
11. Secondly, they are intended to thwart the basic
20. Great value must therefore !Je placed upon the
interests of the dependent, colonial and semi-colonial
inidative of th~ USSR delegation, which. basing its
peoples and their liberation movement, and to supoort
action on its consistently peaceful policy and its conthe expansionist interests of the capitalistic monopoiies.
sistently constructive attitt:le in the United Nations,
has submitted for the consideration of the General As12. Thirdly, they are intended to legalize the present
sembly a draft resolution [A/1525 and Carr.l] which
policy of interference by the colonial Powers in the
makes it possible to give practical consideration to the
domestic affairs of other States;
so-called
twenty-year programme.
13. Fourthly, in connexion with the struggle against
the ideological, political, strategical and material prep21. In the opinion of the Czechoslovak delegation,
aration for a new war. they are intended to sanction
the Soviet Union draft resolution contains definite
the present and future policy of the immgators of a
principles on the basis of which it would be possible
new war, for they do not settle such prt:)blems as the
to prepare a document that would be an effective inprohibition of the atomic weapon, rea:rmament and
strument for seeking peace and ensuring peaceful c0disarmament or war propaganda.
operation among the nations.
14. Fifthly, they are intended to diminish the impor22. The United States criticism that the USSR draft
tance and undermine the authority of the Security
resolution reproduces old peace proposals advanced by
Council, the chief organ of the United Nations for the
the Soviet Union and already rejected by the General
preservation of peace and security among the nations.
Assembly does not hold water m view of the inter..
national
resistance to the preparations for a new war.
15. Sixthly, they are intended to violate the basic
The
fact
that the USSR IS supporting effective measprinciples of the United Nations Charter.
ures against the preparations for a new war merely
16. The first resolution mentioned by the representaprovides further proof of its consistent peace policy.
tive of the United States contains a violation of the
23. The Czechoslovak delegation entirely shares the
principles of the Charter unparalleled in United Naview that the question, for instance. of the prohibition
tions history, and one which affects the competence
of the atomic weapon and other weapons for the mass
of the Security Council; the resolution is, indeed, a
extermination of people cannot be withdrawn from
genuine in.strument of the interventionist policy of
the agenda of the General Assembly and the other
of the Anglo-American bloc. The second resolutio~l
organs of the United Nations until an unconditional
places the aggressor and the victim of aggression on
prohibition of atomic weapons has been ado~ted, until
the same level, and is a further link in the chain of
the vague formulae about so-called international condocuments directed against the Security Council. And
trol of atomic energy have been replaced by a specific
the third resolution virtually buries the question of disand 'binding prohibition of the atomic weapon, until
armament and the reduction of armed forces, as well as
the just desire of hundreds of millions of people
the question of the prohibition of the atomic weapon,
throughout
the world - the desire that atomic energy
and at the same time establishes a further legal basis for
should
be
usedonly for purposes of peaceful, conarmed intervention in the domestic affairs of States.
structive work in the service of mankind and human
17. The author of the memoratldum himself emphawelfare
-has prevailed.
sizes that his programme is only a general outline of
24. The policy of the enemies of peace and the peace"
preliminary projects, and requires to be made more
fut co-existence of nations is to use atomic energy for
definite. Thus it is clear that this proposal cart serve
as a basis for the preparation of a document expressthe production of atomic weapons and is vastly detrimental to the interests of progress, which require that
ing an effective peace policy only if the General As..
atomic energy should be placed wholly and exclusively
sembly is able to work out specific directives and estabat the service of the economy and welfare of mankind.
lish specific principles for further work.

--

312th MeellDl-2O November 1950

25. Atomic wea~nl must be prohibited and destro~ because their pu~se is the mass extermination of ~ple and because they threaten all the achieve-

ments of civilization. progress and humanity. The
question. therefore, cannot and will not be withdrawn
from the agenda until mankind enjoys the beneficent
results of this achievement of human genius for the
development of its peaceful economy, welfare and
culture.
26. Without the prohibition of the atomic weapon,
there can be no effective international control of atomic
energy. What, for example, could any or~ of the
United Nations do with regard to ~int 2 m the Secretary-General's programme, concerning the establishment of an international control system for atomic
energy, which. apart from stating that "every possibility should be explored"; makes litera.1Iy no specific
proposals and, in the spirit of the recently adopted
resolution submitted by the Anglo-Amerlcan bloc,
avoids the question of the prohibition of the atomic
weapon?
27. If the General Assembly does not clearly indicate
that the system of international control must apply to
the prohibition of the atomic weapon, how will the
appropriate United Nations organ which is to examine
this question know what is to be controlled? A clear
indication of this kind is cOii!tained in the Soviet Union
draft resolution, which requires the unconditional prohibition of the atomic weapon and other weapons for
the mass extermination of people, aRid" at the same time
the institution of control to ensure th~ observance of
that prohibition.
28. The position of the United States representative
on the question of the proper composition of the Security Council, in connexion with the proposal for the
holding of periodic meetings, is hostile not only to the
Security Council, which is primarily responsible for
international peace and security and is now functioning
with an illegal membership, but also to the great
People's Republic of China. The USSR draft resolution, which IS based on the necessity for changing this
illegal situation so that the Security Council may function successfully and legally, requires that if it is
decided to inaugurate periodic meetings of the Security Council, provision should be made to ensure that
the Council is "fully and legally constituted with the
participation of the representative of the People's Republic of China".
29. The argument advanced by the United States representative that this paragraph of the Soviet Union
draft resolution is unacceptable because the General
Assembly still recognizes the Nationalist Government
of China, does not bear scrutiny.
30. It does not bear scrutiny because it is precisely
the United States aggression a~nst the territory of
the People's Republic of China, m the form of a blockade and the occupation of the Chinese island of Taiwan,
which is forcibly preventing the legitimate government
of the Chinese people from exercising its authority in
that portion of Chinese territory. It is only the illegal
pnited States occupation of TaIwan which is prolongtng the existence, in t~a:t portion of C~inese terri!ory,
of the bankrupt Kuommtang group which the ChInese
people have expelled as a puppet of the United States
Imperialists. The United States argument does not

..

hold water because its purpose is to ensure that the
General Assembly will perpetuate the present illegal
situation which "'as been Imposed upon the United
Nations by the unilateral and hostile attitude of the
United States Government towards the Chinese people.
31. This state of affairs, which is seriously impairing
the authority of the United Nations and destroying
the conditions required for peaceful co-operation, IS in
accordance with the trend of the aggressive United
States policy in regard to the Pacific area in general,
and the People's Republic of China in particular.
32. Shortly after the Second World War, the ruling
circles in the United States~ _pursuing their plans for
the establishment of United States world domination_
began to count upon China as their strategic base in
Asia. The war a~inst the Japanese invad~rs was
hardly over when United States militaristic circles
were already making tremendous efforts to buttress
the KtiOn1mmng re~me and that regime's extensive
pr.eparations for civil war against the Chinese ~ople
who il~d fought to secure the independence of ChIna
from foreign imperialists. The Chinese people were
still fightint~ against the Japanese invaders when the
United States monopolists developed and began .to
execute ptanll for the economic enslavement and exploitation of the huge territory of China.
33. The United States began.to count.more and more
upon China as an enormous market and as a SCUfce of
raw materials in view of the clear indications of an
impending economic crisis in the United States. 1.;.",
victory of L'te People's Republic of China was a great
defeat for the imperialists in general and for the
United
States imperialists in particular.
...
34. The United States ruling circles, in their preparations for a third world war, are striving to crush
the national liberation movement of the colonial, semicolonial and dependent peoples of Asia. By attacking
the Korean people, its freedom and independence, the
United States has proceeded from threats to direct
acts of aggression.
35. The further development of United States policy
in the Pacific area, the systematic air raids on the
Chinese People's Republic, the violation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of China, the blockade
and the occupation of an inalienable part of the Chinese
People's Republic, the island of Taiwan - all this is not
only in keeping with the general pOlicy of the United
States ruling circles in the Pacific a rea, but is also
evidence of their obvious intention to extend the war
in .the Far East. This development oi United States
policy in Korea and against the People's Republic of
China is causing not only the peoples of Asia, who
are directly threatened by United States aggression,
to be very much on their guard; it is also causing the
peoples of the whole world, who most earnestly wish
to ensure international peace and security, to keep a
close watch on this policy.
36. It is clear in the light of these facts that the
negative attitude of the United States delegation to the
question of the .lawful representation of the Chinese
people .in the United Nations is prompted solely by
the hostility of the United States ruling circles to the
Chinese people and by their aggressive actions and
plans against the Chinese People's Republic. These

General Aaeembly-Fifth ·Seseion-P1enary Meetinge
.490
. . ., -----------------=---.
. . . . _-------=:---_...:.:::.-----------facts once again confirm our point of view, which is
that law and the Charter must triumph over the illegal
position adopted by one Member State of the United
Nations. That applies ~rticular1y to this specilic case,
where we are dealing with the programmeo£ activities
of the Security Council.
37. That is why the Czechoslcwak delegl:Ltion vigorously ~upports paragraph Z (if-) ot the USSR draft
resolution.
. 38. The Czechoslovak delegation attaches great importance to the elaboration of just and democratic
methods and principles for the provision of technical
assistance to the economically backward countries.
<?n this important question thF.; Czechoslovak delega!ion concurs entirely, on grounds of principle, with the
Ideas expressed in the USSR draft resolution. The
draft resolution sttesses that such aid must be provided
mainly through the United Nations. The purpose of
such assistance must be to promote the development
of the domestic resources, national industry and agriculture of the economically backward countries, and
to strengthen their economic independence, and must
not !>econdi~~onal on. 3.!1y demands for political, economIC or military pnvl1eges for countrIes rendering
such assistance.
~9. ~he ?efinition of these principles is all the more
Importanttn !hat the twenty...y~ar programme indirectly
refers to .Potnt Four of President Truman's message
of 2Q January 1949 to the United States Congress.
~he Czechoslovak delegation fully agrees with the
VIews of Mt. Thorp who stated in the Foreign Relations Committee of the United States Senate that
Point Four was not altruistic but was in the interests
of the United States itself. In actual fact, Point Four
of .that U!essage is an instrument of United States
policy.desIgned to .en~ble the United States to penetrate 1Oto economicallY. backward countries and to
supplant the European colonial Powers in those countries. It is an instrument designed to enable the United
States to export its capital through the Export-Import
Bank, to intensify the exploitation of under-developed
countr!es and. t? secure. privileges of all kinds in the
countrIes recelvmg HaSslstance".
40. It is common knowledge that, under the guise
of "assistance", the United States is securing control
of the national economy of. entire States. In reality
the Uni!ed States is disrupting the national :ndustry
and.capItal deve!opment of those countries by means
of hIgh rates of 10terest - rates which are as high as
10 per <:en~ i~ the Latin-American countries. A much
mote conv1OcIng account of the ruinous consequences
of. such ."assistance", which completely disrupts the
development of the countries' own resources could be
given by the delegations of those States which know
from their own experience the results of the so-called
"bold new programme for making the benefits of our
scientific advances and industrial progress available
for the improvement and growth of under-developed

areas".1
41. .The economic development of backward countries

r~quIre~, abo,:e all, the bui~ding up of their own natIonal 1Odustnes, and that IS why assistance must be
1 Extract from President Truman's message to the Urtited
States Congress of 20 January 1949'.

provided, in the main, through the United Nations.
Natura1ly, monopolistic circles are not interested in
doing that, as thex wish to transform such countries
into suppliers of cheap raw materials for the United
States war economy and into purchasers of American
products.
.
42. The policy of discrimination practised by the
United States in its foreign trade with other countries
-particularly with the countries of eastern Europe
but also with the countries that are parties to the
Ncrth Atlantic Treaty-was discussed at various intemo'.tional conferences. The USSR and the countries
of the peoples' democracies- proposed, at those conferences, effective measures for the expansion of intraEuropean trade, particularly between Eastern and
western Europe, bearing in mind particularly the need
to put an end to the political discrimination practised
by the United States. The grandiloquent statements
of the representatives of the United States regarding
freedom of trade were worthless, as they were accompanied by a policy of discrimin~tion against free and
democratic peoples and States which naturally rejected
any attempt to interfere in their internal affairs.
43. The abandonment of freedom of trade and of
equality in relations among States is, of course, of the
very essence of the Marshall Plan. The Marshall Plan
has proved to be an instrument of the expansionist
policy of the American monopolists. Unheard-of political pressure is put on those capitalist countries which
hesitate or refuse to subject their economy to the interests of those monopolists and which defend the
principle of free trade. The American monopolies are
putting pressure on the countries participating in the
Marshall Plan in order to force those countries to
apply a. policy of discrimin~tion in their trade relations
with the eastern European ~ountries. Yet it is quite
clear that this American pressure is injuring the trade
interests of the "MarshaIlized" States.· The economic
consequences of United States trade discrimination
are reflected in the considerable decrease in trade between western Europe and the countries of eastern
~urope. It is, I think, obvious. t~t this policy is particularly harmful to the economic mterests and national
economy of the "MarshaIIized" countries of western
Europe.

44..The Czechoslovak delegation believes that tra(l.e
relatIOns should be developed without discrimination,
0!1 the basis of equality and respect for State sovereIgnty and without interference in the internal affairs
of countries.

45. The Czechoslovak delegation is firmly convinced
that all who desire pr'·· e must do their utmost to thwart
the criminal intentions of the war-mongers, who want to
kindle the flames of a new world war, and to ensure
that the only principle governing international relations is a sincere desire for democratic co-operation
am?ng people~ in the interests C!f lasting peace, internatIonal securIty and the well-bemg of mankind.
46. Since the USSR draft resolution is directed solely
towards those ends, the Czechoslovak delegation will
vote for it.
47. Sir Mohammad ZAFRULLA KHAN (Paid..
stan) : The Secretary-General is to be commended and
congratulated on placing before the Assembly his most

..
312th Meedng-20 Noventbel' 1950
valuable memorandum. The memorandum constitutes
a reminder to Member States of what needs to be done
and to b~ und(~rtaken if the Organization is to move
forward tow~,rds the achievement of the objectives for
which it has been set up.
48. Very little needs to be said in support or justification of the draft resolution now before the Assembly
which Pakistan and eight other Member States have
joined in sponsoring. If the Charter sets out accurately
our aims, purposes and objectives, and if these aims,
purposes and objectives have to be achieved through
the United :f\Tations, then not only can no exception be
taken to any of the points set out in the SecretaryGeneral's memorandum, but it must be confessed and
affirmed that every one of these points needs to be
taken up, studied and vigorously pursued.
49. If one were to select for comment and emphasis
a few of the ten points, everyone of which must indeed
be pursued with speed, one would venture to invite
particular attention to point 9 which, in our opinion,
is the first of these points. This point emphasizes the
"use of the United Nations to promote, by peaceful
means instead of by force, the advancement of dependent, colonial or semi-colonial peoples towards a position
of equality in the world". We have repeatedly drawn
attention to this aspect of a very grave and serious
international problem, and we attach the highest importance to this point in the memorandum.
50. This problem has been neglected so much and the
fa;ilure to resolve it has already occasioned so much
mischief, distress and destruction, that rapid proglress
must now be made towards its solution if further disaster is to be averted. Some of these areas-for instance
Malaya and Vietilam-are ready to assume the responsibilities of self-government. It is true that the atmosphere in these two countries has lately been gravely
vitiated. But it is not delay in the setting up of selfgoverning institutions and responsible governments in
those countries that will adequately resolve the problems with which they are faced, Rather it is speed
towards the achievement of those objectives that will
adequately meet the memv.:e to peace that has risen in
those two countries of South East Asia.
51. There are other countries, say, of North Africa,
that are even readier and better prepared to assume the
responsibilities of self-government, and others that remain must follow as rapidly as possible. There are, for
instance, the British colonies of West Africa, Nigeria,
the Gold Coast, Sierra Leone, Gambia, Senegal and the
Belgian Congo; there is also Equatorial Africa and so
on. There are all these achievements in the political
field to be accomplished as speedily as may be possible.
52. I have had the honour on previous occasions to
draw attention to the fact that so long as there are any
dependent areas in the world, they will continue to constitute the most potent temptation for breach of international peace.
53. As a corollary to point 9, I would venture to draw
attention to point 5, that is, the need to achieve universality for the United Nations Organization. As we
continue co-operating and helping towards the building
up of sovereign independent Sw.tes, they must continue
to be invited to take a due place'in the comity of nations.
It follows that we must aClmit rapidly to the member-

491

ship of this great OrganizatiWl and to the fellowship of
the comity of nations such sovereign States as are.
awaiting admission. The deadlock must be resolved at
an early date. It is a sad reflection that the question of
the admission of those States has not on any occasion
been approached-and, I venture to submit, by either
side concerned in the work on this question-simply on
the merits of the case. It is high time that at least one
of these deadlocks should be resolved in a spirit not so
much of give and take, but in strict compliance with th~
spirit. of the Charter.
54. '~Ve wouT,d then draw attention to points 6 and 7 .
of the memoTandum, which may be taken together.
Point 6 proposes tfa sound and active programme of
technical assistance for economic development' and en..
couragement of large..scale capital investment, using all
appropriate private, governmental and intel'-govemmental . resources". Point 7 calls fortfmore vigorous use
by all Member States of the specialized agencies of the
United Nations to promote, in the words of the Charter,
higher standards of living, full employment and condi..
tions of econOlpic and social progress".
55. I wish to call the attention of the Assembly dur..
ing this general discussion to a fact which is now patent
to everyone, namely, that mankind is one. It is one
organism, and if any portion of it is under..developed,
diseased, affiicted by poverty or other wants, then none
of it can really advance at the necessary rate for mankind to progress toward prosperity if even a minimum
standard of human happiness is to be secured. It is
therefore necessary that more urgent attention should
be paid to the achievement of these objectives-not
merely to the planning for them, although· planning of
course is essential and a necessaJ: j preliminary to embarking on the execution of any programme. The e."'Cecution of these programmes must be more speedily
undertaken and on a much more generous scale than is
contemplated at the moment. That is the one investment
whi(=h is bound to pay rich dividends wherever it is
undt·lrtaken.
56. In other words, with regard to this portion of the
programme, what we are seeking to establish is the
strengthening of peace through prosperity. The maintenance of peace in the sense of an elimination of armed
conflict is only tJ. preliminary. It is not only a matter for
regret but, I might be impertinent enough to say, even a
shame for mankind that, after half of the twentieth
century has elapsed, and even when science and learning,
both in the abstract and in their application, have taken
such tremendous strides towards placing mankind above
the fear of want, we should still· be struggling to find
means for keeping ourselves from flinging ourselves at
each other's throats. But once that is achieved, our real
task will begin, and our real task is to put mankind
beyond these elementaryfears so that the object of the
creation of man which a beneficent Creator had in mind
may begin in some measure to be achieved.
57. Lastly, I would venture to draw attention to point
10, which proposes the "active and systematic use of all
the powers of the Charter and all the machinery of the
United Nations to speed up. the development of inter.. ,
national law towards an eventual enforceable world law
for a universal world society". In this connexion I
would draw particular attention to a sentence in the
commentary on this point" which says that: "There are

..
General Aue~bly-Flfth Seuion-Plenary Meetlnp

492
M .. '.

.1 •• "

_,

me.ny specific steps which need to be taken-for 'eXat11pIe, unaer point 10, ratification .of the convention on
genocide, greater use of the International Court of J ustice, and systematic development and codification of
internationa1law."
58. Greater use of the International Court of Justice
wottld in itself indicate and prove a greater and a keener
desire on the part of parties to a dispute to settle their
disputes by peaceful methods. We go on paying lipservice to our readiness, to our keenness, to our eager
desire to settle our disputes by peaceful methods, but
when it comes to the actual attempt to settle any dispute,
more often than not, almost in every instance, one
meets with reluctance on the ~ of parties to. a dispute
to submit their dispute, if it is of a justiciable character,
to the International Court of Justice and, if not of a
justiclable cl:laracter, to international arbitration. Each
IS anxious to settle the dispute, ready to settle it at any
moment by peaceful methods, provided it is settled in
the manner In which they desire to see it settled, that
is, in its own favour. That is not the way to settle disputes by peaceful methods and, as I have submitted,
the greater the recourse to the International Court of
justice and other similar agencies and instruments for
th~:,~tduI settlement of disputes, the greater and the
dealer will be the proof that countries ba.ve no desire to
go to war to settle ilisputes of an international character.
59.. We must recognize that we have now to engage
ourselves actively in setting up what this memorandum
deseribes as a better world society. The only way to do
it is to strengthen the foundations and build the structure 'of a. social.. economic and political edifice which
embraces within its beneficent
scope the whole
of mant..:.-.t w ... _ ...
fte:..1_ "'..._
_111 __
~~

'l_......

•• '" ~ .1..... "" ........~

~~

&V&

f.U.,",

~

.1; _ _

auvaz.n:;u(" CUI; ~uuuu-

vermes whkh cluster round the troublesome question of

national sovex'eignty. When we have learned to do by
voluntary co-operation what we are afraid to agree to do

as a. matter of legal obligation, all reason for that fear
wilt have disappeared and we shall then be ready to
attoM re.oognition to tile reality that has already established itself.. That.. I venture to submi4 is the only
method of advancing towards the setting up of a uni~ 'WOrld society..

60.. This draft resolution which is before the General
~bl.r does not really seek to do any of these things
by'..i¥f!' test: i\ snould cause anxiety in any quarters.
It U\,~~ ~tttntion to the memonmdum~ and commends
the: ~-General tor placing that memorandum
~ the ~ Assembly. The memorandum has
~.smbed hy_ the Settetary-GenetaI himself as a
WQ~ paper which draws attention to what needs to

k- done-I!< an€! an that ~ draft resolution does is to re~t the *l?Ptopriate organs of the United Nations
~ gil'e (Ottsi~n to those portions of the memotu\dum with which the)'" are parlicuIarly concerned and
tc>. ~rt ~ from time to time..
61.. 'YE: also ha:\"e 1he USSR draft resolution under

~ It a~ to me that that draft does not
~ tM need of direding attention to the points
stlout In the ~-&neral"smemorandum .. It seeks
to.~ <:main particubr points of view.., some of
1!hkh may,. iD theit turn,. oot he optm to serious obje.e~ w~ ~ may mt ~ acceptable to some of the
Member Stltft.. Sooie of the proposal's (lf the S£)viet
treiotl dnft 1'eSQtuoon are ~ towal~ seaui:oc

the enforcement of acceptable policies and aebteving
agreed objectives, but by certain special methods.
62. The nine-Power draft resolution does not lay down
methods and procedun~s. It raises no controversial is·
sues. Methods, proced'ures and d~tai1s of enforcement
can be studied b;' th(~ relevant and appropriate organs
of the United Nations. At the moment, all that it invites
the General Assembly tq do is to request the a'ppropriate organs to pay due copsideration to these points and,
from time to time, to report progress. Metnods uf en·
forcement, the pace to be set, and the policies to be
accepted and enforced win he questions for the appropriate organs to consider. I kq.ve no doubt whatsoever
that the particular points of view that are being stressed
or sought to be stressed in the USSR draft resolution
wiU then be raised before the appropriate organs, from
time to time, when these points are considered.
63. With these words, I commend the draft resnlu·
tion of the nine Powers to the General Assembly.
64. Mr. VAZQUEZ (Uruguay) (translated from
Spanish): The delegation of Uruguay will vote in
favour of the joint draft resolution fA/1514] sub·
mitted by Canada,' Chile, Colombia, llaiti, Lebanon,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Sweden ~nd Yugoslavia on
the Secretary-General's memorandum on the development of a twenty..year programme for achieving peace
through the United Nations. This memorandum undoubtedly represents a most commendable effort on the
part of the Secretary··General and gives concrete expression to a purpose that all must share.
65. Any attempt to establish collective measures to
ensure international peace and security through the
United Nations, withOut prejudice to freedom and justice, must be welcome here, especially at this time. It is
welcome here because our basic function is to establish
such measures; it is welcome at this time because no
time could be more appropriate.
66. Directly or indirectly, all peoples are familiar with
the terrible evils of war. They all desire a just and lasting peace. They are all watching, with growing fear,
the dangerous trend of current events which are turning into a grouing t14-eat to the peace all desire.
67. Moreover; notwithstanding their national differences and the diversity of their social structures, all the
governments represented here have also, in the name of
their peoples, affirmed their faith in peaceful international co-operation, under the rule of law, as the
only proper method of settling international disputes.
68. Two days ago [309th me€fing], for example, the
USSR representative, who spea'cs for a regime certainly
very difierent from ~t which is d:l3racteristic ·of the
western democracies, assu..~ us that he and his government: believed in the possibility of the peaceful coexisten<:e of the political, socful and ecooomic systems
into which the world is divided. He ~ tb..~t the foreign policy of the Soviet Union was directed towards
the achievement of peaceful co-operation among the
peoples and respect for sovereigntyJ) and he has
various occasions reiterated his government's faith in the
efficacy of the United Nations as an instrument for
achieving those ends.. The draft resalution submitted by

on

the. .USSR delegation [,4./1525 arul Cow.!} begin. br
~ appro~ the raising of ~ item proposed
by-the Secittary~ namely~ ''DeveIopoienf of a
5.·

J

i

•

.

S12th Meeting-20 November 1950
twenty-year pr.oframme for achieving peace through the
United Nations' •
69. Neverthele\,s~, 'il sharp cleavage of opinion has be..
come appttrent with regard to that pr!lg~amn:e,--~~cl~av­
age such· as to daslh the hopes of achlevmg at tlus tIme
the unanimit.y required for its complete success. The
opposition arIses with regard to the manner of formulating the programme rather than with regard to its
subjects.
70. The Secretary-General's programme contains ten
points, which we feel must be considered, and they are
put forward in an objective manner so that, while no
solution of the controversial probletns is offered, the
underlying premises are clearly stated, thus providing a
definite basIs for future study and negotiation.
71. The ten points, which I think it would be inappropriate to analyse at this juncture, include points
concerning political matters, such as periodic meetings
of the Security Council attended by Foreign Ministers,
the plan to renew negotiations for the solution of the
protilem of atomic energy and armaments, and the question of the admission of new Members to the Organization. They include points concerning politico-legal
oroblems such as the development and implementation
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, promotion of the full legal equality of dependent peoples, and
speeding up of the universalisation of international law.
They also include points concerning economic questions, such as the technical assistance programme for
the so-called under-developed countries.
72. In our opinion, the joint draft resolution which we
support offers the best procedure for the consideration
of the Secretary-General's memorandum. After expressly !10ting that progress has been n~ade by the present sessIon of the General Assembly WIth regard to the
solution of matters relating to certain of the points
contained in the memorandum and implicitly taking into
account the fact that the memorandum is only an outline for a future pro~-amme, the completion of which
will require careful prepa.ration, the draft resolution
requests the appropriate org-ans of the United Nations
to give consideration to those portions of the memorandum with which they are particularly concerned and
to inform the General Assembly, at its next session, of
the results of their consideration.
73. That is undoubtedly the correct procedure and it
also permits a proper division of labour for a task so
complex and so difficult as that which is proposed to us.
74. As has already been pointed out, the consideration
of the points raised in the programme, although in general within the terms of reference of the General Assembly-which is now considering them--is also a matter
within the special competence of various organs of the
United Nations.
75. For example, points 1; 2, 3 a':ld 4 are ~pecifi?lly
within the competence of th~ Secunty Conned; ll.O~nt 5
concerns the Security Councd and the Assembly, Jomtly
or in turn· points 6, 7 and 8 are matters for the Economic
Social Council; point 9 is within the competence of the Trusteeship Council; and point 10 i~ the
concern of the General Assembly and the International
Court of Justice.
76. It is therefore logical that, as the joint d~f~ resohttion proposes, the organs concerned should diVIde the

and'

498

preparatory work, in a.cc~rdance ,!ith their tet:ms of
reference and their speCIalized fun<:tio1}s, so that It may
be possible to secure the best corre!atlon of the results
of their studies at the next sessIon of the General
Assembly. In this way, in the light an~ under !he pressure of current events, it w~ll.~e pOSSIble to ~ve fresh
force to the study-already 1nltiated and partially completed--of the main pr~blems which ~ust be adequate!y
settled if a comprehenSIve and effectlveprogramme for
the maintenance of peace is to be worked out.
77. My delegation cannot, on the oth~r hand,accept
the draft resolution of the USSR. In spIte of the statements of its sponsors and s~lpporters, ~hat draft suffers
from an essential defect which makes It unworkable as
a useful instrument in future negotiation for the
strengthening of peace.
78. The USSR draft resolution, as is apparent from
the text and in particular from sub-paragraph~ (a) an?
( c) of paragraph 2, lays down, as an essential condttion for the further development of the ~rogr~e for
peace the prior acceptance of the solutions whIch the
USSR supports, and which it fully realizes are disputed
by most of the other Powers represented here.
79. It is not in that way that negotiation~ can be beg'!n
in an atmosphere of equality and good WIll to reconcIle
States at a time like this, when th.e future of the world
is gtavely threatened by the growmg danger of war. If
negotiations among~t.t.~s are to be honourable and
effective the parties concerned must be prepared to con..
sider co'ntrary arguments and, if necessary, to make
concessions if their reason con~nces ~hem that they
should do so or if regard for higher mterests. so r~­
quires. In our opinion it wo~l~ have been .l~osslble, •In
the present case, without impati'mg the c?n~ltions which
are ess~ntial for the conduc~ of negotiat!0n~1 fo~ tpe
Soviet Union to submit its WIshes and objectives In. ItS
draft resolution as an individual expression of VIews
prior to tne discussion.
SO. We do not, however, believe that such wishe~ and
objectives can be laid down as a necessary baslts or
sine qua non for the preparation of a programme. f?r the
negotiations themselves, especially when the posltion of
the other nations, a position fully ~nd clearly' expressed
in the debates of the United Natlons at thts and previous sessions of the General Assembly, is known before·
hand-as it was to the USSR delegation.
81. That in itself would make it. impossible for C?ur
delegation to accept the Sovie~ U won draft resolutIon
as a whole, although some portions, such as paragraphs
2 (e) and (f), might well be consid~red separ~tely ~nd "'..
might well be borne in mind as subjects ·for dIScussIon. )
82. In view of these general co~siderationsl whi~h
summarize our positionl the delegation, of Uruguay WIll
vote in favour of the joint draft resolution on the Sec~
retary-General1smost valuable memorandum. Our country whose greatest strength is its law, hopes that, at
thi~ time of anxious expectancy for all the peoples of
the worldl the representatives o~ those peoples, meeti~g
in this universal parliament, wIll prove equal to theIr
great responsibilities and will answer the hopes of man..
kind by outlawing aggression wherever it. arises ~nd
in whatever Iorm it may appearl and by collaborating
whole-heartedly in the essential task of framing a progt'31l1l11e for lasting peace~ in conformity with the rule
of law and based on freedom and justice.

494

General Assenilily-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

.
·83. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet- Socialist Republies) (translated from Russian): I do not intend to

make a long speech, since Mr. Vyshinsky, the head of
the USSR delegation, has made a detailed statement
[309th meeting] on our delegation's attitude to the ques·tion of the "development of a twenty-year programme
for achieving peace through the United Nations".
84. In spite of all their attempts, the representativ~s
who have spoken here have been unable to refute a
single one of the points which the head of the Soviet
Union delegation made so effectively in his statement.
85. I shall confine myself to two or three brief comments on the statements made here by the United King· dom Minister of State, Mr. Younger [311th meeting].
Mr. Younger asserted that the United Kingdom Government had been unaware of the contents of the
·proposed programme, denying the ass{;ruon of the head
of the USSR delegation, Mr. Vyshinsky, that the text
of the ptogramme had been agreed upon in advance
by the western Powers. No one has any doubt, however, that the programme was agreed upon in advance
with the State Department in Washington.
86. I shall not name the persons who prepared this
·programme: nor those of them who went to Washington
to prepare it. The facts are known to the representatives
who were here at the time and it is therefore unneces·sary to enlarge on the matter. I would repeat, howe\7er,
that no one doubts that the programme was agreed upon
in advance with Washington. I do not think that even
the authors of the programme wm deny this.
·87. With regard to Mr. Younger's assertions and his
interminable references to majority votes of 51, 52 or 53
in organs of the United Nations-such arguments are
worn threadbare and carry no conviction, and for the
Anglo-American bloc to base its policy on them is quite
·futile. The fact is that the only arguments that the representatives of the United States and the United Kingdom use in any organ of the United Nations, and
especially in the General Assembly, are references to
50-vote majorities. But we all know how they obtain
such a majority, particularly on a series of questions
which have been put to the vote here. I shall not be
revealing a gr.eat secret-I have already mentioned it
·in the Security Council-if I say that one of the representatives who was obliged to vote for a particular
proposal stated that he was fully aware and convinced
that the proposal on which the Anglo-American bloc
was insisting was illegal, but was votLng for it because
he had a tight noose of American rope around his neck.
Those are the circumstances in which certain representatives have to vote and that is how the so-called
majority is obtained. That is why references to a majorI ity obtained in such a way are unconvincing.
.
!.88. The last remark which I should like to make to
the Assembly relates to the flagrant distortion of facts
perpetrated by Mr. Younger when he spoke of the
transfer of the World Congress of the Partisans of
Peace from Sheffield to Warsaw. Mr. Younger tried
tG make us believe that the organizers of that congress
transferred it to Warsaw because they were afraid that
there would be .too many real partisans of peace in
Sheffield. But this is mp-rely a juggling with words
which is 'very close to falsehood and slander, since the
organizers of the Sheffield congress were unable to hold

the congress there owing to the police action tak~n by
the United Kingdom Government.
89. Whc were, the persons who were not allowed to
attend. that congress? I shalllist the delegates from the
USSR. First there were the writer~: Ehrenburg, Tikhonov, Kornekhuk, Vassilevskaya, Zaslavsky and
Fadeyev. They '.lre all talented and respected writers
of the USSR, popular among the Soviet people. The
United Kingdom Government did not give them v~sas
to go to Sheffield. I shall now name the composers. The
United Kingdom Government refused visas to the
world-renowned composer Shostakovich and to Khrennikov, also a well-known composer.of the Soviet Union.
It also refused vitas to the academicians Volgin, Grekov, Oparin and N'esmeyanov, and to the artists Cherkaso" and Ak~..androvskaya. It also refused a visa to
the Metropolitan Nikolai, who cannot be regarded as
an agent of the Comintern, although Mr. Younger tried
to allege that all the persons who were refused visas
wer~ Ccminternagents. Finally, visas were refused to
the Stakhanovite worker Rossiysky, an honoured citizen of the Soviet Union, who has distinguished himself
by his labours, and tne famous tractor driver Angelina.
These are the Soviet citizens, ardent and sincere partisans of peace, whom the United Kingdom Government
prevented from attending the congress of the Partisans
of Peace at Sheffield.
90. That is the real position; outstanding scientists
and artists of other countries, such as France, were not
granted visas either, and in some cases force was used
to send them back to the countries from which they
came. That was the situation created by the United
Kingdom with its police measures in Sheffield. The orgau~zers of the congress obviously c-ould not carry out
their work in those circumstances.
91. I would ask Mr. Younger whether a majority
depends on the place of the meeting. I seriously assert
that if the General Assembly were to meet in Warsaw,
or even in Moscow, the Amtrican bloc would have its
majority there also. Thus, wherever the World Congress of the Partisans of Peace may be held-in Sheffield, in Warsaw, or anywhere else-the real partisans
of peace will certainly always vote for peace, against
aggression and for the prohibition of the atomic weapon.
92. Thus the enemies of peace will never succeed in
disparaging the great historical work that has been
undertaken by the Partisans of Peace. None of the
verbal juggling by which the United Kingdom representative has tried to besmirch this congress-this noble
initiative by scientists, cultural leaders and men of religion who are fighting for peace under such hard conditions-ean succeed in discred~ting, besmirching or
belittling the immense significance of this undertaking.
93. These are the brief remarks which the USSR delegation felt obliged to make in connexion with Mr.
Younger's statement.
94. The SECRETARY~GENERAL: I had hoped it
would not be necessary for me to add anything to this
discussion, since I have already taken enough of your
time. But Mr. Malik's statement from this rostrum imposes upon me the necessity of pointing out that something which has been said here is not true and· will not
be made true by repetition,

312thMeeting-20 November 1950
95. It has been said that my memorandum was sanc~,
doned, or even drafted, by the Governments of the
United States, France and th~ United Kingdom. This
is not true, and those who say it must know that it is
not tr\le. I must make it absolutely dear that the memo~
randum was my own conception and that I myself
drafted it in consultation only with my eight-I repeat,
eight-Assistant Secretaries~GeneraJ, and other princi~
pal assistants. The text which I discussed in Moscow
was precisely the sam~ text w~ch I bro~ght to Washin&,tonj London and Paris, and It appl~ars In my communt~
cation to the Member Governmen4Ms without the altera~
tion of a single word or a singl~ comma.
96. Before I conclude, I want to thank you all and tell
you how gratified I am at the serious tone and the
generally high level of this debate. Despite the reitera~
tion of well known differences, it shows the desire of
the Member nations to do their utmost to achieve a
lasting peace. May I add my special thanks to those
representatives who have so warmly endorsed my
memorandum and to the sponsors of the nine-Power
draft resolution which- is now before you.
97. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The discussion is closed. We shall now proceed to the
vote.
98. The General Assembly has before it two draft
resolutions: the first has been submitted by the delegations of Canada, Cmle, Colombia, Haiti, Lebanon,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Sweden and Yugoslavia'
[A/1514], the second has been submitted by the delegation of the Soviet Union [A/1525 and Corr.1].
99. The United Kingdom delegation has submitted
an amendment [-4/1535] to the joint draft resolution.
I shall first ask the sponsors of the joint draft resolution if they agree to the amendment. If so, it will form
part of the draft resolution; if not, I shall put the
amendment to the vote separately. The representative
of Sweden, who is one of the authors of the draft r~so­
lution, has signified assent. Do the other delegations
sponsoring the draft also agree to the amendment?
100. Mr. SIMIC (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French) : On behalf of the People's Republic of Yugo~
slavia, I regret that I am unable to. support the amendment proposed by the United Kingdo..tn delegation.
101. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
As the .Yugoslav representative, who is one of the
authors of the joint draft resolution, does not accept
the amendment, I shall have to put it to the vote
separately.
102. The amendment proposed by the United Kingdom
[A/1535] calls for the substitution of the following
text for the b,:';f paragraph of the draft resolution:
URequ,ests these organs to inform the General
Assembly at its sixth session, through the SecretaryGeneral, of any progress achieved through such con~
sideration." .
103. The United Kingdom representative explained
this amendtnent in his speech here today [311th 111,eet~ng] ," I shall now put it to the vote.
The amendment was adopted by 44 votes to 7} with
5 abstentions.
.

495

104. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
shall now put the joint draft resolution [A/1514], as
amended) to the vote.
The draft resolution} as amended, 'lJJ(J,$ adopted by
51 votes to 5} with 1 abstention.
105. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
The General Assembly will now vote on the USSR
draft resolution [A/1525 and Con-.1]. AfterwCirds,
those who wish to explain·their 'Vote, either on the joint
draft resolution or on the draft resolution of the Soviet
Union) will be able to do so.
106. The USSR representative has asked for a vote
on his draft resolution paragraph by paragraph. If there
is no objection, we shall adopt this course.
107. I have been reproached for not reading draft
resolutions submitted by the Soviet Union. Usually I
do not read any draft resolution, in view of the fact that
they are to b,~ found in the documents distributed to
th.e members of t'h~ Assembly; in this case, however, it
will be easy for me to read each paragraph vf the USSR
draft resolution as I put it to the vote.

The President read the test of the Soviet Union
draft resolution paragraph by paragraph.2
The preamble and paragraph 1 of theoperotivlt part
were rejected by 27 votes to 11} with 17 abstentions.
The first sentence and sub~paragraph (a) of paragraph 2 of the operative part were rejected by 42 votes
to 8, with 5 abstentions.
Sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 2 of the operative I
part was rejected b'j.' 40 votes to 5} with 12 abstentions.
Sub-paragraph. (c) of paragraph 2 of the operative 1
part was rejected by 36 votes to 6} with 13 abstentions.
Sub-paragraph (d) of paragraph 2 of the operative ,
part was rejt3'ctl!d by 38 votes to 5} with 14 abstentions. l
Sub-poragraJ;h (e) of paragraph 2 of the operative_
part was rejected by 24 votes to 16, with 15 abstentions.
Sub-paragraph (f) of paragraph 2 of the opera.tive 1.
part was rejected by 23 votes to 15} with 17 abstentions. !
1
108. The .t'RliSIDENT (tra·t1.slated from French):
A:. none of the paragraphs of the dra.ft resolution sutr .
mittal by the Soviet. Union has been adopted, there is
no need to put the resolution as a whole to· the vote.
109. I call upon the representative of Greece, who
wishes to explain his vote.
110. Mr. KANELLOPOULOS ( Greece) (translated
from French) : The Greek delegation voted in favou!' of
the joint draft resolution because it is convinced that
the draft is sincerely inspired by the ideal of peace.
111. My delegation also believes that thememoran..
dum of the Secretary-General of our Organization is a
remarkable contribution to the conception and creation
of the technical conditions which would make it possible
to strengthen peace.
112. Nevertheless, in voting for the· draft submitted
jointly by the nine nations, my delegation was not
carried away by fleetinR' illusions. An of us here know
that the technical conditions must be supplemented by

I
l

,

l

I

I

<

2 The text of the draft resolution appears in the record of
the 309th meeting.
.

496
moral conditions if they are to be effective. These moral
condit; -1.$ have so far been banished from our Organizati
J1 the aggressive attitude, totalitarian mentality
and monolithic doctrinairism of the $'oviet Uniop and
its satellites. Mr. Vyshinsky, spe~kiJlg from this rostrum, has not been able to convince anyone. I am sure
he has not even been able to convince his own conscience. He, a member of the Communist Party but
once a free man, knows full w~l1 that it is we who are
right. Rut he is not allowed to admit it in public. When
he has this right, the right to acknowledge his thoughts
in Dublic-and I hope with all my heart that he will
enjoy that right one day-it will prove that the necessary conditions have been created for the establishment
of peace throughout the world.
113. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before. calling upon the representative of the Netherlands to explain his vote, I shall read the list of countries which have taken part in the discussion: Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, Philippines, Sweden,
Dentnark,. Egypt, Ppland, Canada, Yugoslavia, United
. States of Amerka, Byelorussiau Soviet Socialist Republic, Lebanon, Colombia, Israel, Haiti, Ukrainian
, Soviet Socialist Republic, France, Chile, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Czechoslovakia, Pakistan, and Uruguay. I cannot call upon those
countries to speak again in order to explain their vote;
I can only call upon those which have not taken part
in the discussion.
114. Mr. VON BALLUSECK (Netherlands): My
delegation voted for the joint draft resolution presented
by the nine Powers and for the amendment proposed
by the United Kingd:--m. We did so because we believe
that .the~ memor~n~um concerning a twen1:r-y~ar programme for achievmg pea,ce through the UmtedNations, which was submitted by the Secretary-General,
offers a number of suggestions, based on the.Charter,
which in our opinion might be fruitfully considered by
the appropriate organs of the United Nations, with a
view to furthering and encouraging the indispensable
evolution of the machinery for promoting peace and the
welfat'e of nations.
115. The points raised in the memorandum of the
Secretary-General are in our view worthy of the mos~
careful examinJ-tion by the relevant organs of the
United Nations. Some of these studies have meanwhile,
as has ~en ~bser-ved by preceding sF'<:akers, be~n initiated as separatl~ problems, and in a number of cases
produced import~nt results under the stress of particular circumstances. However, when we view the twentyyear programme as a co-ordinated whole, the approach
to such a long-term problem should be unprejudiced by
the special needs of a special situation. Therefore we
should, in our opinion, leave it to the appropriate
organs of the United Nations to consider how far and
how soon just and practical ways and means can be
prepared in the light of an ever-evolving world situation. The resolution submitted by the nine Powers formulates requests which cal'1 serve this purpose. For
that reason we supported it.
.
116. For the same reason, we found ourselves unable
to support the draft resolution submitted by the Soviet
Union. As the representative of the United Kingdom
explained this morning [311th meeting], apart from the

fact that the USSR seemed to be trying to smuggle
into its draft resolution a number of pronouncements
on issues on which the General Assembly had already
expressed a contrary opinion, the Soviet Union was
also seeking in its draft to prejudge the results of the
study of the points ~sed in the Secretary-General's
memorandum by imposing its own conclusions, thereby
considerably limiting the scope of an impartial study
and consideration of the matter.
117. As I have said before, my delegation feels that
the preparatory work for a long-term peace plan must
be undertaken in an unprejudiced manner, guided by
the principles of the Charter and by the possibilities of
practical reality. For we do not want nominal, highminded or quasi-high-minded but unrealistic and empty
formulae. What we need are solutions or direc"dves
which can be applied and implemented and which will
find widespread support in the sense of justice of the
peoples of our world.
118. For all these reasons, my delegation rejected the
draft resolution of the Soviet Union; that draft may
contain a few paragraphs here and there which, on their
own merits, p~rhaps' would not be wholly unacceptable
but which, in their context in the draft resolution as a
whole, obtain a very peculiar significance.
119. However, in order to prevent any misunderstanding, I should like to say a few words on one particular
point of that draft. I refer to paragraph 2 (a) of the
operative part, where the question Qf the representation of China is once again introduced-in our view, in
the wrong place and at the wrong time. ReJrc1rding this
particular issue I want to make the position of the
Netherlands delegation perfectly clear.
120. My govennnent has for some time reco~zed the
Government of the People's Republic of China. Therefore it stands to reason that we should be willing to see
China represented in the United Nations by the government which we have recognized and not by a government which we have ceased to recognize. For reasons
of the same order we should consider it correct if the
Chinese Government which we have recognized were
put in a position to accept the binding obligations which
the Charter of the United Nations rightly imposes on
all its Members-obliJrc1tions designed to preserve and
protect the peace of the world.
121. This being so, my delegation voted at the opening meeting of this session of the General Assembly in
favour of the draft resolution introduced by India
A/1365]. In that draft resolution it was said that the
obligations of a Member under the Charter could not
be carried out except by a government which, with a
reasonable expectancy ot permanence, actually exercised control over the territory of that Member, and
commanded the obedience of its people; further, that
the Central Government of the People's Republic of
China was the only such government functioning in the
Republic of China as now constituted and that therefore that government should represent China in the
General Assembly; and also that· other organs of the
United Nations should be recommended to take a
similar view. My dele~tion voted for that Indian
draft resolution. Apart from constitutional arguments,
we believe that the final settlement of the issue of
Chinese representation in the United Nations might

r

312th Meeting-20 Novelnber 1950
lessen some of the grave difficulties and tensions which
our divided world is now encountering in a number of
danger spots.
122. The Indian draft resolution, however, was rejecte:d by a majority in the General Assembly. The
Assembly then adopted, at the same meeting, a draft
resolution submitted by Canada [A/1368] and amended
by Australia [A/1371]. In that resolution, the Assembly took note of the differences of view concerning the
representation of China in the United Nations and
established a special committee to consider that particular problem and. to report back, with recommendations. to the current session of the General Assembly.
The Nether'fands dele2'ation voted in favour of that
...
resolution.
123. The question of Chinese representation will therefore come under examination, and we feel that it would
be unwise and incorrect to prejudge the outcome of
such studies. That, however, was the effect of tne
provision inserted in the operative part of the USSR

draft resolution in which a premature conclusion seemed
already to have been reached on a problem which the
General Assembly was still considering.
124. As I have explained, mygovemment recognized
the Government of the People's Republic of China) and,
as a result of that, would consider it logical and realistic
to have that government occupy the Chinese seat in the
United Nations and thereby become responsible for the
observance of the obligations, the rights and duties of
a Member State under the Charter. At the same time,
having given its vote to the proposal for the study of
the problem by a special commIttee, the Netherlands
delegation believes that the result of these studies should
first be presented before the General Assembly, in
whatever context, pronounces itself on this subject.
125. For these reasons my delegation voted against
the Soviet Union draft resolution as a whole, and also
against paragraph 2 (a) of the operative part of that
draft.
The meeting rose at 5.5 p.m.

---,..----------------------------------------A-40464-Janu,ary 1951-3,600
Printed in U.S.A.
