TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 11 SEPTEMBER 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1509) , . , , . . , . . . . , , , , e , , . , . . , , . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda , , . . , . . . , . . . . . , , . , . . , . . . , , . , . . . . . . , . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council
by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the
Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria,
Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421 and Add.1
and2) ,...........,....,..........+..................

1

S/PV.1509

--

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

7
I

FIFTEEN

HTJ’JDRED

AND NINTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday, 11 September
President: Mr. Y. A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
AIgeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l509)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia,
Turkey, the United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421
and Add.1 and 2).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 August 1969 addressed to the President of
the Security Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Guinea, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Morocco, the Niger, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, the Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Republic and Yemen (S/9421 and Add.1
and 2)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In accordance with the Council’s previous decisions, and with the
consent of the members, I now propose to invite the
representatives of Israel, the United Arab Republic and
Indonesia to take places at the Council table in order to
participate in the discussion of the question before the
CounciI without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel),
Mr. A. El-Erian (United Arab Republic) and Mr. H. R.
Abdulgani (Indonesia) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its last

1969, at 3 p.m.

meeting, the representatives of India and Somalia are also
invited to participate in the debate on this item. I invite
them to take the places reserved for them at the sides of the
Council chamber since, as was already pointed out yesterday, there are unfortunately too few seats at the CounciI
table to accommodate them there.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. Sen (India) and
Mr. A. A. Farah (Somalia) took the places reserved for
them.
3. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian}: In a letter
addressed today to the President of the Security Council
[S/9441], the representative of Jordan requests permission
to participate in the debate on the item before us. If there
is no objection, I propose to invite the representative of
Jordan to participate in the debate on this item without the
right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan) took the place reserved for him.
4. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The Security Council wilI now continue its consideration of the item
before it, The first speaker on my list is the representative
of Somalia, who has asked to speak in exercise of his right
of reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to address the Council.
5. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation would have
intervened yesterday to reply to the observations of the
representative of Israel on my statement, but could not do
so because of a procedural misunderstanding on the part of
the Conference Services.
6. At the 1508th meeting, the representative of Israel
referred to statements made by Sheikh Hilmi Al-Muhtasib,
the leader of the Supreme Moslem Council, the body
responsible for religious affairs and institutions in Jerusalem, The representative of Israel said he had already
repo&d the principal points of the Sheikh’s statements in
his intervention before the Council the previous day. Let us
examine what the Israeli representative chose to cite from
the statements of the Sheikh and what he chose to omit.
7. The Israeli representative selected from the many points
raised in the Sheikh’s statements the fact that the She&h
had declared that the fire at the Mosque had been caused
by arson, and that a young man, whose nationality was not
Palestinian, had been seen leaving the Mosque just before
the fire broke out. The second point was that the
Committee of which Sheikh Hihni is the Chairman had

and the Dome of the Rock has recently been heavy inside
Israel.

announced the creation of a special fund for repair work,
and that repairs would require several weeks at the most.
Before going over those points in the Sheikh’s statements
which the Israeli representative failed to mention, let me
repeat what I said in the Council.

“This controversy, which has extended to Christian
circles, began in September 1967, when the Israeii
Ministry of Religious Affairs started archaeological excavations of a trench at the northern end of the Wailing
Wall.

8. I said that since the Israeli representative had found it
convenient to cite from the statements of that distinguished
religious leader, and since the Israeli delegation attached
such importance and credibility to the statements of that
eminent religious leader, we could perhaps compare and
study some of the points that were contained in those
statements. I shall now take some of the points which the
Israeli representative considered it prudent to omit and
contrast them with the information which the Israeli
representative has given to the Council.

“In January 1968, the Ministry said it was carrying ou.t
further digging in the cellar of the Mahkama or Moslem
religious tribunal building, just north of the Wailing Wall,
Moslem religious authorities have repeatedly protesteNd
these excavations and the Israeli seizure and destructiollr
of houses and other Moslem premises nearby.”
15. References to those excavations proceeding under the
southern wall are contained in the following extract from
The JerusalemPost of 7 June 1968. Further mention of
those excavations are also contained in reports published im
The New York Timesof 11 July and 15 August 1968. 1
shall just read one brief passage to show exactIy the kind of
tension which is being created in the area as a result of
those excavations, tension which cannot be ignored at th’e
peril of peace. The report on excavations under thle
southern wall carried out by Professor Mazar reads:

9. On the question of the fire, the Israeli representative
claimed that it had been relatively small and that it had
been extinguished within an hour. The statement of the
Sheikh speaks about the ineffectiveness and slownessof the
Israeli firemen in extinguishing the fire, and of the Israeli
police preventing the population from helping in quelling
the fire.
10. According to the statement of 30 August issued by the
same distinguished religious leader, the municipality did not
discharge its duties adequately or effectively in extinguishing the fire. According to the She&h, the fire wasfinally
extinguished by Arab firemen brought all the way from
Ramallah and Al Khalil.

“The main entrance to the temple, according to
Josephus, was through a double gate in the centre of th’e
southern wall. Professor Mazar hopes to expose this gstls
as well, but if he does, he is likely to encounter resistam
from the Moslem religious authorities in Jerusalem. They
have already made a protest to the United Nations over
his work at the western edge of the southern wall
charging that it is Moslem property.

11. With iespect to the question of excavations, in my
statement yesterday I said that when excavations, whether
for archaeological or religious purposes, are undertaken at
the expense of desecrating the holy shrine of another faith,
a situation of ominous proportions is created.

“The double gate is an even more sensitive issue:,
however, since it is beneath the silver-domed Al Aqsa
Mosque, which is one of the most sacred mosques in
Islam .”

12. The representative of Israel stated that no archaeological excavations whatsoever had taken place in the
Mosque compound and that the only excavations in the
vicinity were works proceeding to the south of the area in
accordance with projects basically approved by the Jordanian authorities and commenced before 1967. No doubt
the representative of Jordan will be in a position to speak
on that particular aspect. The duty of my delegation is to
bring to the attention of the Council the views and feelings
of the Moslem community in the Holy City as represented
by the Supreme Moslem Council.
13. In his two statements on 21 and 30 August, 3heikh
Hilmi, the Council’s President, declared to the press that
the Israeli authorities were violating international law by
permitting excavations beside the Al Aqsa Mosque and in
Moslem properties, Furthermore that same Moslem Council
demanded the cessation of all excavations around the
precinct of the Al Haram Ash Sharif and demanded
permission for members of the Arab Committee of Architects to investigate the excavations being carried out
beneath the Silsileh Gate. Yesterday the Israeli representative denied this.

16. What measures, one may ask, did the Israeli Government take to stop such excavations and allow the Arab
Committee of Architects to investigate them? If these and
other questions remain unanswered, then the responsibility
of the Israeli Government is clear,
17. Mr. Tekoah also spoke of the desecration of the Holy
Places and referred to the desecration of the Western Wall
or the Wailing Wall. Mr. Tekoah seems to forget that thl:
Western Wall is part of the Al Haram Ash Sharif and cannot
therefore be desecrated by Moslems, It is the property of
the Moslem Waqf. The Jewish community in Palestine did
not claim any proprietorship to the wall or even to the
pavement in front of it. This was very well documented in
December 1930 in the report entitled “Report of the
Commission appointed by His Majesty’s Government in the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
with the approval of the Council of the League of Nations,
to determine the rights and claims of Moslems and Jewsirl
connexion with the Western or Wailing Wall at Jerusalem”.i

14. The ChristianScienceMonitor of 25 August 1969 has
this to say:

1 London, His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1931. [The reportof
the Commission was circulated in English only under the symbolI
S/842l/Add.l dated 23 February 1968.1

“Controversy over the supposed existence of the Jewish
Temple of Solomon under the two mosques of Al Aqsa
2

But now in 1969 Israel claims, by mere force, I submit, the
ownership of the wall, the plaza around it and other places.

22. The PRESIDENT (translated j?om Russian): I invite
the representative of Jordan to take a place at the Council
table and to address the Council.

18. With respect to the question of the Al Haram Ash
Sharif, the Israeli representative has claimed that all Moslem
Holy Places, including the Al Aqsa Mosque, have, since
1967, been controlled, administered and guarded by the
Waqf. Let us contrast that statement with what the
Supreme Moslem Council in Jerusalem had to say on the
matter last month.

23. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Mr. President, despite the
solemnity of this occasion it is a pleasure to see you in the
Chair, to which we are sure you will bring your wisdom and
sound judgement. The friendly relations that happily exist
between Jordan and your great country, the Soviet Union,
cannot but grow firmer and stronger.
24. It is also a pleasant duty to pay a special tribute to
your predecessor, Ambassador Pin&, the Permanent Representative of Spain.

19. The Council considered the whole area of the Al
Haram Ash Sharif a closed precinct for everyone except
Moslems at the times of prayers, only until further notice.
Have the Israeli occupying forces complied with that
request by the only legitimate body in Jerusalem? The
Supreme Moslem Council has demanded the closure of the
Maghrabi Gate and the delivery of its key to the Waqf
Committee immediately. My delegation has the following
questions in this respect: (1) Why, to begin with, did the
Israeli authorities confiscate the key to one of the gates of
the Al Aqsa Mosque? (2) By what legal right or moral code
did the Israeli occupying authorities justify that conflscation? (3) In what “spirit”, to use the word of the Israeli
representative, did the Israelis retain the key and for what
purposes?

25. Just before I came to this Council, I received a cable. I
thought it contained instructions from my Government but
I discovered that the contents were different. The cable is
signed by “The Jewish Defence League”; it contains the
following words:
“Hold you directly responsible for any anti-Jewish
terror acts. In the event of such acts, consider you
legitimate target for deserved punishment.”
26. The same Jewish Defence League has appeared on
television in New York. The group appeared in uniform
with their leader on 4 September. It is surprising to receive
threats by telegram, a communication medium. Previously
we have received letters from a group called the “Minutemen”, Telephone calls are received in our offices, and my
office in particular, every morning and every afternoon.

20. With respect to the desecration of Holy Places, in my
statement yesterday I pointed out that Moslem holy shrines
in Jerusalem were the concern not only of the
Moslem inhabitants of that city, but of Moslem people
throughout the world. This, in fact, is one of the main
reasons why my delegation has been participating in the
Council’s debate, The Israeli representative has attempted
to convince the Council that his Government has taken all
the necessary precautions to see that the Holy Shrines are
protected from offensive or sacrilegious acts. Yet the
Supreme Moslem Council of Jerusalem protested, in the
press statement released by Sheikh Hilmi on 21 August,
that the Israeli authorities have “desecrated our Holy Places
many times most recently when a group of Israeli youths
had led what wascalled a military parade inside the mosque
zone”.

27. If I refer to this abnormal situation facing members of
the United Nations here, it is not only to remind the
Council of the life we are living here, not only to mention
the atmosphere in which we are living, but also to remind
every single person around this table of our people within
the occupied areas; of the captives of the Israelis, whether
in Gaza or in the West Bank or in the Golan heights or in
Sinai.
28. At a time when Jordan has been deeply concerned and
worried about the ever-increasing dangers in our area
resulting from the Israeli occupation and Israel’s continued
refusal to comply with the Security Council’s resolutions
on JerusaIem, the Israelis have revealed more of their
motives and aggressive designs. Time and again we have
spoken of Israeli expansion. We have explained the steps
taken by Israel to bring about the complete annexation of
Jerusalem and thus change the face and character of the
Holy City.

21. In my statement yesterday I said that the question of
Al Aqsa was one which concerned Moslems throughout the
world. The questions that I have directed to the representative of Israel require answers because the actions and
attitudes adopted by the Israeli occupation authorities
concerning Moslem shrines and the Moslem inhabitants of
the occupied territories continue to cause grave concern to
Moslems everywhere. The statements which the Israeli
authorities have made with regard to the Al Aqsa fire and
to the aims and objectives of Israel vis-h-vis the Mosque
conflict with what has been reported in the intemationa1
press and with the statements made by that distinguished
body most intimately concerned with the protection and
preservation of Moslem shrines in the Holy City-the
Supreme Moslem Council of Jerusalem. There are grave
doubts in the minds of all Moslems, and only an impartial
investigation as suggested by the Supreme Moslem Council
will remove those doubts.

29. Today, my delegation joins the 24 other members,
representing 750 million adherents of the Moslem faith,
which requested a meeting to consider another, more
serious tragedy, namely, that of the Al Aqsa Mosque, and
the fire which severely destroyed that historic Holy Place
on the morning of 21 August 1969.
30. I, myself, was in the Middle East area. I wasin Jordan
when that horrible arson was committed. I have witnessed
the horror and dismay of the Arab Qeoples, Christians and
Moslems alike. I have also read the communique of the
3

minutes after the fire started. The broadcast carried the
news of the arson; it did not give any reason for the fin? and
did not say whether it was extinguished. Meanwhile,
Jordanian fire brigades from Ramallah, and even those from
Al Khalil (Hebron) and Nablus, were sent to the scene.-and
we all know it takes an ordinary car more than one hour to
reach Jerusalem from those two cities. With the help of
those brigades and the co-operation of the local population,
the fire wasat last extinguished and contained. According
to Reuters, it took the fire brigades over five hours to
extinguish the fire; this, to a certain extent, wassubstantiated by Israeli authorities. As stated at a pressconference
held that same day by Teddy Kollek, the illegally appointed
Mayor, and according to Radio Israel, it took them until
10.30 a.m. to extinguish the fire. We think Mr. Tekoah
should have exchanged notes with his authorities, with
Radio Israel and Mr. Kollek, before coming here to saythat
it took about one hour. We find it took them until 10.30 to
extinguish the fire. Certainly Mr. Tekoah seems to disagree
with the Israeli eye-witnesses who admitted that there was
delay and tried to find justification for that delay, There
wasno doubt among the inhabitants and eye-witnessesthat
the arrival of the Israeli fire brigades, in short reach of the
scene,was delayed and their job wasunsatisfactory.

President of the Supreme Moslem Council in Jerusalem
concerning the circumstances of that criminal act. The
President, Sheikh Al-Muhtasib, has rejected previous Israeli
allegations that the fire was caused by an electrical
short-circuit.
31. The Israelis attempted to decry the gravity of the’
matter at the time, when they not only delayed in reaching
the burning Mosque but prevented local inhabitants from
helping to put out the fire. They later imposed a curfew on
the Old City of Jerusalem, so that no one could either help
or witness the extent of Israeli efficiency, or rather
inefficiency, in extinguishing the fire.
32. The Israeli ,authorities introduced more than one
explanation for the start of the fire .and at last charged an
Australian with the arson. According to news that originated from Israeli sources,the Australian suspectis a friend
of Israel who was brought by the Jewish Agency to work
for Israel. The Jewish Agency arranged for this Australian
to work in a Kibbutz for some months, so that he could
learn the Hebrew language and acquire more of the Zionist
teachings. The report published in The Jerusalem Post-an
Israeli semi-official newspaper-of 25 August 1969 concerning the life of this Australian in the Kibbutz and his dreams
of building Solomon’s Tempie castsdoubts on the caseand
adds to the fears and worries of the Moslems about their
holy shrines; it also throws light on who is the criminal and
who is the accomplice.

37. That same afternoon the commander of the fire
brigades told the journalists that the pumping of water was
working swiftly and in an orderly manner at the beginning
but that eight minutes later something happened-the
pumping of the water was interrupted and could not work
as before, This is something for every member to ponder.
The commander of the tire brigades reported that it had
not been indicated whether that was due to a technical
mishap or to a premeditated act. It must be remembered,
however, that after the Israeli occupation the water system
in the city was connected tc the western part so thal Ihe
Israelis would be in full control of the water system, This,
among other things, elicited sharp criticism and apprehension from Arab Mayor Rouhi ElKhatib and the former
President of the Moslem Council, Abdul Hamid Es-Sayeh,
both of whom were expelled from Jerusalem to the East
Bank of Jordan.

33. We have not forgotten statements in the early days of
the 5 June 1967 Israeli occupation about the future of
Jerusalem, nor have we forgotten the report of Menahem
Borsh, which was published in Yadihote Ahronote of 18
August 1969, only three days before the burning of the
Mosque, emphasizing that the Temple would be built anew
in the same spot that “strangers tried to seize”, The
desecration of this holy Mosque by a group of the Bitar
members only three days before the arson is a living
example of Israeli motives and designs.
34. What happened on 21 August 1969 was not only a
premeditated burning of a sacred monument but also an
open defiance of our people’s feelings and heritage and a
cause of deep concern to all peace-loving States. As a result
of that criminal act, tension has been escalated in our area,
outrage has reached its peak, and there is a situation
seriously endangering international peace and security. As I
shall now show, the responsibility for the act of arson lies
squarely with the Israeli occupiers, who are intoxicated by
their military victory and are adamantly proceeding with
their illegal plans of expansion, in complete disregard of the
will of the international community.

38. What explanations did the Israelis give for the fire?
The first version came from Abraham Libermann, the
commander of the Israeli brigade, who thought that the fire
was caused by “a spark from a welding machine”. That was
the first allegation, the first attempt. Later, having discovered the unfeasibility of such an explanation, Israeli
officials and Radio Israel unequivocally declared that the
fire had broken out because of an electrical contact. That Is
picture number two. The Government of Israel endo:rsed
and adhered to that second version and took it, as appemd
then, as the final version. As some of the truth beganto
unfold, and as the Supreme Moslem Council, with the help
of individual eye-witnesses who were present in the
Mosque, began to pronounce their observations and findings to the world, the Israeli Government had to abandon
its second version of the cause of the fire and passto the
third.

3.5. Let us see what did and what did not happen on
Thursday, 21 August 1969. In the early hours of that
morning fire broke out in the Al Aqsa Mosque. Moslems
praying in the Mosque and others rushed to the scene to
remove some of the valuables in the Mosque and extinguish
the fire. The Jordanian fire brigade in Jerusalem wascalled.
Moslem religious leaders as well as Jordanian officials
within the Israeli-occupied area came to the scene.

39. Israel by then had no choice but to assumea different
role altogether. It appeared under the guise of protector cf
the Holy Places. Therefore, a certain Dennis Rohan had to

36. To the outside world news of the fire came in Arabic
from Radio Israel at 8.30 a.m., that is, one hour and ten
4

be quickly arrested and negligence had to be imputed, not
to Israel, but to the Moslem guards in the holy Mosque.

I

r

40. That is what appears to have taken place, or, to be
more precise, that is the little we know of what had taken
place. What did not take place, however, confronts us with
serious questions, the answers to which may shed more
light on this act of arson. After all, by raising certain
pertinent questions one may reach the right conclusions.
This is more so, since many of those questions are left
unanswered by the Israeli Government, by Mr, Tekoah, and
by other Israel officials.
41. Question number one: why did the Israeli officials and
Radio Israel, before any on-the-spot investigation was
carried out and immediately after the fire broke out,
attribute the act of arson to an electrical contact?
42. Question number two: where were the Israeli fire
brigades when the fire continued to spread, while the
Jordanian fire brigades, which had come a long way, were
at the scene? Were the Israeli fire brigades of Jerusalem
deliberately delayed, or notified too late?
43. Question number three: why was the pumped water
suddenly interrupted? Was that a coincidence, or a
prearranged and premeditated act by the authority controlling the water units?
44. Question number four: why does Israel insist on
keeping the key to one of the main gateways of Al Aqsa;
’ and what part did that key play in the events? What was
the role of that key-in the hands of the Israelis-the key to
one of the main gateways to the holy Al Aqsa? An honest
answer-if we get an honest answer from the Israelis-may
be the key to the whole problem.
45. Question number five: when and why did Israel
abandon its first and second versions of the events and
instead put on the cloak of protector of the Holy Places?
46. And my last question: who is Dennis Rohan; and was
he acting on his own initiative?
d 47. It is not a secret that the Israeli Government, as well as
different Zionist organizations and bodies, have been
changing the character and status of Jerusalem, against the
wishesand will of its people, in open defiance of the United
Nations and in clear disregard of the two decisions
[resolutions 252 (1968) and 267 (196911 unanimousIy
adopted by this most important body. Time and again, my
delegation has warned against such plans, and time and
again the Security Council, as well as the General Assembly,
has taken a firm stand against such Israeli measures.
However, Israel, undeterred, goes on with its plans.
48. The Aqsa event cannot and should not be viewed hy
itself or as an isolated act, The Al Mosque is a part of the
Old City that has been the subject of demolition and
bulldozing, and its inhabitants forcibly evicted, to make
room for a plaza where Israelis could pray. According to an
interview with his foster-parent-an Israeli in Kibbutz
Mishmar Hasharon-published in The Jerusalem Post of
Monday, 25 August 1969, four days after that act, Dennis

Rohan thought, after spending some months in the kibbutz,
that the demolition and bulldozing were not enough and
that the plaza was not the right place. After spending that
long period there, Dennis Rohan conveyed, according to his
foster-parent, these views: he was led to believe that the
Temple must be built; and for it to be built, Al Aqsa
Mosque must disappear, as did the Maghrabi Quarter.
49. The question arises: was Rohan strange or eccentric?
It depends. If we are to judge his thinking within the
context of Zionist teachings and indoctrinations that draw
on fanciful biblical interpretations-and
he lived in the
kibbutz for over two and a half months-then Rohan is as
normal as any other Zionist in Israel. For, have not the
Zionists and the Zionist movement exploited religion for
political and secular goals? Was not the creation of the
State of Israel in Palestine and the very idea of a Jewish
State there based on religious and Messianic interpreta.
tions? Have they not continued to foster such religious
fanaticism, be it in Al Khalil (Hebron), and to promote the
creation of new Israeli settlements on our lands or in other
parts of the occupied territories, especially in Jerusalem?
Al Aqsa is only a part-though a very venerated part-of
rusalem; and Jerusalem is only a part of the occupied
Perritories.
50. Was Rohan, after all, acting on his own initiative? Was
he not brought to Israel and sponsored by the Jewish
Agency? Where did he get all the money which he offered
to the guards of Al Aqsa on the morning of the fire and
which the guards declined to take? According to The
Times of London, of 12 September 1969: “On Rohan’s
way out he offered each $110 sterling but they declined,
Mr. Hilwani said.” The She&h, thinking there must be
something wrong, then entered into the Mosque and rushed
out crying: “They have burnt the pulpit”, According to the
same semi-official Israeli newspaper, The Jerusalem Post of
25 August 1969, Rohan’s foster-parents in the kibbutz said:
“He never appeared to be short of money to us.”
51. It is not only what happened to the Al Aqsa Mosque
and what has been going on in Jerusalem that arouse the
fears and apprehension of 750 million Moslems and other
peace-loving peoples in the world, but what the future
holds for Jerusalem and other areas under Israeli occupation. Only one conclusion can be reached: the only
insurance for the safety and integrity of the Holy Places, as
well as for other places, is Israeli withdrawal.
52. I now come to what I consider the most serious aspect
of Mr. Tekoah’s statement. Mr. Tekoah told us that the
criminal had been arrested, that a tribunal had been
constituted, that Rohan would soon be tried and if
convicted would be punished in accordance with the law.
But the question arises, which law is he referring to? It is
the same Israeli law which you around this table, all of YOU,
without exception, have declared invalid. The law on which
the charges are based and the law creating the so-called
investigations committee are laws which this important
body has repeatedly declared invalid. The Supreme Moslem
Council in Jerusalem has also rejected such laws and
committees.
They are the laws you called upon Israel
to rescind. In the words of the Security Council: “in the
event 0f.a negative response or no response . . . the Security

Council shall reconvene without delay to consider what
further action should be taken in this matter” [resolution 267 (1969), para. 7J,

53. Was there any Israeli response? Yes, there was.
Mr. Tekoah appeared before you, abandoning his usual
aggressive style, to say in a soft voice, with respect, for a
change : “we are applying the laws you rescinded in order to
assessthe situation in Jerusalem and we ask the Council to
note this, endorse it and accept this fait accompli”.
54. The Israeli representative should not be permitted to
create this confusion. He is telling you: “Everything is
taken care of; there is now a court, a commission and a fair
trial.” But once more I beg you to ponder one thing: which
laws is he referring to? Not the laws a military occupier
under the Geneva Convention is requested to enforce.
Definitely not the laws of Jordan. I must re-emphasize here
that the Israelis are invoking the very same laws you
declared null and void, the very same regulations and laws
you rescinded. Israel said openly that the charge sheet now
being prepared against Rohan is based on sections 317 to
322 of the Criminal Law Ordinance. The Israelis further
stressed that the Commission of Inquiry investigating the
cause of the fire at Al Aqsa was the first commission to
have been established under the 30 December 1968 Inquiry
Commission Law, Both are Israeli, both were declared
invalid by the Security Council, both are illegal and now
Israel comes in this sneaky way, through the window, to
have the Security Council validate what the Council has
expressly declared to be invalid.
55. With all due respect, I suggest that Mr. Tekoah is
putting forth his argument in a very misleading way, I
would say that it is a malicious way, because while he
knows that these laws were declared illegal he tHes, through
the back door, to have the Council validate them,
56. All of the foregoing evidence, together with Israeli
behaviour, throws much light on the question. This
emphasizes the need for firm action to put an end to the
tragic situation in Jerusalem. Palliative measures will not
remedy the situation. They will not put an end to the bitter
feelings aroused in the Moslem world and, indeed, all over
the world.
57. Mr. President, you and the members of the Council
have heard Mr. Tekoah speak about how the Jews and
Arabs strove side by side to overcome and extinguish the
fire and about the spirit of co-operation among them. But I
have already shown what part the Israelis played in
extinguishing the fire and the kind of co-operation they
rendered. Be that as it may, honest and genuine co-operation is based on things which Mr. Tekoah has failed to see.
58. Why should not peace and justice be the basis for
co-operation? Why should not the Charter of the United
Nations and the resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly be the foundations for such co-operation? Israel should not expect the United Nations to
endorse crime as a legitimate means of co-operation
between Arab and Israeli. Otherwise more crimes will be
committed by Israel. Bloodshed will not open the way to
peace in the land of peace. The Israelis are in a position to

choose between love and hatred. Mr. Tekoah is grossly
mistaken in feeling that arson and destruction bring
co-operation. To bum Al Aqsa is to bum the heart of everly
Moslem. This brings neither love nor co-operation, This will1
encourage more Israeli defiance and the Israelis will b,e
tempted to continue on the road of tension, aggressionand
bloodshed.
59. We offer our full co-operation to implement all
Security Council resolutions, all General Assembly resolutions and all United Nations resolutions. Let Israel show th:
same desire by deeds, not words. That would bring genuine
peace.
60. This is the first time that I have spoken from this side
of the Council table. Mr. Tekoah is not sitting far from
here. He is near, but he does not hear.
61. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I thank
the representative of Jordan for the kind words he ha;s
addressedto me.
62. In connexion with the reference made by the representative of Jordan in his statement today to terrorist threatls
against the representatives of Member States of the United
Nations, I consider it necessary, in my capacity asPresiden,t
of the Security Council, to state that the question raised by
the representative of Jordan affects the common interests
of all Member States.
63. I consider it necessary to draw the attention of the
Secretary-General to this matter and to ask him to study it
together with the representative of the United States so
that the necessarymeasures can be taken.
64. In conclusion, in view of the name of the next speaker
on my list, if the representative of Jordan considers ii:
advisable to remain at the Council table, he may do so.
65. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Israel. I now call on him,
66. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I should like to reassurethe
representative of Jordan that not only have I listened to
and heard what he said, but that I was reminded, while:
listening to his statement, of an old Jewish rabbinical
saying: “When Falsehood saw he had no legs to stand on,
he made himself wings,” It seems that the wings the
representative of Jordan made for the falsehoods he chose
to incorporate in his statement today are somewhat like the
wings of Egyptian airplanes; they rarely stay aloft for long,
67. For example, the representative of Jordan found ilt
necessary and appropriate, to refer to the causeof the fire.
Several hours after the outbreak of the fire on 21 August,
the Jordanian Governmental television and radio informed
the Arab world that the Israeli Cabinet had met in a special
session, had deliberated and had decided on the burning of
the Mosque. Now that the entire world has become fully
cognizant of the facts and it is difficult for even the;
representative of Jordan to deny that it was with the
assistance of the Moslem authorities in Jerusalem that al
suspect has been arrested and charged with arson, the
representative of Jordan comes before the Security Council

with the ridiculous accusation that the suspect, a young
Christian visitor, had been brought to Israel by Israeli
authorities to commit the crime of arson,

not reported to the police. In the days before 20 August
Rohan became friendly with the watchmen of the Mosque,
and on the 20th he received permission from one of them
to enter it the following morning, before the normal hours
for public visit, on the pretext that he wanted to take some
photographs under tranquil conditions, This explains how,
on 21 August, Rohan entered the Mosque before 7 a.m. and
was able to place cans of fuel under the steps of the pulpit.
He linked the cans with a scarf soaked in kerosene and set it
alight. Subsequently he walked out of the Mosque through
the main entrance, took leave of his friends the watchmen,
and left the Old City through the Lion’s Gate, On his way
to the Rockefeller Museum, Rohan threw away a sack and a
bottle, drove in a taxi to the Egged bus station, and left
Jerusalem. The fire spread to the southern wing of the
Mosque. Thirty-two witnesses for the prosecution have
been invited by the police.

68. He bases this flight of fantasy on the fact that the
young man, being a friend of Israel, worked in a kibbutz
and had even learned Hebrew. I should like to assure the
representative of Jordan that there are thousands of
Christian and Buddhist, as well as Moslem, friends of Israel
who spend their time in kibbutzim, attracted by their
special atmosphere and society, who work there and learn
Hebrew. In fact, there is nothing in principle to prevent the
Jordanian representative himself from doing the same
thing-and I do not think he has to fear that, if he does, he
will necessarily be accused of preparing himself to commit
arson.
69. The Jordanian representative has also voiced the
slanderous libel that the Israeli authorities were slow in
fighting the blaze, whereas, unlike the fire at the Holy
Sepulchre in 1949, which it took the Jordanian authorities
24 hours to extinguish, this time the fire at Al Aqsa was
extinguished after one hour and the firemen were busy
thereafter only with the embers. He went so far as to assert
that the Israeli authorities cut the water pipes. I do not
think allegations of this kind even deserve a reply.

74. The casebeing now sub judice, I will say nothing more
about it.
7.5. I wish to reiterate that my Government would have no
objection to the attendance at the trial, or to the visit to
the Mosque, of anyone wishing to form Iris own first-hand
impressions.
76. At the 1507th meeting of the Council, the representative of Pakistan quoted from the Hebrew Bible. “Pray for
the peace of Jerusalem”, says the Book of Psalms. From
time immemorial, day after day, three times a day and in
grace after every meal, Jews the world over pray for
Jerusalem and for the peace of Jerusalem. It is the peace of
Jerusalem that is uppermost in our minds today.

70. I shall confine myself to quoting from the Catholic
weekly The Tablet of 30 August:
“It is ominous that before any evidence wasproduced,
the first reaction of some Arabs was to lay the blame on
the Israeli authorities. Even now, when these fantastic
accusations have been abandoned, the Arabs are still
accusing the Israeli authorities of incompetence in their
fire-fighting, although since Arabs themselves cut the
pipes rather than allow infidels into the Holy Place, it is
not easy to make much sense of such an accusation. It
merely proves the sad and self-evident truth that when
tempers are inflamed, any accusation will be believed and
issues that in a calmer atmosphere could be easily
resolved become insoluble.”

77. It was not of peace, unfortunately, that the bellicose
statements we heard today spoke. They were echoing the
calls to war that have been voiced in ever-growing intensity
in the Arab capitals since 21 August. They were echoing
President Nasser’s pronouncement of 23 August: “Our eyes
are on Al Aqsa. . . . The next war will not be a war of
liberation but a war of purification.” A war of purification-such as the Mongolian massacres promised by the
Arab League when its member States invaded Israel in
1948; purification of the land from Jews, as in Hitler’s
macabre slogan Judenrein-purified of Jews.

The credibility of the other allegations by the Jordanian
representative is not much greater.
71. I deem it appropriate at this stage to convey to the
Council the principal charges laid against the accused,
Michael Rohan, suspected of having committed the arson at
Al Aqsa on 21 August. The indictment is in two parts, one
dealing with an attempted arson on 11 August 1969, and
the other with the arson of 21 August. It points out that
Rohan acted out of extreme religious impulses. Both parts
of the indictment describe in detail the meticulous planning, the acquisition of the equipment and materials for
purposes of arson, and the preliminary reconnaissances that
he made in the Al Aqsa Mosque.

78. We shall not give up hope, however. We still pray that
the sacrednessand serenity of Jerusalem and its Holy Places
will not be disturbed by the generation of a controversial
atmosphere on a matter which should unite all men of
sincere faith and goodwill. I shall leave it, therefore, to
world opinion to pronounce judgement on the deplorable
incitement and absurd accusations directed against Israel.
79. Rarely has ‘world opinion been more united and more
The Committee for Human Rights of neutral
Switzerland issued a statement on 24 August in which it
declared, inter alia:
outspoken.

72. After his unsuccessful first attempt, Rohan executed
detailed reconnaissances almost every day in order to find
the most vulnerable part of the Mosque, and then he
decided to set fire to the steps of the wooden pulpit, the
minbar.

“A short while ago, two representatives of this Committee visited Holy Places in East Jerusalem, particularly the
Mosques Omar and Al Aqsa. They personally witnessed
the care of the Israeli authorities to assure free accessto
Holy Places for people of all religions. The testimony Of

73. The indictment mentions that on the first occasion
traces of the attempted arson were left, but the case was
7

pilgrims indicates that Holy Places to some extent are in
an even better condition today than when they were
under Jordanian administration. In conversations with
Israeli citizens and Government officials, it has clearly
emerged that there had been no manifestations of
inter-faith hostility. There can be absolutely no basis to
the suggestion of a plan or idea of destroying Holy Places
of other faiths, This would be contrary to Israel’s
interests.

sible for the fire. Israel has in no way neglected her duty
to protect the Holy Places. I myself have seen evidence of
this today when I prayed at Al Aqsa and at the Mosque of
Omar. . . . I am profoundly impressed by the freedom
enjoyed by non-Jewish religions in Israel,”
83. The outcry against exploitation of the fire for pur.
poses of warlike incitement has been even stronger.
84. The Supreme Pontiff himself found it necessaryto
voice a public plea and warning. Pope Paul made a
statement on 3 1 August in which he deplored the fire at Al
Aqsa and expressed understanding for the religious feeliags
of the Moslems. He added, however:

“The Arab accusation has no foundation in fact. It was
voiced before the cause of the fire had been investigated.
These accusations serve as evidence of the fact that Arab
leaders systematically incite their people in a campaign of
hatred of Israel and do not hesitate to exploit religious
emotions for political ends. This kind of exploitation runs
counter to the very spirit of religion and principles of
human rights. The true spirit of religion would never
utilize false evidence in order to undermine understanding
amongst peoples in accordance with the United Nations
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.”

“We understand their bitterness but we hope it will not
worsen conditions in the Middle East, already JO tense:
and fragile, and we hope that the situation ,will not
degenerate into further violence or more fierce hatreds
which would prejudice even more the higher ansdimpel+
ling cause of justice and peace.”
85. On 26 August, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Brazil declared in a press conference: “Brazil is very mucr
concerned about the conflict in the Middle East lest ii
become transformed into a holy war, capable of provokiin~
genocide .”

80. Mr. Chabi Mama, Dahomey’s Minister for Education
and a prominent Moslem leader, declared on 28 August:
“Jerusalem can no longer be divided into two cities. It
should remain united, I say this not only because I am in
favour of unity and against anything that is divisive, but
also because cutting a city in half is stupid and inhuman.
As for the Mosque, I have seen it, and it does not seem
that it has suffered much; and the damage is, at first sight,
easily reparable. As for the culprit, Michael Rohan, he has
been arrested and has admitted his guilt. Israel bears no
responsibility for this act, and world as well as African
opinion judges on the basis of facts as they are being
revealed in the inquiries presently in course and in the
trial that will take place.”

86. From all continents of the world came similar expres
sions of comem by statesmen, spiritual leaders and laymen.
Even in Tunis voices were heard against enflaming passions.
The Tunisian daily El-Amzl wrote on 26 August: “The calls
for a jihad against Israel were unwarranted.” On the
following day the Tunisian daily L’Action, the organ of the
Socialist Destour, protested against the incitement to war
by certain Arab leaders. It stated: “How can one f;lil tose?
the most inopportune and clumsy nature of these calls for a
holy war launched openly by certain Arab leaders.”

81. Al-Haj Garba-Jahumpa, another Moslem statesman and
Gambia’s Minister of Education, Health and,Social Welfare,
declared to the press on 27 August, following a visit to Al
Aqsa:

87. On 30 August, the International Buddhist Association
Maha Sangha, with headquarters in Cofombo, sent a
telegram to the Secretary-General stating inter alia:

“I firmly reject any claim that Israel and the Jewish
people as such had anything to do with the fire in the
Mosque. The current campaign against Israel is rooted
either in ignorance or propaganda opportunism. It has
nothing to do with any religious motives. I waa in
Jerusalem last Thursday and had the opportunity to
watch the fire brigade go about putting out the fire. They
worked very hard and did a marvellous job in saving the
dome of Al Aqsa.

“With all our respect for followers of Islam at lsrgc,we
request them not to use this fire incident in Jerusalem
Mosque for political purposes and for inciting millions of
followers of Islam for a holy war as this may bring untold
suffering and misery for humanity.”
88. International editorial opinion has been no lesscritical
of the exploitation of the fire for political incitement thas
public figures and organizations. I shall mention only a few
characteristic comments. The daily, El Espew’odor@f
Bogota, on 24 August stated:

“I am fully convinced that Al Aqsa was savedfrom far
greater damage through the good work done by the
firemen. I have full confidence in the inquiry commission
and am looking forward to its findings,”

“The unfortunate incident of the Mosque Al AVs 11
Jerusalem serves as an excellent pretext to inflame ahoi!
war of Moslems; it is a windfall for the political llsadcrstc
keep up the flame of fanaticism and to conceal their chl
errors.

82. The Chad Minister of Public Affairs, Mahamat Rahama
Saleh, stated at a pressinterview in Jerusalem on 8 September:

“As in all criminal investigations one should ask wlreir
the one that stands to gain? In novels of Crime, wlu%eiPr
a murder occurs it is elementary to aSCert,ain*ho

“Israel did everything she could to contain the fire at Al
Aqsa. . , . I do not believe charges that Israel is respon8

benefited from the death of the victim: the heirs, those
that nourished secret rancour, political or personal
friends. In this case, there is no doubt the crime is being
capitalized on by Arabs, the only ones who stand to gain
politically from it. . . exploiting to the fullest the evident
indignation of the people.

94. The Times of Zambia of 3 September, referring to the

“In this difficult situation, the Government of Israel
and its people have nc other defence but that of
enlightened public opinion and common sense which
precludes even the remotest possibility of their being
responsible for this crime. And with all this, we should
bear in mind that, during the Arab occupation of
Jerusalem, Jewish Holy Places and cemeteries were
deliberately desecrated, a small detail which those that
call for a holy war will undoubtedly forget now.”

95. The prominent

Arab calls for war, stated:
“This is a step back into the era of the crusaders to the
time when the real problems of disease, poverty and
oppression were obscured by religious fanaticism.”
Madrid daily, Ya, wrote on 28 August:

“It seems to be exaggerated that the fire in the Mosque
should have given rise to another complaint in the
Security Council.
“It is precisely Israel that is most interested in not
giving a motive to religious resentment of Moslems in this
warlike period.”
96. The Da@ Telegraph of London wrote on 27 August,
under the heading “Nasser fans the flames”:

89. Le Figaro of Paris commented on 29 August:

“The Arab States have opted for a case that must fail in
any test of logic. Nor must Israel be blamed for
negligence, because the Arabs themselves guarded the
Mosque and no police can prevent a crime of a madman
or a pro vocateur. ”

“The Arab cause in the outside world will suffer from
the latest blood bath in Iraq, the bomb outrage in
London and the reckless eagerness with which the fire in
the Al Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem has been exploited to
whip up a ‘Holy War’ frenzy against Israel.”

90. In an editorial entitled “Blindness of Passions”, Le
Monde of 22 August admonished:

97. The Economist

‘$An old Roman saying states that the author of a crime
is the one who gains from it. It is evident that the fire of
Al Aqsa Mosque does not benefit Israel at all. It is fatal,
in the climate of over-excitement that prevaiIs in the
Middle East since the Six Days War, that the notion
should spread of a new crime by Zionists.”

“At first it seemed tha,; last week’s fire in the third holy
shrine of Islam had given the Arabs a political bonus. It
won them much sympathy. . , . Yet, just as in May and
June 1967, the Arabs are forfeiting this sympathy. The
charge made by the Arab Foreign Ministers in Cairo that
Israel has ‘plans against Moslem and Christian shrines’ is
as irresponsible as much of the vindictive nonsense that
has poured out of Arab radios. It is remarkably difficult
to believe the apparent Arab claim that the fire in the
Mosque was an act of deliberate Israeli policy, or that the
Mosque was more vulnerable to a firebug, or accident,
under Israeli administration than Arab.

91. The daily, Bangkok World, observed in its editorial of
25 August: “The fire is a transparent attempt on the part of
Arab leaders to make use of religious feelings for political
purposes.”
92. The political commentator
broadcast on 2.5 August:

of the Radio Malagasy

of 30 August 1969 commented:

“It may be that, at least in Jerusalem, the trial in
September of the young Australian who has been charged
with the fire-raising will dispose of the wild stories and
mitigate Arab bitterness. The Moslem religious authorities
were helpful in securing his arrest.”

“The Arab Governments have exploited the incident
that must under no circumstances be blamed on Israel,
for political calumny, In many of its aspects this fire is
reminiscent of another, the fire of the Reichstag.

98. The New York Times of 28 August admonished:

93. The Rising Nepal, published in Katmandu, wrote in an

editorial on 25 August:
“The real danger, however, is that the Arab Govemments will be carried past the point of no return on a
floodtide of Arab rhetoric and emotion, even as President
Nasser at the showdown was forced by his own zealots
into the 1967 war.”

“From what can be made out of the whole affair, from
this distance, and as the matter now stands, it is that
while the occurrence is naturalIy a most regrettable blow
to all Moslems, it does not follow that the Israelis
themselves had a hand in it. . . , The Israelis as a
God-fearing people and as hard-boiled pragmatists have
never interfered in matters of religion and the fact that
Arab and not Israeli guards were on duty at the Mosque
when the fire broke out not only lends credence to this
view but also suggests that the Arab charges have little
evidence, so far, to go by. In U Thant’s reply message to
the call made by the twenty-four Moslem countries, too,
the implication of Israeli complicity in the affair is very
conspicuous and significant in its absence.”

99. One of the most thoughtful comments comes from a
country which is a neighbour of both Israel and the Arab
States. The Cvprus Mail of 31 August declared in an
editorial:
“The world has rarely been witness to such unprincipled and fanatical political and religious exploitation of events as the Arabs have been pursuing following
the fire, despite the fact that prompt police action
9

consideration, I should like to express to you my delega.
tion’s warm welcome to you as President of the Council.
We are convinced that your great experience in and
knowledge of the work of the Council will guarantee! the
smooth work of the Council and will facilitate our task. At
the same time I cannot fail to associate myseIf with those
who have paid a tribute to the representative of Spain,
Ambassador Pinies, for the excellent way in which ha
presided over our deliberations in August.

resulted in the arrest of one man suspected of having
started the blaze. It has been denounced as an Israeli act
of sabotage and there has been a crude campaign to whip
up a war fever, demands for strong punitive action by the
United Nations and an attempt to drag the whole Islamic
world into the Israeli-Arab confrontation.”
100. Referring to the complaint submitted to the Security
CounciI by the Arab delegations, the newspaper observed:

107. The Security Council is forced again to considler a
serious incident which took place in Jerusalem and which
shocked the whole civilized world. Al Aqsa Mosque is a
valuable monument of the cuhural inheritance of mankind;
it has a priceless historic value and is a sacred place folr the
religious, spiritual life of several hundred million persons,
The Hungarian Government-although
Hungary is a secular
State-fully understands how deeply shocked were the
Governments which requested the convening of the Securi.
ty Council by the barbarous attempt to destroy the Al ,4qsa
by arson.

“They feel with very good reason that they have the
United Nations Security Council completely in the
hollow of their hands and can persuade it to take sides
with them against Israel whenever they wish. This was
again demonstrated by the Council resolution
[270 (1969/j on the recent incident in Lebanon. , . . It is
now clear that the Al Aqsa incident is to be brought
before the Security Council within the next few days. If
it is handled in the same prejudiced fashion that has been
characteristic of all recent debates on the Mid-East, it will
do untold harm to prospects of averting a new ArabIsraeli war and will make utter nonsense of its own
much-quoted resolution [2#2 (1967)J of November
1967.”

108. The representative of Israel put a false complexion
on this question by interpreting the circumstances of the
arson as if it were an event connected only with the sphere
of religion. He even tried to make us believe that the event
brought Arab and Jew nearer to each other. He declared:

101. The real question which confronts the Security
Council today in this debate is how to deal with the
exploitation of the fire at Al ‘Aqsa for political purposes
and how to prevent the vindication of incitement to
belligerency.

“It is not what separates us that Israel and the Arab
States must search for, but that which unites us. No
matter how complex the political controversy, no matter
how grave the military confrontation, there is kinship
between Jew and Arab in their civilization. If Et is the
vision of ultimate peace that guides us, we must nurture it
with care and reverence.” f 1507th meeting, para, 12rS.j

102. The Chief Rabbi of Israel issued on 22 August, the
day after the fire at Al Aqsa, a statement expressing his
feelings of participation in the sorrow of all the faithful of
Islam and of their religious leaders. Emphasizing that it is
inconceivable that a Jewish hand should have caused the
fire, the Chief Rabbi declared:

Those are very fine words; they were taiIored for this event.
I should be happy to welcome that statement by the
representative of Israel as a change of policy, since not long
ago, in justifying the Israelis’ military adventure, he boasted
that they taught their neighbours a lesson. However, I think
such a welcome would be over-hasty.

“Let UShope that the truth will soon be established and
that all distortion and incitement will vanish like smoke
and that in their stead will prevail brotherhood which is
the essenceof all the great religions in the world.”

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J, M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took the pluce reserved for him,

109. Had Mr. Tekoah analysed the arson in the proper
context, it would have been unnecessary for him to a!!sure
the Council that the Israeli authorities had done and would
be ready to do everything to preserve the Holy Placlcsin
Jerusalem. The basic question in this incident is not how
the Holy Places were or are to be safeguarded but why fIta
Israelis are the ones who want to undertake the safeguard.
ing. It is very difficult to deny that it was the Israeli
occupation that nurtured the development of a climate in
which the arson seemed to be natural and desirable. To
prevent a repetition of such grave violence, the first step
should be the liquidation of the climate favourable Loit.
Therefore the first step should be the withdrawal of the
Israeli occupation forces from tire Arab territories, from the
area of the Holy Places of Jerusalem. Then tension would
ease in the whole region. If the Israeli GovernmlEnt’s
concept of “ultimate peace” is not connected with the life
beyond the grave, if they wish to live in peace with their
neighbours, they should show their goodwill; and it WouId
not be too complicated to indicate some signs of it.

106. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): Comrade President, before
stating the views of my delegation on the subject under

110. The resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council on Jerusalem adopted during the PSI

103. Will the Security Council of the United Nations
contribute to this brotherhood?
104. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): Before
calling on the next speaker on my list, the representative of
Hungary, I wish to inform the members of the Council that
a letter addressed to the President of the Security Council
(9443J has just been received from the representative of
Saudi Arabia requesting permission to participate in the
debate on the item before the Council.
105. If there is no objection, I propose to invite the
representative of Saudi Arabia to take part in the discussion
of this item without the right to vote. In view of the limited
space at the Council table, I shall ask the representative of
Saudi Arabia to take the place renerved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.

10

three years clearly indicate that the community of Governments, that is, the membership of the United Nations,
cannot accept any change in the legal status of Jerusalem.
Why does the Israeli Government fail to declare that it
complies with the provisions of the latest Security Council
resolution [267 (1969)] of 3 July 1969? A declaration to
the effect that the Israeli Government agrees with those
who cannot recognize the acquisition of territory by force
would also be instrumental in letting us accept at face value
the statement of the representative of Israel. However,
Israel at present continues its policies of annexation.

Temple by Solomon, only one generation passed, So will
it be with us.”
Then he was asked a question: “What about that Moslem
shrine? -referring to Al Aqsa. This was the answer,which I
underline: “It is, of course, an open question. Who knows?
Perhaps there will be an earthquake.”
116. Fifteen days later, that is, on 15 July 1967, what did
that same historian say, according to an article in the De-Of
magazine on 15 July 1967, six weeks after the occupation:

111. My delegation considers that the question of the Al
Aqsa Mosque is an integral part of the whole situation in
the Middle East and cannot be separated from it. The Israeli
Government must bear the responsibility for the arson and
for the tense climate in which it occurred. The basic
problem is not how to repair the damage, although it
should be done, but how to ease the tension in the region, a
tension that endangers world peace and security. The
solution is the implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967): a withdrawal of the Israeli troops from
the occupied territories. The Council should force Israel to
abandon the aggressor’s “vision of ultimate peace”, its
present impudent attitude towards the United Nations. My
delegation is ready to vote for a forceful resolution on this
issue.

“I always say that one of the deepest of our hopes, and
the most expressive, is the hope that salvation will be
attained with the construction of the sacred Temple. It is
obvious that we are not going to build this Temple in the
Maghrabi quarter.”
Remember that the Maghrabi quarter wasbulldozed by the
Israelis, and that they made a plaza adjacent to the wall. He
is saying here: “It is obvious that we are not going to build
this Temple in the Maghrabi quarter, but we shall build it
on the Mountain of the House. That is why it is obvious
that the mosque on this mountain must disappear.”
117. Those are the words of Israel, not my words. Those
are facts. “The mosque must disappear” one of these days,
in one way or another, It was for this reason, and being
aware of everything that had been going on-the bulldozing
of the Maghrabi, followed by excavations, then approaches
towards the mosque-that I came before this Council on 30
June 1969 and warned that it was my duty to tell the
Council:

112. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): 1 thank
the representative of Hungary for the kind words he has
addressed to me as President of the Security Council.
113. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Jordan, on whom I now call in exercise of his right of reply.

“What will happen, may I ask, when cracks are
discovered there too-as doubtless, if permitted, they will
be? Will this unique mosque, Al Aqsa, the third holiest in
all Islam, be condemned and demolished as well? Where
will the line be drawn? Or will Israel be left to continue
unhampered its ‘excavations’, its looting and wanton
destruction, its desecration of holy places and its gross
disregard for the rights of others? Only the members
around this table can answer these questions. And
time. . , is running short.” [1482nd meeting, pcra. 33.1

114. Mr. EL-FARRA
(Jordan): In comparing Mr.
Telcoah’s earlier statement to the Council with the one he
made today, one can see this: Mr, Tekoah has not abandoned his style as he apparently tried hard to do two days
ago. He has come with the same charges, with the same
accusations, imputing falsehoods to the delegation of
Jordan. All my quotations were from sources other than
Arab sources. I quoted Radio Israel. I quoted 1728Jerusalem Post, which is here for anyone to read, I quoted sources
which have no relationship of any kind to Arab sources.
Yet Mr. Tekoah chose not to rebut the issues raised, not to
answer a single one of my six questions. He found it more
convenient to shout in his usual manner, throwing out lies
so that some might stick and become acceptable to those
listening to him-and, when I say that, I%lave in mind those
invited by Mr. Tekoah who are sitting over there in the
gallery. I have not come with empty charges. I am
introducing evidence. To determine what happened one
must look at the motives. Whataare the motives? L;t us go
to the time of the Israeli occupation of Jerusalem, on
5 June 1967.

Time is of the essence.
118. Then Mr, Tekoah spoke about the cause of the fire.
We know that Roha.n did not appear in the picture in the
beginning; there was a claim that welding wasthe cause of
burning. Then there was another fabrication-and the
Israelis are gifted in fabrication-that it wasa contact of the
wires up in the roof. Then when our people-the guards and
the She&h, that is, the people in charge-came with the
evidence and the world found out, and Reuters conveyed
information here and there, it was Radio Israel which said
many things about the delay; it wasnot Jordan. And I have
it right here; I have a book-1 do not want to take the time
of the Council-showing what Radio Israel said. These are
the facts; I put them before the Council.

115. Here is what an Israeli said on 30 June 1967, 25 days
after the occupation. Dr. Israel Eldad, a well-known Israeli
historian, said, according to Time Magazine of 30 June
1968:

119. When the Israelis announced the news at 8.30, no
mention was given that the fire was put out, although it was
one hour and ten minutes later. Later on, at 10.30, there _

“We are at the stage where David waswhen he liberated
Jerusalem. From that time until the construction of the
11

the accused and the champion of justice at the same time; it
cannot be both. Israel is now charged with this crime,. It
cannot be the organ to decide what happened during the
act of arson, especially when Israel is the accused,

was another piece of information. They said at 10.30 that
they had extinguished the fire. These are the Israelis. But
Mr. Tekoah apparently did not compare notes with his own
Government, nor with Radio Israel. He came here to
impute falsehood to me, but citing Radio Israel and Israeli
sources does not amount to falsehood. This is the tongue of
Israel speaking. And the great Powers have radios; they
monitor everything said in the area, and I am sure some of
them are the friends of Israel. They can come openly and
say if these announcements are not true; these are
monitored.

125. Then Mr. Tekoah referred to Maha Sangha. He staid
that our Secretary-General had received a cablegram from
Maha Sangha of India supporting Israeli points of view. This
is very interesting, because I a30 tried to find out the
reaction of world public opinion to this crime. I discovered
that over 100 communications, either cablegrams or letters,
had been received from responsible institutions, organizations, individuals and leading figures in the world by the
Office of the Secretary-General and the President of 1:he
Security Council. Other communications came in about
what had happened in Jerusalem. I do not have the exact
number of communications here; I have it in my office. Elut
I know there were over 100 of them and they had the
following to say.

I20. What I am stating here are facts, I challenge the
Israelis to answer my question and to say that Radio Israel
did not convey this information; it is as simple as that.
121, Then came the question of learning Hebrew. It is
always a pleasure to know foreign languages-Hebrew,
English, Russian, French, Spanish, Chinese; it is a privilege
and a pleasure. But was this Rohan sent by the Jewish
agency-and I challenge Mr. Tekoah to say this man wasnot
sent by the Jewish agency, because I am quoting his
semi-official newspaper, The Jerusalem Post-was he sent
by the Jewish agency to live in a kibbutz, to work for
Israel, only to learn Hebrew? He could have gone to Berlitz
in New York, or Australia to learn Hebrew-they have
Berlitz, too. But he came to Israel for a purpose: he came
for a mission; he came tempted by many means of
temptation-and
there are many in Israel-to do what he
did; and all circumstantial evidence leads to this result.
There was a fire; fire brigades were delayed; water was
interrupted-and
again this was reported on Radio Israel;
this was said by the man from the fire brigade. He said that
the water was running normally for eight minutes, then it
was interrupted. Why? It had been normal for two years.
Why should it be interrupted that last minute, at the time
of the fire?

126. First, they emphasized their outrage, shock and
dismay at this horrible crime. Second, they said that Israel
cannot be absolved of its responsibility for the tragic fire at
the Mosque of Al Aqsa, caused by arson. Third, they said
that Israeli violations in Jerusalem had led to such acts and
that Israel should abide by the resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly. Fourth, they said thlat
the solution to preventing such acts could be achieved by
the complete withdrawal of the forces of occupation from
Jerusalem and the other Arab territories. Fifth, all deman.ded strong and effective United Nations action in this regard.
127. I could go on citing these communications. I have
them here. One comes from Japan and says:
“The Moslem community in Japan strongly protests the
burning and damaging of the Al Aqsa Mosque in
Jerusalem and urges the responsibility of the Israeli
authorities for this action.”

122. The delay in extinguishing the fire is admitted by the
Israelis. In fact, they have tried to show excuses, pretexts,
justifications. But the question of delay is admitted by
Israel. I want to emphasize that because it is very
important. ‘It is not admitted by Mr. Tekoah, but by his
authorities.

128. Here is one from Colombo:
“The burning of the AI Aqsa Mosque is an unpardonable assault on the spiritual domain of man. Pie
trust that immediate and effective measures will be taken
for the safety of valued institutions of Moslem and othler
religions from unscrupulous forces and also to ensure that
people are not pushed forward towards the abyss of
world chaos.”

123. He referred to a statement in a Catholic weekly. I do
not know what the statement was, nor its text, nor the
magazine-I only know that he referred to it. But I do not
have to go to gentile material. I gave him Jewish materialIsraeli material, Radio Israel. Can this be a thing which is
falsehood?

129. This came from Sierra Leone, in Africa:
124. Then came the question of the investigation: he saw
there is a committee. I know the Council agrees with me
that all the findings of that committee are illegal; they are
based on laws which the Council rescinded, which you
declared invalid, which you called on Israel to rescind. So
we wiI1 be discussing things in a vacuum, because they are
based on something which is null and void, on laws made to
accommodate Israeli designs; and I am certain the Security
Council is not here to endorse what Israel has enacted and
what the Council has annulled and declared invalid, Neither
the Committee’s report, nor the t%-&.ngsnor the evidence
to be introduced by that Power are valid, Israel cannot be

“Africa’s Moslems are greatly shocked by the Israeli
crime of the burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque. They
strongly condemn the barbaric action. They are appealing
to the United Nations to take the necessarymeasures for
the implementation of its resolutions.”
130. This came from Manchester, England:
“The Moslems of Manchester saddened by fire in Al
Aqsa Mosque. Request action restore Jerusalem guardianship to Moslems.”
12

131. This came from Bonn:

Al-Muhtasib, which the representative of Israel deemed it
fit to misquote, He did not reply to these questions. He did
not address himself to the matter before the Council. We
did not share the thought which might have been entertained by some here, that the representative of Israel would
this time, for a change, in deference to this highest organ of
the world Organization, address himself to the matter
before it. He did not address himself to the question put at
the end of the statement of the representative of Jordan
when he said: we offer all co-operation to implement the
resolutions of the Security Council, the resolutions of the
General Assembly, the resolutions of the United Nations-and when he asked the representative of Israel to
make the same offer.

“The calamity of the burning of the Al Aqsa Mosque in
Jerusalem is a tragedy for 700 million Moslems in the
world. This incident cannot be ignored or tolerated.”
132. Other communications came from Singapore, Burma
and India. I have them here, and with the permission of the
President I may have to request their circulation if we think
that would be helpful to the Council. I have a volume of
letters deploring and condemning and seeking and requesting urgent action by the Security Council.
133. Mr. Tekoah ended his intervention by saying that the
real question is how to deal with the exploitation of Al
Aqsa. Are we exploiting Al Aqsa? Have we tried to exploit
any case when we call for a remedy by the Security
Council? There is nothing to exploit. You exploit when
you have no cause and no reason to come to the Council;
but when you have right on your side you have nothing to
exploit, you need no exploitation. This question was not
brought to the Council because Jordan wanted to come
before the Council. We joined our other Moslem brothers
who felt that the question should be brought to the
Council, and in their wisdom they thought it would be the
right thing because this is the organ created to consider
situations threatening international peace and security. We
went along, although we will be coming to the Council soon
on other aspects of the question of Jerusalem. We want to
ask the Council what it wishes to do about its past
resolutions. We have come to the Council to remind it of its
definite and clear commitment to convene a meeting for
action against Israel if its resolutions continue to be ignored
and defied by Israel. We have come to the Council to ask it
what it is going to do about this promise for effective
action. We shall again come to request action against Israel
when we receive definite and final information that Israel is
continuing to ignore and defy the will of this world body.

137. Did the representative of Israel deem it fit to reply to
that question? Some might have entertained ,the hope that
he would have stated before the Council that he would also
offer his co-operation to implement the resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council on the rights
of the people of Palestine, to implement Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) on the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from the occupied Arab territories, which would pave the
way to peaceful settlement and, as the representative of
Jordan put it, to genuine peace in the area. Did he address
himself to any of those pertinent, relevant and constructive
questions? He did not. We all regret that he did not.
138. When the representative of lsrael spoke this afternoon, some might have entertained the hope that he would
continue the exceptionally moderate tone which was
reflected in his two statements at the 1507th and 1508th
meetings, statements which included an appeal to understanding and brotherhood and were ostensibly devoid of his
usual pattern of abuse, arrogance and defiance. We did not,
I must confess, entertain that hope. His statement this
afternoon bore us out; he decided to revert to his usual
pattern.

134. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I call on
the representative of the United Arab Republic to speak in
exercise of his right of reply,

139. With your permission, Mr, President, may I take up a
few points which were included in the statement of the
representative of Israel. This is not an attempt to reply to
him; there is no need to reply to his abuse.But I wish to
put the record straight on questions which have a bearing
on the authority of this body and on the responsibility of
the United Nations for international peace. The representative of Israel did not hesitate, here in the Security Council,
the organ which has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to address
the gallery and to boast about the wings of Israeli planes, to
boast about the instruments of destruction, to boast that
these instruments of destruction are effective, and to reflect
on wings of other planes. In the defence of legitimate
rights, the wings of some planes may fal1, but the
determination to uphold rights and to stand fast in the face
of aggression will not fall. It is the hope of all who yearn
for the restoration of peace that the Security Council will
clip the wings of the planes of destruction.

135. Mr. EL-ERIAN (United Arab Republic): When the
representative of Israel took the floor this afternoon, some
might have thought that he would address himself to the
pertinent questions put to him by the representatives of
Somalia and Jordan, Those questions related to facts
bearing on the question before the Council, facts relating to
the circumstances of the crime of arson committed against
the Holy Al Aqsa Mosque. They covered a wide range. They
related to his allegations that one tenth of the Mosque had
been damaged. A question was put to him by the
representative of Somalia, to the effect that reports
indicated that considerable damage and considerable destruction had been caused to the Holy Al Aqsa Mosque.
The question of the duration of the fire was another
pertinent question put to him. He alleged that the fire had
been completely put out after an hour. Corroborative
evidence was submitted by the representatives of both
Somal#a and Jordan to prove that this wasnot the case.

140. The representative of Israel protested against statements by some Arab leaders that this will be the year of
liberation. The representative of Israel wants this third year
following the Israeli aggression on 5 June 1967 to continue
to be the year of occupation and of aggression. He resents

136. The questions also covered statements of the President of the Supreme Moslem Council, Sheikb Hilmi
13

the fact that some Arab leaders say that this year should be
the year of liberation, As usual; he omits-quoting from
these same Arab leaders such phrases as: “We have opened
every door for peace, but Israel has closed all the doors to
peace ,” He does not quote these phrases, but he chooses to
misquote and misinterpret other phrases, and to protest
against the hope of some Arab leaders that this year wil1 be
the year of liberation, the year of the end of occupation,
the year of the implementation of the Security Council
resolutions-the Security Council resolutions which reiterate the established principle of the inadmissibility of
conquest and the inadmissibility of the seizure of territory
by the illegal use of force. He misquotes the war of
purification and he ascribes to the Arab people alien ideas
they have never known, and he likens them to Nazi ideas.

144. According to the representative of Israel, member.
ship in the Security Council should be based on the
criterion of a country’s relationship with Israel. But this is
not the criterion which is laid down in Article 23 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which says:
“The General Assembly shall, elect ten other Members
of the United Nations to be non-permanent members of
the Security Council, due regard being specially paid, in
the first instance, to the contribution of Members of the
United Nations to the maintenance of international peace
and security and to the other purposes of the Orgmization, and also to equitable geographical distribution.”
145. The members of the Security Council have been
elected on the basis of this criterion, not on the basis of the
criterion of their countries’ relationship with Israel. Mem.
bers of the Security Council have been elected by a
twosthirds majority of the General Assembly, and with
practical unanimity. But what I have quoted is the
representative of Israel’s concept of this highest of organs,

141. The world knows by now who introduced to the
Middle East the Nazi techniques and the Nazi ideas, and
who continues to practise these Nazi techniques and these
Nazi ideas. The world knows by now, and the world has
long known, the record of tolerance of the Arab people.
And history is there. Whatever the representative of Israel
may say here will not change history-and neither will his
Prime Minister, Mrs. Gold Meir, when she says that Palestine never existed. As reported by The Times of London on
19 June 1969, she said:

146. I wish here to recall a solemn reminder which was
voiced, Mr. President, by your predecessor as President of
the Council, Ambassador de Pini& of Spain, whenhe stated
on 14 August 1969, in his capacity as President of the
Council:

“It was not as though there was a Palestinian people in
Palestine, considering itself as Palestinian, and we came
and threw them out and took their country away from
them. They did not exist.”

“I should like to point out that, in my capacity as
President of this body, I definitely cannot allow direct or
indirect attacks to be levelled against its authority aad
dignity. This is one of the principal organs of the United
Nations, on which Member States have conferred primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security; moreover, they have agreed that in carrying
out its duties, the Security Council acts on their behalf,”
/lSOOth meeting, para. 2. J

That is the pattern of historic facts as represented by the
Prime Minister of Israel. No wonder that the representative
of Israel today accuses the Arab people of racial and Nazi
concepts.
142. The representative of Israel spoke of and quoted
from some human rights committees. It would be more
pertinent if he were to come and quote the resolution of
the Human Rights Commission to establish a committee to
investigate violations of human rights.2 Why did Israel
choose not to co-operate with that Committee? It would
be more pertinent if he quoted the reports, and later the
evidence that will be submitted by such committees,

147. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): The
next speaker on my list is the representative of Saudi
Arabia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table <and
call on him to address the Council.

143. Now I come to a point of great importance. Today
again the representative of Israel spoke of the Security
Council as being in the hands of the Arab countries, and
this time he chose to hide behind certain quotations. He did
not do this before. Is this not the representative who, after
the Council unanimously adopted a resolution, stated
before the Council that the Council is corrupt politically,
legally and morally ? Is he not the representative who, a
few weeks ago, in a statement to the Council at its 1504th
meeting on 26 August 1969, stated that the unanimously
adopted resolutions of the Council “must be regarded as
being primarily a refiection of the arithmetical vagaries of
the vote, always dominated by the fact that of fifteen
members of the Council no less than six have no diplomatic
relations with Israel”? [1504th meeting, para. 77.1

148. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, it
augurs well that you have assumed the Presidency while this
item is under consideration. It is a religious item, ‘and
people at large-and more so in the Moslem world-consider
religion not only as a conglomeration of articles of faith but
also, as in the case of Islam, as a way of life. Islam defines
spiritual and moral values in the Koran, its Holy Book; but
it also sets forth the law which regulates the life of the
individual in relation to his God and his fellow men.
Religions preceded political ideologies in motivating, if not
directing, the attitude of the individual to his Creator, this
in the form of worship, and his conduct vi&vis the
community in which he lives, Inasmuch as ideology has
been considered as transcending ethnology in inanY conntries of the world, to the Moslem his religion supersedes
ideology and personal interests, or even national interests.
To the Moslem, his religion is the most precious thing on
earth,

2 Special Committee to Investigate Israeli PracticesAffecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the OccupiedTerritories.

149. I said, Mr, President, that it augurs well that You are
in the Chair because your great Revolution wasmotivated
14

by an ideology. Islamic society in its conduct is still
motivated by its religion. Thousands, hundreds of thousands, millions were sacrificed in order to serve a cause,
whether political or social, or for some sort of reform. In
modern times this has happened. But Islam remains the
motivating factor in moulding the life of the individual as
well as that of Moslem communities and nations.

myself if I were to remind the members of the Council that
the United Nations is responsible for the creation of the
usurping State of Israel. Why the usurping State of Israel?
Because there was in Palestine an indigenous people who
had a personality like any other people in the region. And
let us forget that they were Arabs. I mentioned time and
again that they were Arabized. But this still does not
preclude their having been the indigenous people of the
region. And what has the Council done with all those
resolutions that were passed about the partition of Palestine, about the return of the refugees, about the sanctions
that would be used against Israel, the pet State that was
created by the United Nations because of pressures that I
need not reiterate here. Why has nothing been done so far?
We know that the Zionists have permeated themselves in
most Western countries to the extent that in some countries
they formulate the policies of the Middle East. This
statement is being made by someone who has been familiar
with Western policies since 1929, and I am not saying this
idly.

150. Having said that, I must refer to the threats that are
being received by some delegations. I have not yet received
any; I have just come back from a fact-finding trip, But I
did receive quite a number of threats in the past.
Mr. President, you did well to request the host country, as
well as our beloved Secretary-General, to look into this
matter, because the essence of the United Nations is
freedom of speech. It so happens that there are certain
people amongst us who may be sensitive and who may react
subconsciously in such a way as not to be able to express
themselves freely when they receive threats of the nature
that our colleague from Jordan mentioned this afternoon.
151. I do not think that this City of New York is the right
place for the Security Council. I mentioned that a few years
ago. I have been with the United Nations for 23 years and I
know how the United Nations is subjected to pressures
from every direction; there are lobbyists and propagandists
everywhere. Just because the host country contributes a
large sum to the United Nations should we be here at the
risk of our lives? Let the Council function in a neutral
country, neither big nor small, but a neutral country so that
freedom of speech can really be enjoyed.

155. The item before us is the question of Jerusalem,
some might say, because after all Jerusalem is the heart of
Palestine, Although it is revered by Jews, it is none the less
revered by Christians and Moslems. And what do we find
happening in Jerusalem. 7 There are plans to change the
character of that Holy City, It is a paradox that people and
Governments in the West try to preserve monuments,
leaving aside holy shrines. But these Zionists from Western
Europe, because they had fared badly at the hands of
Hitler, are made to flock into the Holy Land of Palestine
and desecrate it, by all kinds of modern concepts of
reconstruction, with their scholars digging the earth to find
where the temple of Jerusalem had been built, as if the
town belonged to those Khazars from Eastern Europe.

1.52. We must serve notice through you, as the President
of the Council, and through our illustrious SecretaryGeneral,’ that such threats will not be tolerated in the
future. If pornography and obscene literature are masquerading under freedom of expression, that is another matter.
There is enough demoralization in society, But to curb the
freedom of speech, which is the essence and the life of the
United Nations, I submit, is inadmissible from whatever
quarter it comes.

156. “Well”, they say, ‘(this is an Australian, a Christian,
who was a fanatic, who thought that by burning the Al
Aqsa Mosque and by rebuilding the Temple of Solomon”which, incidentally, Solomon himself did not build, but
which the Canaanites of Lebanon built-“there
will be a
new era”-Christ may come again into this world, or
something of that sort. I do not know what his philosophy
is.

153. I was away but I had the opportunity to read the
provisional verbatim records of the meetings of the Council.
I must salute the representatives of Pakistan, India and
Indonesia, because, after all, they represent one half of the
population of the Moslem world. But it is not a question of
numbers, it is a question of principIe.

157. Now, I am reminded of van der Lubbe-you are of
my age, Sir; you remember 1933, do you not, when van der
Lubbe, that poor Dutch half-witted person was used as a
medium to burn the Reichstag. That served as an excuse for
a pogrom by Hitler against Communists and Jews, You
remember’ the name Georgi Dimitrov; he was a Bulgarian. I
am saying this as a monarchist. Dimitrov was a Communist.
Poor Dimitrov was accused. Van der Lubbe was the
medium and Georgi Dimitrov was considered the arch-fiend
by Hitler, who initiated those pogroms against Communists
and Jews. There is a sort of parallel here.

154. Before this incident of the Al Aqsa Mosque, I
happened to be in Saudi Arabia and, of course, had
occasion to discuss the question of Palestine with His
Majesty the King. I can assure you that the King, although
he is a man of few words, has assured me that he and his
sons and his brothers, and many Moslems who have
declared their intention during the pilgrimage, will, when
the time comes, be prepared to martyrize themselves in
order to defend Islam and defend the Holy Places of Islam.
I believe that his Majesty the Ring had mentioned the
question of Jerusalem time and again since 1967, when the
usurpers occupied all Jerusalem and parts of Jordan, Syria
and the United Arab Republic. But he reiterated in
unmistakable terms that Jerusalem is asholy to Islam as are
Mecca and Medina. I do not think I would be repeating

158. I do not go into the question of why this Australian
should come to the Holy Land of Palestine. We know from
certain statements made in Israel itself that he resembles, in
a way, van der Lubbe-so that the Zionists may achieve
their end by destroying the Al Aqsa Mosque in order to
rebuild the Temple.
15

bitterness. In the speech he made while I was travelling
from Paris to New York on 9 September, he stated.-and 3
read from the provisional verbatim record-that all that is
taking place in the Council is “to exploit religious feel&S
for political and even warlike purposes”. [I507th m,eer;llg,
para. 87.1

159. As far back as 1922, Lord Melchet-the English
choose names for their nobility, but he wasknown before
that as Sir Alfred Mond-I do not know whether that was
his real name, too, because the Jewsare quite adaptive and
they Anglicize their names when it suits their purpose. Not
all of them-the Orthodox Jews are as tenacious as the
Arabs in preserving their names. It is like calling myself
‘CBrody” in America; I am Baroody. So Mond, I do not
know what he was; it must be some Ashkenazi name,
coming from I do not know where. I know the Sassoons
came from Baghdad, they preserved their name; but those
people calling themselves RothschiIds and Melchets,
Anglicizing or Frenchifying their names-Cassin is one of
them-we know them. When it suits them, they embellish
their names and garnish them with all kinds of appelations.

163. I mentioned advisedly that before the fire broke out
in the Al Aqsa Mosque not only His Majesty King Feisal but
other Moslems had vowed that they would see to it that all
Jerusalem would one day return to the indigenous people
of Palestine.
164. Mr. Tekoah spoke of the ecumenical spirit:. Thir
ecumenical spirit began when the late Pope J&n XX[I
-may his soul rest in peace-said that the Jews were not
responsible for the crucifixion of Christ. Of course the Jews
of today were not responsible for the crucifixion of ~Christ,
and, happily, Mr. Tekoah’s ancestors and Mr, Abba Eban’s
ancestors and Mr. Ben-Gurion’s ancestors and Mrs, Golda
Meir’s ancestors were innocent because they never came
from the area; they came from the northern tier of Asia,
tribes that moved from near Mongolia-and he referred to
Mongolia; I will come back to that-westward, and :settled
where southern Russia is today.

160. To go back to Lord Melchet, who said in 1922:
“The day on which the Jewish Temple will be rebuilt
has become near. I shall dedicate the rest of my life for
the reconstruction of Solomon’s Temple on the site of
the Aqsa Mosque.”
161. Who reacted to that statement? None other than my
good friend whom I sawrecently in Beirut, the Grand Mufti
of Jerusalem, He reacted to that statement in 1922. He
wrote to the British High Commissioner-I do not know
whether Lord Caradon was a magistrate at that time, in
1922. For the benefit of Lord Caradon I recall that the
Grand Mufti wrote to the British High Commissioner. And
then he received the following letter in 1922 from the
Secretary of the British Mandatory Government of Palestine :

16.5. Of course, the Jews of Europe did not crucify Christ.
Christ was a reformer. We in Islam do not believe even that
Christ was crucified. But that is not the question. The
question is one of trying to exploit the ecumenical spirit
that Pope John XXIII tried to initiate among all religions.
The Israelis exploit the ecumenical spirit for their owrr
advantage. The representative of Israel-and I was shocksd
by this-called the Moslems his brethren. It reminds me of
Abel and Cain. They were brothers too. One killled the
other. For the benefit of the Council, I must repeat what
Mr, Tekoah said: “The torment and bloodshed inflicted
upon us on account of our religion are ever present in our
minds.” But the Christian tormented one another. They are
not the only people who were tormented for their religion.
Religious intolerance has been world-wide: the Inqui!sition,
Catholics and Protestants, Protestants and Catholics, after
the Inquisition. In Islam itself various sectsfought against
one another, No doubt among the Hindus and the
Buddhists there were some sects that thought others were
wrong. Mr. Tekoah is always wailing, on behalf of thosr?
Khazars of Eastern Europe, that the Jews were persecuted
on account of their religion. So were others persecuted on
account of their religion. That is a misleading statement.

“His Eminence the Grand Mufti of Palestine,
Sayed Mohammad Amin El-Hussein&
“Your Eminence,
“With reference to the conversation which your
Eminence had with I-Iis Excellency the High Commissioner in which you protested against the statement of Sir
Alfred Mond openly demanding the reconstruction of the
Jewish Temple on the site of the Aqsa, I wish to inform
your Eminence that His Excellency referred the matter to
the proper authorities in London and received the
following answer.
“ ‘Reference your number 248 dated the first of July,
the statement by Sir Alfred Mond was as follows: “He
believes that Palestine can again give the world religious
inspiration; furthermore, Sir Alfred Mond was very
careful about this subject. He stated that it is his fervent
hope to construct a new huge Jewish Temple on the site,
and instead of the Aqsa Mosque”.’ ”

166. I could go on quoting chapter and verse, but ofi*
thing he said bears repetition here:
“All attempts, however, whether in the area itseilfor in
the Security Council, to seize on the fire as a weapon fer
intensifying belligerency towards Israel and asisal@
Israel’s rights and standing are unworthy and unac.
ceptable.” [1507th meeting, para. 125.1

Very confusing-“a new . . a Jewish Temple on the site, and
instead of the Aqsa Mosque”. I can produce that letter any
time the Council wishes me to do so, It is in the archives of
the Mufti. The Mufti is well guarded in Beirut, so that no
one can pilfer his archives, But this is not all.

The emphasis is on Israel’s rights and standing. By what
right is Israel in Jerusalem or in Palestine? By the religious
argument: because Judaism flourished in Palestine, P&stine should therefore be Jewish? So did ChtWaGtY
flourish in Palestine. On the basis of the demographic

162. Our colleague Mr. Tekoah speaks here of brotherhood when it suits his purpose. He could not hide his
16

argument? Let USsee whether the demographic argument is
valid. How many Jews are there in the world? They say
there are 16 or 17 million Jews. I do not know whether any
census has been taken. There are a billion Christians. The
Holy Sepulchre is in Jerusalem, and the first Qibla in Islam
is in Jerusalem-there are 600 million of 650 million
Moslems, By what yardstick, therefore, should Jerusalem
belong to those Zionists ? Just because they have money
which they deploy in Europe in order to corrupt certain
Governments or legislators, even in Western Europe, to get
their own way-just because they can wield financial
influence, because one of their erstwhile abilities is knowing
how to manage financial loans abroad? Is it because they
have permeated the chanceries of many Governments that
have sent them as emissaries to under-developed countries
in order to proffer aid. They say, to the under-developed
countries, “We will do this for you if you will kindly do
this for us.” I have been told that by persons who had a
certain revulsion about it and spoke out to me and to
others.

the population for social welfare have been increasing, and
the wealthy Jews who at first shunned Zionism, like the
Rothschilds, before the Balfour Declaration was enunciated, wanting to make sure they would not be chased out of
the United Kingdom should a national home for the Jews
be established one day in Palestine, began to see that they
did not need to put all their eggsin one basket. So, whilst
playing on the religious motives of the devout Jews all over
the world, they were supporting this movement in order to
exploit the whole of West Asia and Northern Africa and go
from there even to the heart of Africa. This is their scheme
and their project. Some Jews who are non-Zionists told me
this. They would be threatened if I gave their names, so I
do not have to give their names here. And that Frenchman,
M. Cassin-I do not know whether he is a Frenchman-is a
Jew first and foremost. They gavehim the Nobel Prize, too.
He not only defends Israel but deplored the fact that the
Palestinians had banded themselves together and were
trying to fight back to regain their homeland. He called
them terrorists.

167. On what grounds is Israel in Jerusalem, or in the
Holy Land of Palestine for that matter? It is because of a
dream of Herzl that was no longer valid when Jewsafter the
French Revolution and later, after the Dreyfus affair, were
accepted in most Western countries on an equal footing
without discrimination. The dream is no longer valid. Those
architects of Zionism are secular, and I feel sorry for the
Jews on whose sentiments they played-not only in Central
and Eastern Europe but prosperous Jews here in the United
States, who can wield such power as to tip the balance in
elections, who could persuade the Government of a mighty
Power to send aircraft to destroy the Arab people.

172, Where were they in 1940, when he fled to join the
illustrious General de Gaulle and organize in France, on
French soil, the Resistance Movement? Those were the
heroes. Why? Because they are Europeans. They must be
heroes. Terrorists who are Europeans are heroes. In my
terminology, I call them nationalists; I would not call the
French Underground “terrorist”. But it suits M, Cassin,
whom I have known, and who is still writing and active in
those circles which bolster Israel and its tyranny over the
Arab world. And he calls the nationalists of Palestine
“terrorists”.

168. But the Arab people are indestructible, I can assure
you-100 million of them, and they procreate fast. There
will be 150 million, There is space for them. We are not
afraid of the population explosion, Poor, tiny Israel is
there. Why should we begrudge it that area among us? I
have said time and again that if they want to come and stay
with us as Jewsthey are our brothers in humanity as well as
in religron. But if they are going to come to exploit us,
which they will do if we let them-of course, we the Arab
people are not going to stand for that.
169. Now, I will bolster my argument by quoting from
none other than Jewish leaders. “The Al Aqsa Mosque is
situated on the Sanctuary of Sanctuaries, in the TempIe,
and it belongs to the Jews,” That is a statement from none
other than Mr. Klausner, whom, no doubt, Mr. Tekoah
knows. He is the President of the Society for the Defence
of the Wailing Wall, He wrote that in the Palestine WeekZ~
of 6 August 1929,40 years ago.
170. Then Dr, Schlesinger-I do not know if it is a German
name or a Germanized name-said: “I see in the presence of
the Mosque of Qmar on the Mountain of the House a grave
tragedy. I want to destroy it, for I possessthe power, and I
am not sure that I do not have the power to do that.”

173. This is a preview of what I have to say. I have some
exhibits here on the Mosque of the Rock, and also other
exhibits about the Al Aqsa Mosque, embroidered with
Hebrew slogans about the Temple of Solomon that should
be rebuilt. I have articles from various Western newspapers,
recent and old. I recited some old passageswhich unmask
the motives of Israel.
174. The tone of Mr, Tekoah at this meeting, I noticed,
wasmellifluous, except that he gave himself away when he
talked about the “perverted methods”--1 am paraphrasing-for rousing religious feelings against that little
tiny Israel, an oasis of democracy in the Middle East. What
kind of democracy is it? Perverted democracy? The
perverted democracy of the voting machine, or the democracy of the heart or the spirit? A democracy that has its
principles as humanism, or the democracy that believes in
napalm and the weapons of destruction? What kind of
democracy is that which is bolstered by some great
democracies that have become corrupt in their own
lands-where their youth is rebelling against them because
of their lies and rationalizations? Is this democracy, when
they talk of humanism and sell engines of destruction to
wipe us out? And those who abet in the crime are criminals
themselves.
17.5. Mr. Tekoah mentioned something about the Mongolian hordes that committed genocide. Who committed
genocide in Palestine, except those Zionists who came to
our region like a cyclone from Central and Eastern Europe,
devastating the land, driving the people from their homes in

171. When we come to economic exploitation, Western
Asia is still virgin territory, in so far as markets are
concerned. The standard of living is moving up, and in the
Western world taxes have been on the rise. The pressuresOf
17

the name of a noble religion, Judaism? Judaism was the
motivation for their political and economic ends.

in Israel. All of a sudden the German guilt, which was a
broken record that had been heard in Israel, vanished from
the press of Israel and in mellifluous phrases the Israelis
began to say that the Germans were now seeing the light,
just because they sold Israel arms to destroy us.

176. This is something recent I am going to quote for the
benefit of our Israeli colleagues. In a symposium that was
held on 15 July 1967, Dr. Israel Eldad mentioned what a
great war it was. Of course I am paraphrasing what he said
so as not to take up more of the time of the Council. He
said:

180. Whom do they think they are fooling, those Central
European Zionists and Eastern European Zionists? Them
selves. Because sooner or later the Arab people will see to it
that in defending their rights-and Islam will see to it that
in defending its holy places-Israel will be curbed,

“Joshua killed all, even their animals, in the same way
that David did, and this is what the Torah orders us, and
what the Arabs would have done with us if they had been
victorious.”

181. Jews thrown into the sea? Who wants to throw Israel
into the sea? Stay there if you want, as Jews, But Israel
from Europe dominating us, the headquarters for our
exploitation: No. Jerusalem is the heart of the problem and
it is only by insisting through those who exercise power
that Israel be restrained-and not only by passing resolu,
tions but by sending ultimatums to Israel that if it d,oesnot
obey certain resolutions adopted since 1947 with regard to
the partition of Palestine and with regard to the refugees
and their return, if they so wish, to their homelan.d, then
Israel will be punished-that the Council will really become
effective. Otherwise it will be an academic forum for
debating questions as if it were a court of justice, with the
difference that no justice is rendered.

The Arabs are defending themselves, The Arabs protected
the Jew; the Arabs never persecuted the Jew when he lived
amongst us, becausehe wasone of us, not like those Khazar
Jews from Eastern and Central Europe. These are European
Jews, ethnologically European and culturally European.
They simply have Judaism as their religion just as a
Scotsman is a Christian. That does not make him a Semite.
Incidentally, Semitism is not something of the blood. It is a
conglomeration of culture, language, customs, tradition. Do
you consider these people coming from Europe, those
usurping Zionists, as neo-colonialists? You honour them if
you call them neo-colonialists; they are usurpers. They are
the ones that swept over the land, chasing the people of
Palestine from their homeland.

182. The Times of London two days ago referred to wh;
some Western countries-in
order to sing the song c
Israel-call guerrillas, the Palestinian fighters. In an editon’;
referring to the incident of the hijacked plane and otht
similar matters, The Times of London stated: “No dout
they feel that, having been deprived of their lancls, the
cannot be expected to respect international law or convex
tions.” They are referring to the Palestinian fighters, It goe
on to say: “But the one certain consequence of th
terrorism they threaten is that it will promote sympathy fc
their opponents”-as if they do not have enough syn
pathy-“and not for them, and that the most determine’
action will be taken to stop them,”

177. The account of the symposium continues: “A voice
interrupting: or as we did in Deir Yassin , . .” he is referring
to what Dr. Eldad said; Dr. Eldad replied-“Yes, the same
as Deir Yassin, for had it not been for Deir Yassin, a half
million Arabs would have remained in Israel and this means
that Israel would never have been created,” This is not
fabricated by the mass media of information in the Arab
world or in any other place. I am not going to read all of it.
These excerpts appeared in the De-Ot magazine on 15 July
1967 and then were repeated in Ha-ohm Ha-zeh on 27
August 1969.

183. I have warned the Council since 1966 tillat th
question of Palestine has gone out of the hands of Arsl
Governments. Even some of my colleagues thought that
was dramatizing the situation. It came to pass. Th
Palestinian people are resolved. I have come now from tha
part of the world-not only from Saudi Arabia, but fron
certain other Arab countries-and it is heartbreaking to E(
that the psychosis of retrieving one’s homeland has taker
hold even of boys and girls, not only in their teens bul
younger than that. They will not rest until Jerusalem ii
restored, They will die by placing their lives in the palm 01
their hands and throwing away their lives for the cause.

178. That is the spirit of European Zionism, not the Zion
of the spirit, but the Zion of destruction.
179. What are you going to do here in the Council? That
is the question. Pass another resolution, no doubt, with the
European Zionists laughing up their sleeves. The first
instalment has arrived. How many are there, 25 or 50
Phantoms, raining destruction over our region? I have just
come from Europe and I have learned something that the
Council should know. An Eastern European country is
being sold certain planes as destructive as the Phantoms. To
use against whom? I am not going to embarrass the
country and name it. Against your country, Sir? Russia is
not to be fooled with. Against whom are they going to use
them? They are going to be sent to Israel. Who told me?
One who did not get his full commission on the deal. I hope
that the deal will not go through. Was it fabrication when
we were told in I965 that certain great Powers would not
send arms to Israel? Mr. Ben-Gurion came and saw the
West Germans. The West Germans sold those arms that
were shipped from that big country which promised never
to send arms to Israel. That was a scandal. It was glorified

184. What are we going to do here in the Council? Adopt
resolutions with no teeth in them? Even sanctions arc not
working-the sanctions of the Council. If you do not
believe what I say you only have to read’ in toda:y’s N!r~~
Street Journal an article by Ray Vicker entitled “Rhodesia:
Booming Despite Sanctions”-the sanctions of the Council.
185. I shall take the floor again, but I should like to
conclude this statement by appealing to the representatil;a
of the major Powers to see that our voice is heard by their
18

policy-makers in their home Governments, to see that they
understand that this question is far more serious than many
people think it is. It is not a game of words or a string of
resolutions to be adopted by the highest organ of the
United Nations.

itself. They remind me of a certain episode in history from
which the word “assassin” derives. It is an Arabic word,
hashashin. It reminds me of the Old Man of the Mountain,
although the conditions are different because at that time
there was no nationalism. Here, however, we have a
combination of nationalism motivated by religion, which in
Islam, as I stated before, is a way of life and not a fact of
principle, And anyone wh6 tampers with the way of life
and the sacred beliefs or 600 million persons will end in
sorrow. I say this to the Israelis because they are human
beings and I do not wish to see them, as human beings,
suffer.

186. I warn you, my brothers sitting around this table,
that it is possible for the Zionists, who are suffering from a
psychosis, pitted as they are against 100 million Arabs, to
draw in the big Powers which have interests in the area and
cause a conflict that will burn us all, following the
legendary mentality of Samson when, allegedly, he brought
down the Temple over his head and the heads of his
enemies.

190. Let us hope that those responsible for the policies of
the big Powers will heed the words of someone who has
witnessed two world wars, lest, as I said, the United Nations
end up like the League of Nations before it. Thank you, Mr.
President, for your kindness, and with your permission, and
after I hear what Mr. Tekoah has to say, I will take the
floor again.

187. With all the lethal weapons lying around and with
interests blinding the eyes of wisdom in men, if this Council
fails to heed such warnings as those I am voicing it may
come to pass that there will be no voice left to say: “We
wish we had acted with justice instead of with expediency.”
188. It is high time that we set our house in order. We, as
diplomats here, receive instructions from our respective
Governments; but I think it is our duty, not only as
messengers of our respective Governments but as human
beings in our own right as well, to make those responsible
in our Governments see that the time is getting late, and
that, judging by past history, miscalculation may very well
plunge us into the chasm.

191. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): I wish
to thank the representative of Saudi Arabia for the kind
words he has addressed to me.
192. The list of speakers is now exhausted. As a result of
consultations among the members of the Security Council
concerning the next meeting, it has been agreed that the
next meeting of the Council, to continue its consideration
of this question, will be convened tomorrow, 12 September, at 3 p.m. If there are no other comments or objections,
I shall take it that the proposal is accepted.

189. Why do I say this time and again? Because time and
again I have been assured that the Palestinians are inflexible
in their determination, and that no Arab Government dares
stop them because they would destroy it. They are as
dangerous to the Arab Governments as they are to Israel

The meeting rose at 7:1.5 p.m.

19

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

fr?m bookstores
ond distributors
to: United
Notions,
dales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
der Notions
Unies
aont en vente
dons les librairies
et les agences
dbporitaires
du monde entier.
Informer-vous
auprbs
de votre libroirie
ou adresser-vour
6:
Nations
Unies, Section der ventes, New York ou Gen(rve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLlCACtONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicocioner
de Ias Nociones
Unidas ert6n
en todos partes del mundo. Conrulte
a su librero
Ventar,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

UNIDAS

en venta en tibrerios
o dirljase
al Nacioner

y cosas distribuidoror
Unidar,
Secci6n

de
