Re1olution1 adopted on the reporta of the Fint Committee

organization or with one or more States members of that
international organization, which are Parties to this Treaty.

Article XIV
J. This Treaty shal! be open to ali States for signature.
Any State which does not sign this Treaty before its entry
into force in accordance with paragraph 3 of this article may
accede to it at any time.
2. This Treaty shall be subject to ratification by signatory
States. lnstruments of ratification and instruments of accession
shall be deposited with the Governments of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America,
which are hereby designated the Depositary Governments.
3. This Treaty shall enter into force upon the deposit of
instruments of ratification by five Governments including the
Governments designated as Depositary Governments under this
Treaty.

4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession
are deposited subsequent to the entry into force of this Treaty,
it shall enter into force on the date of the deposit of their
instruments of ratification or accession.
5. The Depositary Governments shall promptly inform all
signatory and acceding States of the date of each signature,
the date of deposit of each instrwnent óf ratification of and
accession to this Treaty, the date of its entry into force and
other notices.
6. This Treaty shall be registered by the Depositary Governments pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United
Nations.

Article XV
Any State Party to the Treaty may propose amendments to
this Treaty. Amendments shall enter into force for each State
Party to the Treaty accepting the amendments upon their
acceptance by a majority of the States Parties to the Treaty
and thereafter for each remaining State Party to the Treaty on
the date of acceptance by it.
Article XVI
Any State Party to the Treaty may give notice of its
withdrawal from the Treaty one year after its entry into force
by written notification to the Depositary Governments. Such
withdrawal shall take effect one year from the date of receipt
of this notification.
Article XVII
This Treaty, of which the Chinese, English, French, Russian
and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited in
th.e archives of the Depositary Governments. Duly certified
copies of this Treaty shall be transmitted by the Depositary
Governments to the Governments of the signatory and acceding
States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized, have
signed this Treaty.
DONE in ............ , at the cities of London, Moscow and
Washington, the ............ day of ............ one thousand
nine hundred and .............11

2223 (XXI). Report of the Commlttee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2130 (XX) of 21 December
1965 entitled "lnternational co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space", which was adopted unanimously,
H avi,ng considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,12
11 The Treaty was signed in London, Moscow and Washington on 27 January 1967.
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twmty-firsl
Session, Annese.r, agenda items 30, 89 and 91, document A/6431.

15

Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in
furthering the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes,
Recalling its resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961, in which it expressed the belief that the
United Nations should provide a focal point for international co-operation in the peaceful exploration and
use of outer space,
Believing that the benefits of space exploration can
be extended to States at all stages of economic and
scientific development only if Member States conduct
their space programmes in a manner designed to
promote the maximum international co-operation and
engage in the widest possible exchange of information
in this field,
l. Endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space concerning exchange of information, encouragement of international programmes, international sounding rocket launching facilities, and education and
training;
2. W e/comes the intention of the Committee on the
P~aceful U ses of Outer Space to increase the usefulness
of its activities in the exchange of information on outer
space matters by preparing expanded reports annually
on a specific date ;
3. No tes with appreciation that a number of Member
States have assisted the information programme of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space by
providing ample descriptive material on their national
space programmes, and urges all Member States to
provide this information to the greatest extent feasible
and practicable ;
4. W elcomes the decision of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to establish a working
group to consider the need, feasibility and implementation of a navigation services satellite system ;
5. Reiterates its request, contained in section III,
paragraph 1, of resolution 2130 (XX), to the Committee on the Peaceful U ses of Outer Space to continue,
in co-operation with the Secretary-General and making
use of the available resources of the Sccretariat and
in consultation with the specialized agencies and in
co-operation with the Committee on Space Research,
the preparation and consideration of suggestions for
programmes of education and trainin~ of specialists in
the peaceful uses of outer space to ass1st the developing
countries;
6. Expresses the desire that these considerations be
reported upon to the General Assembly at its twentysecond session ;
7. Endorses the guidelines adopted by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to be
applied where international support or sponsorship is
requested for the training of specialists of Member
States in the specialized fields of space science and
technology ;
8. Urges that space activities be carried out in such
a manner that States may share in the adventure and
the practical benefits of space exploration, regardless
of the stage of their economic or scientific development;
9. Commends the co-operative space programmes in
effect between many Member States and recommends
such programmes to the attention of others ;
10. Notes with appreciation that certain Member
States have continued to contribute to the objectives of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
as laid down in its reports, by establishing and

16

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

strengthening e<lucational and training programmes,
ami urges others to take the same action ;
11. Recommends that those responsible for the development of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching
Station, and in particular the Member States associate<l with the construction and operation of the
facility, the United Nations Development Programme
and the specialized agencies concerned, should extend
ali the assistance necessary to continue the development
of that station ;
12. No tes also with appreciation that, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 1721 B (XVI), the
Secretary-General continues to maintain a public registry of objects !aunched into orbit or beyond on the
basis of information being furnished by Member States ;
13. Suggests that the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space examine means to increase its
usefulness as a centre of information for Member States,
particularly the developing countries and those with
small space programmes ;
14. Notes with appreciation the reports submitted
by the World Meteorological Organization13 and the
International Telecommunication Union 14 on their activities in the field of outer space and invites these
organizations to make progress reports to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in 1967;
15. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work as set forth in the
present resolution and in previous General Assembly
resolutions and to report to the Assembly at its twentysecond session.
1499th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2224 (XXI). The Korean question

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
Korea, 15
Reaffirming its resolution 2132 (XX) of 21 December 1965 and previous resolutions on the Korean question noted therein,
Recognizing that the continued division of Korea
<loes not correspond to the wishes of the Korean people
and constitutes a source of tension which prevents the
full restoration of international peace and security in
the area,
Recalling that the United Nations, under the Charter,
is fully and rightfully empowered to take collective
action to roaintain peace and security and to extend its
good offices in seeking a peaceful settlement in Korea
in accordance with the purposes and principies of the
Charter,
Expressing the hope that conditions can soon be
created which will facilitate the reunification of Korea
on the basis of the freely expressed will of all the
Korean people,
lS World Meteorological Organization, Fifth report on the
Advancement of Atmospheric Sciences and their Application
in the Light of Developments in Outer Sf!ace (Geneva, 1966).
T~ansmitted under the symbol A/AC.105/L.31.
14 International Telecommunication Union, Fifth report by
the International Telecommunication Union on Telecommunication and the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (Geneva, 1966).
Transmitted under the symbol E/4188/Addl.
1 ~ Official Rec.ords of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Sessiol4, Supplement No. 12 (A/6312).

l. Rcaf}inns that the objectives of the United
Nations in Korea are to bring about by peaceful means
the establishment of a unified, independent and dernocratic Korea un<ler a representative form of government,
and the full restoration of international peace and
security in the area;
2. ll.xpresses the bclief that arrangements should
be made to achieve these objectives through genuinely
free elections held in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Gener¡il i\ssembly;
3. Requests the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to intensify
its efforts to achieve these objectives and to continue to
carry out the tasks previously assigned to it by thc
General Assembly;
4. Notes that the United Nations forces which were
sent to Korea in accordance with United Nations
resolutions have in great part already heen withdrawn,
that the sole objective of the United Nations forces at
present in Korea is to preserve the peace and security
of the area. and that the Governments concerned are
prepared to withdraw their remaining forces from
Korea whenever such action is requested by the Republic of Korea or whenever the conditions for a
lasting settlement formulated by the General Assembly
have been fulfilled.
1499th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.
2225 (XXI). Status of the implementation of tbe
Declaration on the lnadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and
the Protection of Their lndependence and
Sovereignty

Thc General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the evidence of unceasing armed
intervention by certain States in the domestic affairs
of other States in different parts of the world and at
other forms of direct or indirect interference committed
against the sovereign personality and política! independence of States, resulting in increased international
tension,
Reaffirming al! the principles and rules embodied in
the Dedaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention
in the Doroestic Affairs of States and the Protection of
Their Independence and Sovereignty, contained in its
resolution 2131 (XX) of 21 December 1%5,
Deems it to be its bounden duty:
(a) To urge the imroediate cessation of intervention, in any forro whatever, in the domestic or externa}
affairs of States;
( b) To condemn all forms of intervention in the
domestic or externa! affairs of States as a basic source
of danger to the cause of world peace;
(e) To call upon all States to carry out faithfully
their obligations under the Charter of the United
N ations and the provisions of the Declaration on the
Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Doroestic Affairs
of States and the Protection of Their Independence and
Sovereignty and to urge thero to refrain from armed
intervention or the promotion or organization of subversion, terrorisro or other indirect forros of intervention for the purpose of changing by violence the existing
systero in another State or interfering in civil strife in
another State.
1499th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.
