31

Reeolution.s adopted on the niports of Ille Foarth Commiltee

N oting that the petitioners are finding it difficult to
obtain travel documents,
Considering that the exercise of the right of oral
petition to the United Nations by the inhabitants of
Territories under the International Trusteeship System
should be facilitated,
Invites the Administering Members concerned to
grant the petitioners referred to in the present resolution travel documents to enable them to appear before
the proper organs of the United Nations for hearings,
when granted by such organs, and to return thereafter
to their places of residence.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.
1063 (XI). Offere by States Mem.bere of the
United Nations of etudy and training facilitiee for inhabitante of Truel Territoriee

The General Assembly,
Noting from the report of the Trusteeship Council
the results of the programme of scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States to inhabitants
of Trust Territories pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 557 (VI) of 18 January 1952, 21
N oting that the major part of the scholarships offered by Member States remains unutilize<l,
Recalling that, in its resolution 753 (VIII) of 9
December 1953, the General Assembly recommended
that the Administering Authorities of the Trust Territories take all such measures as would ensure the greatest possible use by inhabitants of the Trust Territories
of the scholarships and training facilities offered by
Member States,
l. Requests the Member States administering Trust
Territories to take all the necessary measures to ensure
that scholarships and training facilities offered by
Member States be utilized by inhabitants of the Trust
Territories, and to render every assistance to those
persons who have been granted scholarships or fellowships;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council to consider,
at its sessions in 1957, the question of the way in which
the scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States are being utilized by inhabitants of Trust
Territories and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twelfth session;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twelfth session a detailed
report on the actual use of scholarships and training
facilities offered by Member States for the education
of the inhabitants of Trust Territories.
661 st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.
1064 (XI). Attainment of self-government or
independence by Trust Territoriee

The General Assembly,
Taking into account that, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, one
of the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship
System is the progressive developm~nt ot the popula/bid., Eleventh Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/3170), part
I, chapter V, section 5.
11

tions of Trust Territories towards self-government or
independence,
Taking into account that, under General Assembly
resolution 289 A (IV) of 21 November 1949, the Trust
Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration
is to attain complete independence by 1960, and that,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1044
(XI) of 13 December 1956, the Trust Territory of
Togoland under British administration is to attain
independence in 1957 through union with an independent Gold Coast,
Recalling that the General Assembly, in its resolution 558 (VI) of 18 January 1952, invited the Administering Authority of each Trust Territory to determine the period of time in which it was expected that
the Trust Territory concerned should attain self-government or independence, and also taking into account
that this question has been repeatedly discussed at
subsequent sessions of the General Assembly,
N oting that the Trusteeship Council, in its report
to the eleventh session of the General Assembly, 22
drew the attention of the Assembly to the fact that
up to now the Administering Authorities have not
fixed such time-limits,
Attaching great importance to the fixing of definite
time-limits for the termination of trusteeship in Trust
Territories and for the granting of self-government or
independence to the peoples of these Territories,
1. Recommends that the Administering Authorities
take the necessary measures to ensure that the Trust
Territories of Tanganyika, the Cameroons under British administration, the Cameroons under French administration, Togoland under French administration
and Ruanda-Urundi achieve self-government or independence at an early date;
2. Invites the Administering Authorities to estimate
the period of time required for the attainment of selfgovernment or independence by ail Trust Territories,
in conformity with General Assembly resolution 558
(VI) of 18 J anuary 1952 and the present resolution;
3. Invites the Administering Authorities to submit
appropriate information to the Trusteeship Council at
its .nineteenth and twentieth sessions on the implementation of paragraphs 1 and 2 above;
4. Requests the Trusteeship Council to report to
the General Assembly at !ts twelfth session on the
progress made in implementing the present resolution.

661 st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.
1065 (XI). The future of the Trust Territory
of Tanganyika

The General Assembly,
Having noted, during a hearing granted by theFourth
Com~ittee, the statements of Mr. Julius Nyerere,
President of the Tanganyika African National Union,
on the situation and the future of the Trust Territory
of Tanganyika, 23
H aving noted in particular the views expressed by
the petitioner to the effect that :
• Ibid., Supplement No. 4 (A/3170).
• Ibid., Eleventh Session, Fourth Committee, 579th and
582nd meetings.

32

General AHembly-Eleventh Seuion

(a) The Administering Authority should declare
that the aim of its policy is to develop that Territory
into a democratic State,
( b) As an interim measure for the near future, the
Constitution of the Territory should be so amended
as to introduce parity of representation for Africans
on the one hand, and non-Africans on the other,
( c) U niversal suffrage on a common roll should be
introduced in the Territory,
Having studied that part of the Trusteeship Council's report which deals with Tanganyika, 24
Having noted that the Trusteeship Council has expressed the hope that the Administering Authority will
.:ontinue with all possible speed the process of developing the Territory to the end that an integrated society
will be established in which Africans will play their
due part,
1. Draws the attention of the Administering Authority and the Trusteeship Council to the views expressed
by the President of the Tanganyika African National
Union and to the relevant debates in the Fourth Committee;
2. Recommends to the Administering Authority that
it should consider making a statement on the policy it
proposes to follow in Tanganyika and should, inter
alia, include therein the principle that, in accordance
with the objectives of the International Trusteeship
System, the Territory shall be guided towards selfgovernment or independence and shall become a democratic State in which al! inhabitants have equal rights;
3. Recommends to the Trusteeship Council that it
instruct its periodic visiting mission which will visit
the Trust Territories in East Africa in 1957, to study
in particular the question of Tanganyika's political
development, in the light of such relevant information
as it obtains from the Administering Authority and
from representatives of the population of the Trust
Territory;

and suggestions made in the course of the discussion
of the report at the eleventh session of the General
Assembly.
661 st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

4. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council include in its next reports, in the framework both of its
examination of conditions in the Territory and of the
question of the attainment by the Trust Territories of
the ?bjective of self-government or independence, a
spec1al study of the Territory's political development,
in the light of the visiting mission's report and the
~nformation obtained from the Administering Author1ty.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 392 (V) of 15 December
1950, 854 (IX) of 14 December 1954 and 947 (X)
of 15 December 1955,

1066 (XI). Report of the Trusteeship Council
covering the period from 23 July 1955 to
14 August 1956

The General Assembly,
H aving e.zamined the report of the Trusteeship Council covering the period from 23 July 1955 to 14 August
1956, 20
1. Takes note of the report of the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council, in
its future deliberations, take into account the comments
"'Ibid., Eleventh Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/3170), part
Il, chapter 1.
• Ibid., Sunlement No. 4 ( A/3170).

1067 (XI). Hearings of petitioners from the
Trust Territory of the Cameroons under
French administration

•

The General Assembly,
Having granted, in the Fourth Committee, hearings
to petitioners representing organizations in the. rrust
Territory of the Cameroons under French adm1mstration,
H aving studied that part of the Trusteeship Council's report which deals with the Trust Territory of
the Cameroons under French administration, 26
l. Takes note of the statements of the petitioners
and transmits them to the Trusteeship Council for
further study;
2. Expresses the hope that the Administering Authority will take all necessary measures to restore political activity to normal conditions and to bring to an
end the tension which have characterized the political
life of the Trust Territory of the Cameroons under
French administration;
3. Recommends to the Trusteeship Council that it
continue to pay attention to the matters dealt with in
the present resolution and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twelfth session.

661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.
1068 (XI). Question of the frontier between the
Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian
administration and Ethiopia

Taking note of the reports transmitted to the General Assembly by the GovernmeITl:s of•Ethiopiall'I' and
Italy 28 in accordance with th~ reqllest contained in
resolution 947 (X),

•

Taking further note of the efforts ~xerted by both
Governments to expedi te their ' curi-ent direct negotiations in accordance with the recommendation contained in resolution 947 (X),
Noting further that, so far, only the northern sector
of the frontier between the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration and Ethiopia has
been discussed,
Recalling that the Trusteeship Agreement will cease
to be in force on 2 December 1960, when the Trust
Territory shall become an independent sovereign State,
Recalling also that, in accordance with the Trusteeship Agreement, the Administering Authority is re• Ibid., Supplement No. 4 (A/3170), part Il, chapter V.
.. Ibid., Eleventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 40, document
A/3502.
• Ibid., document A/3463.
