S/2010/666

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 December 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 21 December 2010 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I would like to refer to the exchange of letters between the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council, dated 21 September 2004 (S/2004/764)
and 1 October 2004 (S/2004/765), concerning the security arrangements for the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
As indicated in the exchange of letters, in addition to the protection then
provided by the multinational force in Iraq, the Council welcomed the proposed
arrangements for an integrated United Nations security structure consisting of four
elements, namely, international security staff, protection coordination officers,
personal security details and guard units. With regard to the fourth element, the
Security Council authorized the deployment of three formed units, each consisting
of up to 160 armed civilian police, paramilitary or military personnel (480 in total),
to be provided as contingents from Members States and to form part of UNAMI,
with the specific responsibility of controlling access to and conducting patrols
within UNAMI premises.
I would like to thank the Security Council for its continued support for the
integrated security structure in Iraq, which has been vital for the United Nations
presence in the country since 2004. While noting the significant changes that have
taken place in Iraq since that time, including a general improvement of the security
situation and the progressive transfer of responsibilities from the multinational force
(now the United States forces in Iraq) to the Iraqi security forces, Iraq remains a
challenging operating environment. During the next year and with the planned
United States forces drawdown, UNAMI will increasingly be required to rely upon
the integrated United Nations security structure and the Iraqi security forces.
In view of the changing circumstances in Iraq, I intend to implement several
important adjustments to the integrated United Nations security structure in its
original configuration from 2004:
(a) The coordination mechanism between the United Nations and the
Government of Iraq will include police advisers and/or liaison officers;
(b) In addition to controlling access to and conducting patrols within
UNAMI premises, the guard force will provide mobile and close protection security
for United Nations personnel outside United Nations premises. The United Nations
has informed the Government of Iraq of its intentions in this regard.

10-70771 (E) 281210

*1070771*

S/2010/666

I believe that increased security support from the Iraqi security forces, as well
as the continuation of the integrated United Nations security structure, as described
above, will be critical to ensure that United Nations personnel operating in Iraq have
an adequate level of protection in the foreseeable future.
I should be grateful if you could confirm whether these adjustments to the
integrated United Nations security structure are acceptable to the Security Council.
It would then be my intention to take the necessary steps to reconfigure the
integrated United Nations security structure and approach Member States for
contributions accordingly.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

10-70771
