CINITEDNATIONS

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR
W-R 2-

1770”

MEETING: 28 ‘MAY 1974

NEW

@.&p*
d

”

l981“.

(-~w~-,-‘~~y

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1770) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

. . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Iraq concerning incidents on its frontier with,Iran:
Report by the Secretary-General on the implementation of the consensus
adopted by the Security Council on 28 February 1974 (S/l 1291) . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1770

_’

,‘

:

_.

,’

_.

..

NOTE

,’

-’

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a’symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document. ,!
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTIETH MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 28 May 1974, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Charles Catere MAINA (Kenya).
Present: The representatives of the following States:.
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist .,Republics, -United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.

Security Council in connexion with document S/l 12Y 1
of 20 May 1974. I personally will represent Iran in the
,., Security Council.”
Pursuant to the usual practice, and if I hear no objection, I
propose to invitd the repre’sentative of Iran, in accordance
with his request, to participate .in the discussion -without
the right to vote.
.. .
,
At the invitation of the Resident. Mr” F. Hoveyda (Iran)
took a place at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 770)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

3. The PRESIDENT: As the Security Council resumes its
consideration of the complaint by Iraq concerning incidents
on its frontier with Iran, I believe it might be useful to
recapitulate briefly the previous action of the Security
Council. The Council placed the item on its agenda on 15
February at its 1762nd meeting and continued the discussion at the 1763rd and 1764th meetings, held on 20 and 28
February. At the last-mentioned meeting the President,
following consultations with all the members of the Council
and with the representative of Iran, read out the text of a
consensus by which the Security Council, inter alia,
requested .the Secretary-General “to appoint as soon as
possible a special representative to conduct an investigation
of the events that have given rise to the complaint by Iraq;
and to report within three months”.

2. Complaint by Iraq concerning incidents on its frontier
with Iran:
Report by the Secretary-General on the implementation of the consensus adopted by the Security
Council on 28 February 1974 (S/l 1291).
The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the usual
practice, I should like to pay a tribute to my predecessor,
Ambassador El-Shibib of Iraq, who ably presided over the
Security Council during the month of April. Also, as the
month of May is coming to an end, I should like to thank
all the members of the Council for the support they have
given to the President during the 28 days I have been in the
Chair.

4. In Pursuance of the request of the Security Council the
Secretary-General submitted a report to the Security
Council on 20 May (S/12291] concerning action taken in
implementation of the Council’s consensus. Annexed to the
Secretary-General’s report is a report submitted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Weekmann-Mufioz. Members of the Council are, I am sure,
appreciative of the report submitted.

Adoption of the agenda
l7ze agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Iraq concerning incidents on
its frontier with Iran

5. I understand that, following the circulation of the
Secretary-General’s
report, the parties concerned held
consultations. They then expressed their wish that the
Council resume consideration of the matter. In the light of
that request consultations were held among the members of
the Council last Friday. From those consultations the text
of a draft resolution emerged /S/11299/.

Report by the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the wnsensus adopted by the Security Council on 28
February 1974 (S/l 1291)
2. The PRESIDENT: As President of the Security Council,
I have received a letter dated 28 May 1974 from the
Ambassador of Iran, Mr. Hoveyda, reading as follows:

6. This draft resolution-which
would welcome in particular the points of agreement between the parties concerned, as listed in the Secretary-General’sreport, and
would expressthe hope that the partieswould take assoon
aspossiblethe necessarystepsto implement the agreement
reached-appearsto meet the wishesof many membersof
the Council, aswell asthoseof the parties concerned.

“On instructions of my Government, I have the honour
to request that, in accordance with the relevant Articles
of the Charter of the United Nations and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council,
Iran be permitted to participate in the discussion of the
1

Soviet side. It was all the more regrettable because the
conflict had arisen between two developing countries which
are striving to consolidate their independence and develop
their economies, and whose peoples have so much in
common in their culture, customs and historical past.

7. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation porn Russian): Before making a statement in
explanation of vote on the draft resolution before the
Council, I should like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the post of President of the Security
Council. It can aptly be said that, as the proverb puts it,
you have come straight off the ship into the dance.
Immediately after your arrival in New York as Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations, you
assumed not only those responsibilities but also the
honourable and responsible duties of President of the
Security Council. In the course of informal consultations
we have all had the opportunity to see how skilfully,
purposefully, and with what great tact you conduct the
work of the Council. Because of these personal qualities of
yours, the Council has succeeded in overcoming the
obstacles which it has encountered in its work and in
finding satisfactory solutions to the questions under consideration. I should like to take this opportunity to declare
the readiness of the Soviet delegation to co-operate with
you and to develop business-like contacts with you in the
Council and in the United Nations in general. I should also
like to point out that the Government of the Soviet Union
is steadily following a policy of the broadest development
of friendship and co-operation with your country, the
Republic of Kenya. The Soviet Government values highly
the policy of non-alignment which Kenya is following.

12. The Soviet Union sincerely wishes for a settlement of
all the disputed questions between Iraq and Iran. It is the
deep conviction of the Soviet, Union that such a settlement
will fully reflect the spirit and letter of the Charter of the
United Nations and will be of the utmost significance not
only for the peoples of these two countries but also for the
maintenance of peace in that region.
13. It is our deep conviction that disputes, disagreements
and conflicts on the Iran-Iraq border are unquestionably
not in the interests of either the Iranian or the Iraqi people.
The conflicts can only cause even greater tension in the
relations between the States and lead to utterly unnecessary
loss of life and to an increase in the obstacles to achieving a
peaceful settlement of the disputed questions by means of
bilateral negotiations in a spirit of mutual understanding
and compromise. The deterioration of relations between
Iran and Iraq can benefit only those circles which have an
Interest in maintaining and increasing tension in this region
in order to achieve their selfish and mercenary aims which
bear no relation either to the interests of these two
courrtries or the interests of the peoples of the Middle East
as a whole. The deterioration of relations between Iraq and
Iran can be advantageous only to those who are doing
everything to impede the restoration of just and lasting
peace in the Middle East on the basis of the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from all the Arab territories occupied in 1967
and of respect for the lawful rights of the Arab people of
Palestine.

8. I should also like to draw attention to the excellent
work done by Mr. El-Shibib, the representative of Iraq, as
President of the Security Council. A difficult task fell to his
lot in the month of April and he rose to it brilliantly.
9. Turning to the draft resolution before the Council on
the question under consideration, the Soviet delegation
would first like to note the great importance, both in
bilateral and in international terms, of the agreement
reached between Iraq and Iran on the need to implement a
series of measures aimed at a peaceful settlement of the
border conflict which has arisen between them. This
agreement has now been given practical expression in the
submission to the Security Council of the draft resolution
which has been agreed upon between Iraq and Iran. The
Soviet delegation is convinced that this draft resolution will
help to settle the frontier dispute between the two
countries and to develop good bilateral relations between
them.

14. At the present time when there are favourable
advances and changes in international life and ivhen
international tension is being eased, it is particularly
important that acts which would be detrimental to the
over-all process of the easing of international tension,
detente, normalization and the improvement of international relations should not be allowed in any part of the
world.
15. The interests of strengthening peace and international
security would be served by a policy of developing and
strengthening these favourable changes and extending them
to all the regions of the world, including the Middle East
region. The first prerequisite is that all matters in dispute
between all countries throughout the world, as between the
countries of the Middle East region, should be settled by
peaceful means through negotiations, as is required by the
Charter, the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
(General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV)J,
the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security
[General Assembly resolution 2734 (XXV)J, the solemn
declaration by the General Assembly on behalf of all
Members of the United Nations on the non-use of force in
international relations and permanent prohibition of the
use of nuclear weapons /see General Assembly resolution

10. The agreement reached between Iraq and Iran and also
the submission to the Council of the draft resolution agreed
on by the two sides are a source of particular satisfaction to
my delegation. That is because Iraq and Iran are States with
which our country is maintaining and developing relations
of friendship and co-operation The Soviet Union maintains
close and friendly relations with the Republic of Iraq which
are based on the 1972 Soviet-Iraqi treaty on friendship and
co-operation. The USSR also maintains friendly and goodneighbourly relations with Iran, with which in the same
year of 1972 an agreement was concluded on the development of economic and technical co-operation.
11. It is therefore perfectly natural that the border
conflict between these two countries with which we are
friendly oould not fail to arouse a feeling of concern on the
2

2936(XXVII)l,
and other fundamental
decisions of the United Nations.

documents and

mobilizing all their resources for the purposes of development and construction, and not in straining their mutual
relations and in destruction. The Declaration on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order
[General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VI)],
the text of
which had been sponsored by Iran and Iraq, particularly
stressed that the main objective of the new order is to
ensure “accelerating economic and social development and
peace and justice for present and future generations”. All
States and peoples should strive to achieve this noble aim.

16. The Union of Soviet Socialist Reuublics
consistentlv
.
adheres to the principle that peoples must themselves
decide their own fate. ln settling the disagreements and
disputes which arise between States, the use of force must
be avoided. All such matters must be settled exclusively by
peaceful means through negotiations on mutually acceptable terms, taking into account the interests of the
countries and peopIes concerned. This is required by the
Charter, which proclaims that the States Members of the
United Nations shall “practice tolerance and live together in
peace with one another as good neighbours”. One of the
fundamental principles of the Charter, furthermore, is the
requirement that all Members of the United Nations should
settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such
a manner that international peace and security, and justice,
are not endangered, and that States should, in their
intemationai relations, refrain from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other way inconsistent with
the purposes of the United Nations.

20. We note with great satisfaction the determination of
Iraq and Iran to end the existing tense situation on their
frontier, to seek a settlement of aI questions through
bilateral talks and to improve their relations, which is stated
in the draft resolution and in the report of the Secretary
General and of his Speciai Representative, Mr. WeckmannMuRoz. The statements by the parties and the report of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative show that one of
the most urgent problems requiring an immediate solution
is the delimitation and demarcation of the frontier between
Iran and Iraq. In this connexion, the statements made by
the two sides to the Secretary-General’s SpeciaI Representative have particular significance. Those statements reveal
that “neither [of the sides], in principle, had territorial
claims aIong the land frontier; both Governments, in fact,
indicated that they would stand by the findings of a new
joint
delimitation
commission”
[S/11291,
annex,

17. The Soviet Union is consistently guided in its foreign
policy by these generaBy recognized and accepted highly
humanitarian principles of international relations. These
principles, based on goodwill and mutual understanding,
were confnmed and reflected in the joint documents signed
by the Soviet Union with both Iraq and Iran. The joint
Soviet-Iraqi communique issued in connexion with the
offrcia1 visit to the USSR of the President of the Republic
of Iraq in September 1972, states: “The Soviet Union and
Iraq reaffirmed their dedication to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of United Nations, the norms of
international law, and international agreements and treaties”. In the joint Soviet-Iranian communique issued during
the official visit to the USSR of the Prime Minister of Iran,
in August 1973, both parties-the Soviet Union and
Iran-“again declared their dedication to the principles of
settling ail disputes between States by peaceful means
through negotiations, without the threat of use of force, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations”.

pma. 36J.

21. The Soviet delegation is convinced that the statements
by the two sides, together with their declared wish to
conduct negotiations on a practical basis with a view to
ensuring safe and unhampered navigation along the Shattal-Arab river, represent a good solid basis for the comprehensive settlement of the frontier dispute between Iraq and
Iran.
22. The question of peaceful and stable frontiers between
neighbouring States is well understood by the Soviet Union,
which has one of the Iongest land frontiers in the world,
extending 60,000 kilometres. It has borders with 12 States.
Following such basic principles of international relations as
the principles of peacefu1 coexistence, the non-use of force
and good neighbourliness, the Soviet Government has
always done and continues to do its utmost to ensure that
its frontiers with other States are frontiers of peace, good
neighbourliness and friendship. As a result of these efforts,
our frontiers with such neighbouring countries as Finland,
Afghanistan, Iran and Turkey, like the Soviet Union’s
frontiers with the fraternal socialist countries, are also
frontiers of peace, good neighbourliness and friendship.
Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, in
his report on the fiftieth anniversary of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics in December 1972 stated: “We note
with satisfaction that we now have good relations with
many peace-loving States of Asia and Africa, and first and
foremost with our immediate neighbours-Afghanistan, Iran
and Turkey”.

18. The settlement of disputes through the non-use of
force is all the more just and well founded in the present
case because both parties-Iran and Iraq-together with a
significant majority of States Members of the United
Nations at the twenty-seventh session of the General
Assembly supported and voted for the Soviet proposal on
the non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [ibid.]. The
present international situation and the task of consolidating
detente and extending it to all regions of the world clearly
and convincingly confirm the urgency of the need for the
Security Council thoroughly to discuss this important
General Assembly resolution and to take appropriate
measures itself for the fuIl implementation of the resolution.
19. As was shown at the sixth special session of the
General Assembly on the problems of raw materials and
development, both Iraq and Iran have an equal interest in
accelerating their economic and social development and

23. The frontier between the USSR and Iran is of course a
very long frontier. Before the demarcation of the frontier
line, a number of complications and undesirable incidents
3

occurred along this frontier. As a result of the settlement of
the frontier question between the USSR and Iran by means
of long and painstaking negotiations on the basis of the
principles of equality, mutual understanding and respect for
the territorial integrity of States, the frontier between the
USSR and Iran, which extends over 2,500 kilometres, has
become a frontier of peace-and tranquillity in the full sense
of the word.
.
24. The delegation of the USSR, having carefully listened
to and studied the statements made by the parties in the
-question under consideration and also the draft resolution
agreed between them, expresses its sincere desire and hope
that the frontier problem between Iraq and Iran can and
should be settled in the very near future by peaceful means
and in strict compliance with the fundamental principles of
the Charter with regard to respect for territorial sovereignty
and pacific settlement of disputes, and also ,with the
generally recognized norms of international law. A good
basis has been found for such a settlement. In the opinion
of the Soviet delegation, this draft resolution clearly and
directly defines the ways and means of pacific settlement of
the frontier question between Iraq and Iran in full
accordance with the principles and provisions of the
Charter.

have indicated their readiness to settle theirdispute through
negotiations. We have consistently held that the parties to a
dispute should reach a fair and reasonable settlement of the
boundary question left over by history through negotiations on the basis .of the five principles of peaceful
coexistence. As we have never favoured United Nations
involvement in any form in the boundary dispute between
two countries, we will not participate in the voting on the
:
draft resolution contained in document S/i 1299.
^‘.(
31. The PRESIDENT: There are no further names on my
list of members wishing to explain their .votes before the
vote. Accordingly, I shall now put to the vote the draft
resolution in document S/l 1299.
A vote wastaken by show of hands.
l%e draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none. 1
.a
&e member (C!Vna) did not participate in the voting..
-.
32. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on these representative ‘who have expressed the wish to explain their votes
after the vote.
33. Mr. NJINE (United Republic of Cameroon) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, my delegation
wishes first of all to welcome you to New York as the
Permanent Representative of your country and to express
our hope that your lofty mission will be crowned with
success.It is also a pleasure for me to appreciate the’talent
and effectiveness with which you have taken over your
important and delicate functions as President of the
Security Council for this month. I am very pleased that
under your presidency,<,the co-operation between our
delegations has‘been ‘close and.friritful, thus reflecting the
brotherly and mutually beneficial relations maintained
between the Republic of Kenya and the United Republic of
Cameroon. This occasion likewise seems to me to be
appropriate to address the sincere congratulations of my
delegation to your predecessor, the Ambassador of, Iraq,
Mr. El-Shibib, for the valuable services he rendered to the
Security Council during the month of April.

25. With regard to operative paragraph’4 of this draft
resolution, we should of course have preferred it to indicate
that, in discharging his mandate from the Security Council,
the Secretary-General would act with the prior agreement
and approval of the Security Council regarding such
questions as the nature and scope of assistance to be given
to the parties in the settlement of disputed questions, if.
such assistance is requested.
:.
..,.
‘. ., _*
, : .-, i;. s ..,
.:
26. At the same time, we take into account our exchange
of views with the parties and also the statement by the
representative of Iraq at the consultative meeting of
members of the Council, with which the United States
representative associated himself and to which the representatives of other countries raised no objections. The essence
of the matter is, of course, that the Secretary-General will
act in agreement with the Security Council.

34. My delegation notes with satisfaction the happy
conclusion of the mission that the Security Council
entrusted to the Secretary-General under the terms of the
consensus adopted on 28 February 1974, which received
unreserved support. In this cormexion I should like to
congratulate most warmly on behalf of my delegation the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Mr. Weckmann-Mufloz, for the excellent contribution they have
made to the consolidation-of peace in that part of Asia. It is
indeed because of their persevering efforts and their lengthy
experience of international affairs that it has been possible
to create conditions favourable to a peaceful solution of the
dispute between Iraq and Iran. Already the cease-fne
decided upon by the two parties on 7 March 1974 is being
observed and will be followed by other measures mentioned
by the representative of the Secretary-General in his report.

27. Bearing that in mind, we do not insist on the inclusion
of a special clarifying provision in the draft resolution, on
the understanding that, if the parties should request
assistance from the Secretary-General, he would of course
reach agreement witb the Security Council on the nature
and extent of such assistance.
28. The Soviet delegation sincerely hopes that relations
between Iraq and Iran will be normalized and will begin to
develop in a spirit of peace and co-operation, and that the
frontier between them will, in accordance with the Charter,
become a frontier of good neighbourliness, peace and
tranquillity.
29. The PRESIDENT: As no other member wishes to
make a general statement, I &all now call upon t.flOSe
representatives who wish to speak ln explanation of vote
before the vote.

35. Finally, my delegation wishes to pay a tribute to the
Governments of Iran and Iraq for the understandiig and

30. Mr. CHUANG Yen (China) (translation from CMnese):
The Chinese delegation is pleased to see that Iran and Iraq

1 Seeresolution 348 (1974).
4

spirit of compromise they have evinced. in the circumstances by agreeing to resolve by peaceful means and
without prior conditions ati the bilateral questions which
have so far hampered the happy development of their
co-operation. The Security Council should by every means
encourage the two parties to persevere in this course. For
its part the Government of the United Republic of
Cameroon, which maintains excellent relations with both
Iraq and Iran, has given its complete support to .the draft
resolution which is before us and which opens up encouraging prospects for co-operation between these two countries
and for peace in that region. I
36. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Mr.. President, first
of all I should like to join those who have welcomed you to
New York and who have congratulated you upon your
election to the high office of President of the Security
Council. To say the least of it, you have been thrown in at
the deep end in the few weeks since you have been here.
Let me say that the skill with which you have conducted
our consultations in the past few weeks shows that we have
indeed been fortunate to have you as President during this
month, and we look forward very much to working with
you as our colleague in the Security Council in the future.
37. My delegation was glad to support the draft resolution
before the Council. The draft, as you know, was the result
of intensive consultations between the members of the
Council and was fully agreed to by the two parties most
concerned with the dispute, namely, Iraq and Iran. In these
circumstances we made it clear that we should not be able
to support any proposals for amendments to the draft
which were not acceptable to both of those two parties
most
directly
.;
,_. concerned.
. ‘,&-..: *“” ?” ., ,?, .
38. My delegation would like to join with those other
delegations that have congratulated the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Mr. Weckmann-Mufioz. The
situation that led to the Council’s considering this question
in February was a potentially dangerous one. The way in
which that situation has been defused and a basis agreed
upon for the resumption of conversations between the
parties with a view to the comprehensive settlement .of all
bilateral issues is an excellent example of how the
machinery of the United Nations can be used effectively for
the peaceful settlement of disputes or of potential disputes.
39. It only remained for me to wish the parties well in the
conversations they have undertaken to hold and to express
the hope that they may succeed and thus remove a
potential source of friction in that very important part of
the world. I say that it only remained for me to do that,
but that wasbefore I heard the speech of the representative
of the Soviet Union. If I may .say so, it is not possible for
my delegation to accept the gloss that the representative of
the Soviet Union sought to put upon the resolution that we
have accepted here today. It seemed to us that in his closing
remarks Mr. Malik attempted to introduce an entirely new
and, if I may say so, discordant element into our
proceedings today-namely,
the precise relationship
between the Secretary-General and the Security Coundl
when a dispute of this nature has been brought to the
Council and to the United Nations. In our view, it is not
appropriate to discuss a matter of that category and that

importance on a resolution dealii with an agreement
entered into bilaterally between the parties to a dispute: particularly, if I may say so, when no amendment to that
effect has been moved to paragraph 4 of the text, although,
ris we, all know, in the Informal consultations that took
place between the members of the Security Council the
representative of the Soviet Union had given some indication of his readiness and his intention to move such an
amendment.
40. Therefore I think it is necessary for me to place on
record that nothing in this resolution, and indeed nothing
that has taken place in the Security Council today, and
certainly, with great respect, nothing that has been said
unilaterally by the representative of the Soviet Union, has
in any way altered the relationship that exists between the
Secretary-General and the Security Council of the United
Nations. If that is a matter that is to be discussed, no doubt
there will be an appropriate time and an appropriate forum
in which to discuss it, but this is not that thne and this is
not that forum. No doubt the Secretary-General would
wish to confer with and consult the Security Council as he
thought fit. I fmd if very difficult to believe-indeed I fmd
it impossible to believe-that if anything of substance were
to happen in relation to this particular dispute the
Secretary-General would wish to act without coming to the
Security Council to hear our views.
41. I hope the Security Council and you yourself,
Mr. President, will forgive me for perhaps digressing in what
I hope will be otherwise uncontroversial remarks, but I
thought it was perhaps necessary to put the record straight
as far as the meaning of this resolution wasconcerned.
42. Mr. LFXOMPT (France) (inferprefat’fon ji&n i+~?M;l:
Mr. President, first of all allow me, on behalf of my
delegation, to congratulate you and to bid you welcome to
the high office that you exercise to&y for the first time at
A formal meeting of the Council and that is also your first
experience of participation in these proceedings. We see
you as a worthy successor to your predecessor, Mr. OderoJowi, with whom we enjoyed friendly relations that we
look forward to continuing with you.
43. I should also like to take this opportunity of thank@
the Ambassador of Iraq whose work we much appreciated
last month during his presidency of the Council when he
displayed much talent and authority. In difficult circumstances he conducted our work with a skiIl and dignity to
which my delegation takes pleasure in paying a tribute.
44. Today, the Council has before it the excellent report
of the Secretary-General following the mission entrusted to
Ambassador Weckmamr-MuRoz. My delegation, which partidpated directly in the preparation of the consensus of 28
February last, since the representative of France was at that
time President of the Council, cannot but welcome the
results achieved by the Secretary-General and his Spedal
Representative. As previous speakers have noted, they have
in fact done remarkable work. If theirs was the main merit,
nevertheless the procedure adopted on 28 February last
with the accord and support of the parties has proved
appropriate. The Council has discharged its responsibilities
in a useful manner and we hope that this will bear fruit

accordingly. It is now for the parties concerned, on the
basis of the four principles which they have themselves laid
‘down, and which the Council has welcomed in the
resolution just adopted, to seek solutions to the disputes
between them. My country, which has very close and
friendly relations with both parties, looks forward to the
full successof their efforts.

for the month of May. The fact that your arrival as the.
Permanent Representative of Kenya has coincided with
your assumption of the duties as President has undoubtedly
increased the difficulties of your position many-fold.
Nevertheless, we have been the witness of your outstanding
capabilities in your conduct of the informal consultations,
which has convinced the members of the Council that the
presidency is indeed in excellent hands. ‘1t.i~ indeed a,
matter of gratification also for my delegation, to see thechair occupied by the representative of Kenya. I, need not I
elaborate upon the excellent relations which exist betweeil.‘.‘
Kenya and Indonesia, for the deep friendship existing-.
between our two nations is well-known to the international
community. The co-operation between Kenya and lndonesia within the non-aligned group, and especially in the
Security Council, reflects not only a cordial relationship I
between the two States, but also a deep sense of international responsibility shared by Kenya and Indonesia.

45. It goes without saying that the Council will continue
to watch developments and will stand ready to lend the
parties any assistance of which they may stand in need.
46. Mr. SCHAUFELE
(United States of America):
Mr. President, first of all permit me to join the previous
speakers in expressing my delegation’s welcome to you as
President of the Security Council for the month of May,
and more permanently as the new Permanent Representative of Kenya.
47. The United States welcomes the resolution which the
Council has just adopted. We congratulate the Secretary
General and his Special Representative on the successful
outcome of their extensive efforts which made this resolution possible. In particular, Ambassador Weckmann-MuAoz
has demonstrated great concern, hard work, and diplomatic
skill of a high order in the achievement of this success.We
believe the fruitful outcome of the efforts of this Council,
the Secretary-General and his representative, and the
countries concerned, is an excellent example of the
effective work for international understanding and peace of
which the United Nations and its Members are capable.

51. My delegation’s thanks and congratulations go also-to
the outgoing President, Ambassador El-Shibib, who, with,,
great tact, skill and dignity presided over the work of the
Council last month.
52. My delegation would like to record its appreciation,+
the Secretary-General for his cogent report, which is most
useful in the consideration of this matter. Our tribute also
goes to the Secretary-General’s Special Representative,
Ambassador Weckmann-MuRoz, whose untiring efforts have,
contributed substantially to the defusing of the situation
which has led to hopeful signs of cooperation that now
exist. We are pleased to know about Ambassador Weckmann-Muftoz’s appointment as the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative In Cyprus and trust his new endeavours will be similarly crowned with success.

48. All too often the successesof the United Nations, such
as this one, go unheeded, while its difficulties receive
abundant attention. It is therefore appropriate that we note
on this occasion that the United Nations has fulfilled the
aspirations of its founders in the quiet resolution of
potential conflict and the skilful use of its role as a third
party through whom nations may fmd a way to help settle
their differences. Should the Secretary-General deem it
appropriate we, of course, would welcome Information on
any further efforts he might be asked to undertake by the
parties in accordance with the resolution. Every successof
the United Nations in settling potentially dangerous
disputes strengthens it for the future. Thus, those countries
which can use the United Nations well and effectively in
resolving their differences serve not only themselves but the
Organization as well.

53. My delegation would further like to express its praise
and commendation to the Governments of Iran and lraq,
not only for the restraint exercised by them during the
tense situation of last February and March, but also for the
steps taken to deescalate the situation in order to find
common grounds for a settlement. It is heartening to note
that both Governments are equally desirous of negotiating
agreements on such issues as navigation and sharing of river.
waters to mutual advantage.
54. However, despite these encouraging signs of basic
agreement, the report indicates that the situation in some
areas nevertheless continues to be tense. Although this is a
cause for concern, we are hopeful that the genuine desire
of both Governments to de-escalate, coupled with the steps
they have agreed to undertake, as Incorporated In the
resolution, will have the cumulative effect of restoring
normal conditions throughout the area. We are further
hopeful that the forthcoming negotiations between the
parties will soon be held leading to a settlement of ah
bilateral Issues.

49. We wish therefore to express our appreciation for the
full and close co-operation which both countries concerned
have given to the Secretary-General and his representative.
Their ready assistance to Ambassador Weckmann-Mufioz in
his fact-finding and their constructive and realistic attitudes
during their consultations have reduced the tension and
clarified the issues between them. This has created an
auspicious atmosphere for the bilateral negotiations which
they have now agreed to resume promptly. We wish them
every success.

55. The initial agreement reached between the parties in
this instance should serve as an example, worthy of
emulation, of how neighbouring countries, given the will
and determination, can usefully attempt to settle their
differences in the larger interest of peace.

50. Mr. KUSUMASMORO (Indonesia): Mr. President, it is
a source of great satisfaction to my delegation and to me to
be able to welcome you in our midst and to congratulate
you upon your assumption of the presidency of the Council
6

56. It is in view of the considerations I have set forth that
my delegation supported the draft resolution.
57. Mr. EL I-IASSEN (Mauritania) @zferpretafion from
FrenchJ: Mr. President, I would first wish to welcome you,
in a most cordial and brotherly manner, on the occasion of
your arrival in New York as the Permanent Representative
of Kenya, and also to express my wishes for your complete
success in your.mission. I feel this all the more strongly
because Kenya and Mauritania are two African countries
which maintain closi: relations .of ,co-operation in the
Organization of African Unity and here at the United
Nations.
,‘.
58. ,I also wish to congratulate you on the lofty responsibilities you are assuming as President of the Security
Council for this month. You -started to exercise those
responsibilities on the very morrow of your arrival here,
which is not of necessity easy. But yout Vast experience as a
high official in an important regional African organization,
your recognized competence and your diplomatic abilities,
have ‘enabled you and will continue to enable you to
discharge these delicate functions with brilliance.

ation, built on mutual interest and understanding, an
understanding perhaps facilitated by the common characteristics of Alpine Austrians and mountain Kenyans. The
very frst month of your presence at the United Nations has
conferred upon. you high distinction and a considerable
burden. My delegation and I personally are looking forward
to co-operating with you in the United Nations, and
especially in the Security Council, in the spirit of friendship
characteristic between our two countries.
64. I should also like to associate myself with the
expressions of appreciation and gratitude addressed to the
President of the Council for the month of April, the
distinguished md t&iitGd representative of Iraq, Ambassador El-Shibib. He held the presidency in a busy and most
difficult period and discharged his duties with admirable
skill and dedication.
65. We have met today to consider a report by the
Secretary-General concerning recent disputes and recent
incidents which arose between two States Members Of the
Organization. For all of us here-and Austria is no
exception-this dispute was a matter of concern and of
deep regret. As far as Austria is concerned, my country has
been able to build close and most confident relations with
both countries concerned. The excellent state of relations
between Austria and Iran has been demonstrated by
repeated and highly appreciated visits of his Imperial
Majesty the Shahinshah to Austria and by broad and most
fruitful economic co-operation. No less ancient and close
are the relations my country maintains with the Republic
of Iraq and its distinguished leaders, many of whom have
visited Austria in the past years. Especially in the field of
economic relations, Austria and Iraq have co-operated
extensively.

59. Allow me, too, to pay a heartfelt tribute to the
digriified and remarkable manner in which your predecessor
guided our work during the last month.
60. My ,delegation supported the draft resolution in
document S/l 1299 because it seems to us that it is an
approach based on mutual understanding and the quest
for a peaceful solution to a situation of conflict, and as
such -it ‘cannot but meet with the support of my Covemment. Furthermore, this text has been accepted by the two
parties’concerned.
61. My delegation is convinced that the method adopted
by Iraq and Iran for the settlement of their dispute will
further consolidate their century-old relations of friendship
and co-operation. It is therefore a very happy outcome, in
the opinion of my delegation, that Iraq and Iran have
committed themselves to this course of dialogue and
peacefulness. We are the more pleased because Mauritania
maintains very close ties of friendship and solid ties of
co-operation with these two brother countries.

66. Both countries, Iran and Iraq, are dedicated to a vast
programme of national construction, and keen and eager to
maintain momentum in this process. Furthermore, the
dispute which arose between them goes back far into
history and is not of the making of the parties. However,
the report now before us hopefully constitutes a concluding
chapter of a period of tension and is at the same time the
opening chapter in a new phase of friendly, neighbourly
relations between the two countries concerned. If this is
so-and this is our hope-then we can safely say that the
Council has done a good job and lived up to its main task:
the maintenance of international peace and security.

62. Before concluding, I should like to express the
gratitude of my delegation to the Secretary-General, ,and its
great appreciation for the excellent report submitted
to us. We are also very grateful to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador WeckmannMufioz, whose efforts have, without a doubt, made possible
the fortunate results which have been put before us
today.

67. In the discussions the Council held in February, both
formally and informally, encouraging signs very soon
emerged showing that despite existing differences both
parties were genuinely willing to solve their dispute by
peaceful means. This very fact and the statesmanlike
attitude of both sides, especially that of their distinguished
representatives in this chamber, Ambassador Hoveyda on
the one side, and Ambassador El-Shibib on the other side,
made it possible for the Council to adopt a consensus on 28
February [1764th meetingj. This action, in our view, is a
model for the potential of United Nations involvement for
peace, provided two sides to a conflict not only are willing
to solve their problems by peaceful means, but also are
prepared to use United Nations machinery, the vast and
extensive potential of the United Nations, in the very

63. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): Mr. President, it is a
two-fold pleasure for my delegation to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May and to welcome you at the same
time to the United Nations as the newly appointed
Permanent Representative of Kenya, a country to which
Austria feels bound by profound ties of friendship and
trust. Indeed, Austria and Kenya over the past years have
initiated close and fruitful technical and economic co-oper7

capacity for which it was created by our founding fathers ln
San Francisco.

timely and objective manner the danger to peace and
stability in the region of the situation which had developed.
It appealed ta the parties ta refrain from all military action
and from any move which might aggravate the situation.
This collective decision once again reaffirmed the fundamental principles of the Charter regarding respect for the
territorial sovereignty of States and the pacific settlement
of disputes and the duty of all States ta fulfil their
obligations under the Charter and the universally recognized narms of international law.

68. _In looking at the report before us, I feel one can safely
say that our expectations of 28 February have been
fulfilled-and
this within the reasonably short time and
within the dates set by the Council.
69. The Secretary-General made an excellent choice
indeed in appointing Ambassador Weckmann-Mufioz as his
Special Representative for this difficult and delicate task.
tibassador Weckmann-Muiioz has submitted a most interesting report, which gives high credit to his diplomatic skill
and abilities, and I should therefore like, with your
permission, Mr. President, to pay a warm tribute ta
Ambassador Weckmann-Mufioz and his associates.

77. The spirit of co-operation with all members of the
Security Council which was shown by the two States and
their determination ta help deescalate .tie prevailing
situation and to improve their relations should be noted.
Our delegation also took part in the consultations which
were held amongst members of the Council with a view to
reaching a cansensus on this question.

70. We fully share his findings and conclusions, which
convincingly show that through this mission a number of
facts previously unknown-and perhaps even not fully
assessedas such by the parties-were brought to light, and
thus a number of sources of misunderstanding could be
eliminated. Most important, however, are the four points
on which both Governments have agreed and which form
the integral part of the resolution just adopted by the
Council and fully supported by my delegation.

78. My delegation shares the view of other delegations
that the activity of the Secretary-General in implementing
the Security Council’s decision to conduct an investigation
of the events through his Special Representative, Ambassador Weckmann-Mufioz, made an important contribution
to the achievement of agreement between the parties to
take specific steps towards eliminating possible armed
conflicts.

71. Only a combination of both elements, genuine political
will of the two GovernmeGts concerned and- the
utiliiation
of the possibilities and machinery of this
Drganization, could make such an encouraging outcome of
this mission possible.

79. The position of the Byelorussian SSR an the question
of the renunciation of the threat or use of farce in relations
between States has long been well known. We advocate that
all disputes, including border disputes, should be settled by
States through peaceful means, through negotiations. Our
delega$ion considers that the resolution adopted by the
Cauncil meet3 these desires’ of the 1canfiicttig, $arti!es and
we therefore voted in favour of it.

72. Today’s action by the Security Council concludes our
consideration of this matter, but, at the ‘same time,
hopefully opens the road wide towards a comprehensive
settlement of all bilateral issues between the two countries
concerned. Let us hope that the frontier of peace and
understanding, the frontier of genuine good-neighbourly
and confident relations, will soon replace the existing area
of unfortunate tension.

80. We hope that the parties will take the necessary steps
as soon as possible for the practical implementation of the
agreement reached between them and will thus make a
definite contribution to the further easing of international
tension.

73. Mr. SMIRNOV
(Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translation from Russian): My delegation would
like to begin its brief statement by expressing its satisfaction at seeing you in the post of President of the
Security Council, and would also like ta express the hope
that under your able guidance the Council will be able to
make progress in solving the probiems before it.

81. In this cannexian, we support the agreement reached
between Iran and Iraq on a stri% observance of the 7 March
1974 cease-fire agreement; prompt and simultaneous withdrawal of concentrations of armed forces along the entire
border, in accordance with an arrangement to be agreed
upon between the appropriate authorities of the two
countries; the creation of a favourable atmosphere canducive ta implementing the agreement reached on refraining totally from any hostile actions against each other; and
an early resumption, without any pre-conditions, at the
appropriate level and place, of conversations with a view to
a comprehensive settlement of all bilateral issues.

74. We should also like to congratulate our colleague from
the Iraqi delegation, Ambassador El-Shibib, on his successful discharge of the duties of President of the Security
Council last month.
75. The Council has just adopted without abjection a
draft resolution which undoubtedly may serve as a powerful stimulus ta the solution at the negotiating table of the
disputed frontier questions between Iran and Iraq.

82. Lastly. with regard ta paragraph 4 of the resolution,
we should iike to &te that- there has always been a link
between the Secretary-General and the Security Council in
the implementation of Council resolutions and the solution
of questions discussed in the Council. This link has existed
and will always continue to exist as an objective fact,
irrespective of the wishes or reluctance of any delegation.
This is now an objectively existing situation which, as

76. It is now obvious to everyone that this encourap;ing
decision was made possible by the adoption by the Secu&t;
Council at its 1764th meeting on 28 February this year of a
consensus on this question. The Council appraised in a
8

1

experience has shown, will yield favourable results. That is
why my delegation understands that, if the parties apply to
the Secretary-General for assistance, the nature and extent
of such assistance will be determined by the Security
Council.

Kenya to the United Nations, and in particular, as President
of the Council for this month. In the informal consultations
you have already evinced your special skills for the post
you now hold.
87. The delegation of Peru is pleased that the consensus of
the Council of 28 February last has brought about such
positive results. Praise is due to the active work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Weckmann-Muitoz,
who made it easier for both
parties to the dispute to agree on the essential points which
are to constitute the basis for the general agreement and
settlement of their bilateral questions.

83. Sir Laurence ,McINTYRE (Australia): Mr. President,
let me first of at1 welcome you officially to the presidential
chair of this Couhcil and congratulate you on the dignified
and resolute way in which you have entered on your duties
as President, especially bearing in mind the circumstances in
which you have been called upon to undertake the
presidential duties. We have a word-an informal word“unflappable”, which, I think, aptly describes the calm and
unpanicky way in which you have conducted our business
up
tb
this point. Let me also pay a tribute to your
_ precedessor in the presidential chair, Ambassador El-Shibib,
who, in circumstances that were not always easy for him,
conducted the business of this Council in a dignified and, 1
think,, wholly impartial manner, to the satisfaction of all
of us:

88. The Secretary-General’s report rightly illustrates which
are the main problems faced by both parties. My delegation
voted in favour of the draft resolution because it places the
bilateral problem in its proper context so that it can be
solved in the best possible way whereby the parties, in
accordance with the rules laid down by themselves, will
reach an agreement. With this the Council has fulfilled its
duties, and my delegation is most happy that this is so.

84. My delegation welcomes this resolution and has had
no hesitation in supporting it. We do so bearing in mind the
quite-active part that my delegation played in the proceedings of the Council when we first came to consider the item
before us in February last. I think we must all feel a sense
of gratification that both parties have been able to reach
agreement-agreement
first of all in accepting the recommendations of the report of Ambassador WeckmannMunoz, the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, and
may I at this point express what i believe are the thanks of
all the members of the Council for the excellence of
Ambassador Weckmann-Muiioz’s report, which, I think, is a
credit to him and a testimony, I am sure, to the patient
work he has devoted to the task that was given to him.
Secondly, I think we should be gratified that both the
parties principally concerned have been able-as a result, I
am sure, of careful, patient negotiations between them with
the assistance of the President-to agree on the terms of this
resolution. Both parties deserve our congratulations, and
the Council has, I think, fulfilled its responsibilities by
adopting this resolution. I believe that the Council, in view
of the circumstances, might well have been less than
responsible if it had failed to adopt and accept this text.

89. The PRESIDENT: May 1 now make a short statement
as the representative of KENYA. My delegation was indeed
placed in a very difficult and delicate position when the
question we are discussing came up in the Security Council
last February. Both Iraq and Iran are fellow members of the
Group of 77, and my Government has the closest and
friendliest relations with both countries. It is therefore with
a great sense of relief that we note that both countries,
motivated by a sense of duty to dedicate themselves to
solving their differences peacefully, have co-operated fully
with the representative of the Secretary-General.
90. My delegation wishes to express its appreciation for
the efforts of Mr. Weckmann-Mufioz
in producing the
report that is before the Council. We know that a lot of
work has gone into the production of the report and, as we
have all seen, the report is not restricted merely to
fact-finding. It is the type of report which can come only
from a dedicated servant of the United Nations.
91. The resolution we have adopted is the result of
strenuous efforts by all of us in the Council and the
Government of Iran. It expresses the willingness of the two
parties to solve their differences through peaceful measures
and to de-escalate the tense atmosphere in the area.

85. It is my confident hope that this resolution is
preparing a climate in which Iraq and Iran can settle all
their outstanding boundary and other problems without
any further resort to the use of force. If they should need
in the future to call at any time on the Secretary-General
for his assistance, members of the Council can, I feel sure,
expect that the Secretary-General will keep the Council
informed of what he is asked to do and what he proposes to
do in the interest of agreement between the parties in
resolving any outstanding problems between them.

92. A large burden in carrying out the terms of the
resolution falls on the two Governments, and we are sure
that with patience and goodwill on both sides a solution
will be found.
93. Paragraph 4 of the resolution links the United Nations
with the peaceful efforts, and 1 am sure the collective
membership of the United Nations will spare no effort to
help both parties should the need arise.

86. Mr. STUBBS (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, may I first of all pay a tribute to Ambassador
El-Shibib of Iraq, who was President of the Council during
the month of April and presided with dexterity, distinction
and impartiality.
I also wish to associate myself with
representatives who have welcomed you here as you take
up your new functions as the Permanent Representative of

94. As PRESIDENT,
Iran.

I now call on the representative of

9.5. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, allow me first of all to associate myself with
9

the members of the Council who have addressed congratulations to you. You yourself have referred to the very fine
relations between Kenya and my own country, and I need
not, therefore, add anything.

agreementbetween the parties, we are of course gratified.
But can we altogether forget the fact that we were branded
aggressorhere in this Council by our neighbour whereas,as
the findings of the Secretary-General’srepresentativebear
out, we could have justly been the plaintiff? Are we not
therefore within our rights to put the record straight?
Through the conclusions of the representative of the
Secretary-General it is now clear to all members of the
Council that the sceneof the bloody clash between Iran
and Iraq of 10 February, which resulted in more than 100
dead and wounded on each side, was within Iranian
territory. That fact establishesbeyond any doubt that the
most serious of the border incidents along the Iran-Iraq
frontiers, the scope and dimension of .which warranted a
meeting of the Security Council on 15 February, was the
result of an Iraqi attack on and penetration into Iranian
territory. The Government of Iran cannot but view with
consternation the fact that the Council has passedover in
silencethe implications of that finding.

96. The Secretary-General and his Special Representative
know well the great esteem in which.1 hold them. I should
like only to wish Ambassador Weckmann-Mufioz all success
in his new duties only recently announced.
97. With the adoption of the draft resolution the Security
Council brings to an end its consideration of an occurrence
on our border which now, after the investigations made by
Ambassador Weckmann-Mufioz,
can be seen within a
different perspective. Moreover, the Special Representative’s investigation has, as all members are aware, a
spin-off in the form of a bilateral agreement between Iran
and Iraq. The Governments of two peoples with many
cultural and spiritual affinities have at last agreed on the
steps to be taken to permit the opening of a dialogue from
which we hope a comprehensive arrangement covering all
the issues between them may emerge. The resolution the
Council has adopted today welcomes this bilateral agreement between the parties and expresses the hope that they
will as soon as possible take the necessary steps to
implement it.

101. In making this clarification, however, I do not, you
may rest assured,seek to open old wounds or to engagein
polemics. We wish to turn away from an unhappy past to
the future, which is what really counts, sinceit is to some
extent within our power to shapeit.
102. It has always been our position that the entire range
of problems between our two countries could be resolved
only through bilateral negotiations and that no other way
held any prospect of success.Weare gratified that that view
was finally upheld. It now remains to take the steps
envisagedin the agreementwe have concluded leading to
negotiation. The successfulimplementation of those steps
will be the most tangible proof of the good faith of each
side. For our part, we are resolved to show our good faith
by our conduct. We expect the sameof Iraq.

98. On the instructions of my Government, 1 wish now to
make some brief comments on the resolution and on the
report of the Secretary-General. First, I wish it to be clear
that we look upon the four points mentioned in the
resolution as a purely bilateral agreement between Iran and
Iraq. The recital of those four points in the Council’s
resolution is nevertheless not inappropriate since the
agreement between the two countries did, after all, come
about as a side effect of Ambassador’ Weckmann-Muiioz’s
mission and is reported by him and by the SecretaryGeneral in their respective reports. But that takes away
nothing from the purely bilateral nature of the agreement.

103. Mr. EL-SHIBIB (Iraq): Mr. President, it gives me
great pleasureto welcome you asthe PermanentRepresentative of Kenya and to say how gratified my delegationis to
see you presiding over our deliberations, particularly so
becausemy country enjoys warm and friendly relations
with Kenya, in addition to the fact, which you yourself
have mentioned, that we belong with you to the Group of
77 as well as the group of non-alignedcountries. I should
like also to thank you for the very kind words you have
addressedto me. I also wish to expressmy deep gratitude
to my colleagueswho saw fit to addresssuch warm and
kind sentimentsto me for the work I have done while I was
occupying the chair of Presidentof the Council.

99. Secondly, it seems appropriate in this forum and at
this time to make it plain that we look upon the four points
as agreement on how to proceed from where we are to
where we should like to go. The agreement looks to the
possibility of dialogue; it describes the steps to be taken in
order to be able to begin such an exchange. The path to the
negotiating table leads through faithful observance of the
undertakings in points (a), (b) and (c) listed in paragraph2
of the resolution. That is the context in which we consider
paragraph3 of the resolution. In that connexion I must
emphasizewith regret that in spite of the fact that this
agreementbetween the parties was reached over a month
ago Iran continues to be exposed to unmitigated hostile
propaganda from Iraq. We are, of course, accustomedto
that kind of propaganda. But, as.was made clear to our
neighbour through Ambassador Weckmann-Mufioz, such
conduct is not conducive to the dialogue Iraq hasdeclared
itself ready to engagein with Iran.
100. Having made those observationsabout the resolution
just adopted, I must add that I cannot in clear conscience
say before this Council that I am unreservedlysatisfiedwith
the outcome of the debate. To the extent that this quarrel,
rather than having been escalated, has ended up in an
10

104. My delegation wishes first of all to express its
gratitude for the action of the Council when it adopted its
consensuson 28 February 1974 and decided to take
positive action on the complaint brought by my country
before this Council. We are once again gratified by the
dispatch with which the Council has dealt with the report
of the Special Representativeof the Secretary-Generaland
the resolution that emanatedas a result of that report. Our
gratitude goes no less to the Secretary-General for his
choice of such a distinguishedand able man, a man of great
wisdom and great integrity, namely, Mr. Weckmann-Muiloz.
We should like also to mention the excellent work done by
his assistant,Mr. Homann-Herimberg,of the Secretariat. My

obsolete because Iraq for 32 years has not applied certain
very important provisions of it. I shall not take up the time
of the Council, since our position on this question has been
explained in detail in the communications
we have
addressed to the President of the Security Council in recent
years.

thanks also go once again to the Secretary-General for the
dispatch with which he has been klnd enough to inform
my Government of resolution 348 (1974), which the
Council has just adopted.
105. These were the only comments I wished to make on
the report and the resolution. However, since my colleague
from Iran has brought forward fresh and, unfortunately,
contentious points, I feel that I have to reply briefly.

112. Mr. EL-SHIBIB (Iraq): I should like to express my
appreciation and to note the statement that the representative of Iran has just made that the treaty of 1937 has not
been abrogated.

106. Let me say first of all that-to paraphrase the words
of Mr. Richard of the United Kingdom, which have been
echoed by other members-the
manner in which the
Council has dealt with this question provides an excellent
example of the use to which the machinery of the United
Nations can be put. We are particularly gratified at these
remarks because my country felt it its duty to bring before
the Council a tense and potentially dangerous situation.

113. Let me, with regret, refer to the accusation against
my Government that it is indulging in unmitigated hostile
propaganda-to use the words of the representative of Iran.
It is not the intention of my Government to indulge in
unmitigated hostile propaganda, but it feels that it has to
inform the public about certain facts. If they unfortunately
appear to be not to the liking of one or another party, that
is something we cannot help. It is the nature of the facts
themselves that gives them their importance.

107. We are in general very pleased and satisfied with the
report and the findings of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. With wisdom and with vision he studied
the situation on the ground, looked at the events in their
true perspective and saw their historical unfolding. It was
not a mere incident that was brought before this Council in
February but a series of events which took their most
serious form when Iran abrogated the 1937 Border Treaty
between the two countries in 1969. This dark event
naturally led, as it was obvious it would, to the bloody and
serious fighting which took place during February. We are
happy that Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz reported that the situation appeared calm and that both parties claimed to have
given strict instructions for a complete observance of the
cease-fire agreement. As far as my country is concerned, I
should like to assure the Council that it will hold to strict
observance of the cease-fire, which we proposed in the first
place, and we also hope that our neighbour, Iran, will do
likewise.

114. I should like also to refer to paragraph 35 of the
report by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, particularly the last sentence relating to the
Khanaqin-Badra/Qasr-e-Shirin-Mehran
sector and the Iraqi
interpretation of that border area. I should like also to refer
to paragraph 36, which states that, in view of the
observations made by the Special Representative, neither
Government in principle had territorial claims along the
land frontier.
115. I should like to say on behalf of the Government of
Iraq that we have no territorial claim on our neighbour
along the entire frontier, that we strictly observe the
territorial integrity and the sovereignty of Iran. We expect
that our future relations will be baaed on the principles of
good neighbourliness, strict observance of each other’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, strict non-interference
in each other’s internal affairs and strict respect for
international agreements and the obligations upon each
party emanating from them.

108. In regard to the resolution that has just been
adopted, we feel that the four-point agreement which was
reached as a result of the efforts of the Special Representative and by the use of the Secretary-General’s good
offices has been endorsed in the resolution. As far. as my
Government is concerned, we will enter into fulfilment of
the steps specified in good faith and good will and we also
hope that this good faith and good will will be reciprocated
by our neighbour.

116. The PRESIDENT:
Iran.

I call on the representative

of

117. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpretation jkom French):
The paragraph of the report of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to which the representative of Iraq
has just referred clearly shows that the scene of the incident
on 10 February 1974 took place on the territory of Iran. I
am taking note of what my colleague from Iraq said in
regard to the subsequent paragraph, namely, paragraph 36.
Iran has no territorial claim in respect of Iraq either. But I
am bound to add that the representative of Iraq, in his
statement, once again referred to the 1937 Treaty, and I
should like to repeat that the treaty died of natural causes,
so to speak, because Iraq refused to apply important
provisions of it for 32 years.

109. Finally, we thank the Council particularly for paragraph 4, which allows the parties to avail themselves of the
assistance of the Secretary-General when it is required.
110. The PRESIDENT:
Iran.

I call on the representative

of

111. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpretation from French):
I shall be extremely brief: I take due note of the statement
made by my colleague from Iraq concerning the fact that
his Government intends strictly to comply with the points
of the bilateral agreement concluded with Iran. My colleague from Iraq has once again mentioned the abrogation
of the 1937 treaty, and I wish to put the record straight.
The agreement has not been abrogated; but it has become

118. The PRESIDENT: Before 1 call on the representative
of Iraq, I might, perhaps redundantly, point out that
paragraph 2 (d) of the resolution contains a provision under
which the conversations will continue. I would ask that this
be borne in mind.
11

12 1. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) {interpretation fi-om French):
I regret that my distinguished colleague from Iraq jokes
about such serious subjects. However, I completely agree
with your remark, Mr. President. These are bilateral problems which only the parties can settle by bilateral
negotiations.

119, Mr. EL-SHIBIB (Iraq): All I wish to say is that the
death of treaties must be a new term in international law. I
am sure it will be read with amusement by future legal
minds when they tackle international problems.
120. The PRESIDENT:
Perhaps I need not repeat my
statement as I call on the representative of Iran.

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

12

\
! \\

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Unite I Nations
publications
throughout
tbe world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLXCATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

from
bookstores
or write
to: United

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en veate dans les librairies
depositaires
du mondo entier. Informex-vous
aup&
de votre libraire
B : .Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIOJIYPXTb

H3~anna

3miax

ODrantmaum

H arexrcraax

U3~AHUB

OPI-AHW

06zeAHxeHHbrx

HaqnR

no acex panonax
Mara3HAe
HRH nHmHTe

BgIlJeN
XHHJKXOM
HauHR,CexqK~nonpo~a~eK~~aKxR.WbH)-~OpKHIIx~eKeBa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

3A9UEf

PUBLICACIONES

Lftho

&I Unfted

Nations,

New York

YOXuiO

DE LAS

Rice:

SW&

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

OIi’bEHSiHEHHbIX
KyllSiTb

xnpa.
Haaojuire
cnpasxn
no anpecy:
OpMLSiH3auHs

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estsn
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

and distributors
Nations,
Sales

NACIONES

HAI&HR
B KHNXCHblX
mara06 si3AaHBffx
B
06'beAHXe.HAblX

UNIDAS

en venta en Iibrerfas
y casas distria su librero
o .dirfjase
a: Naciones

1.00

7&82801-May

1980-2,280
