urgent practical steps to tackle the critical needs of the peopk
of Yugoslavia, including displaced persons and the mo~t
vulnerable groups affected by the contlict, to assist in the
voluntary return of displaced persons to their hom.::s:

in Yugoslavia which would permit all the peoples of Yugoslavia
to decide upon and to construct their future in peace;
8. Encourages the Secretary-General to pursue his
humanitarian efforts in Yugoslavia, in liaison with the International Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children's
Fund and other appropriate humanitarian organizations, to take

9. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter unt,i
a peacefol solution is achieved.
Adopted una11imously al the .102.lrd
meeti11g

Part II. Other matters considered by the Security Council

ADMISSION OF NEW MEMBERS TO THF. UNITED NATIONS 191'

A.

2. Recommends tu the General AsM:rubly !.hat the
Republic of Korea be admitted to membershir, in the Unikd
Nations

Appucalions of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and the Republic of Kt,rea

Adopted without vote
meeti11g.

Decisions

al

the J(~/I s!

Decision

At its 2998th meeting, on 6 August 1991, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda. decided to refer the
applications of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 199
and of the Republic of Koream for membership in the United
Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New Members
for examination and report, as provided in rule 59 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 702 (1991), the President of the Council
made the following statement on behalf of the members: 2oz
''By adopting resolution 702 ( 1991), the Security
Council has taken another step towards the completion of
a political process in exercise of one of the most important
functions entrusted to it under the Charter of tht United
Nations, namely, to make recommendations to the General
Assembly regarding the admission of new members to the
Organization.

At its 3001st meeting, on 8 August 1991, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members201 concerning the applications of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and of the Republic of Korea for
admission to membership in the United Nations.

Having examined separately the applications of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 199 and of the Republic of
Korea,200 for admission to the United Nations,

"The applications ofthe Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and the Republic of Korea have been considered
and unanimously approved by the Council. The aspirations
of the peoples and Governments of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea
have harmoniously coincided. That is why the Council
decided to consider and take a simultaneous decision on
the admission of both parts of the Korean Peninsula to
membership in the world Organization.

1. Recommends to the General Assembly that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea be admitted to
membership in the United Nations;

"This is a historic occasion for the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, the Republic of Korea, the
Asian continent and the world community of nations.

Resolution 702 (1991)
of 8 August 1991

The Security Cow1cil,

46
