CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

Adoption,

of the agenda

735)

.. . .

1

. . . . . . , . . . .. .. . .. . ... . .

1

. .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. .. .. .

. . ,. . . .. . , .. . .

The situation in the Middle East:
fa) Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973);
Council resolution
fb) Report
of the Secretary-General
under Security
. . . . . . . .. . . . , . . . . . . . , , . .. .. .. . .. .. . .
331 (1973) (S/10929)
Expression of farewell to Sir Colin Crowe, representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

spv. 1735

NQTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Secu.rity Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in whjch it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions md Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday, 26 July 1973, at 10.30 a.m.
I)resident: Sir Colin CROWE (I Jnited Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

hovisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 735)
I.

Adoption

of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
[a) Security Council resolution 33 I (1973);
{b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 33 1 (1973) (S/10929).
The meeting was called to order at II a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

Mr. N. KeEani (SJJrian Arab Republic), Mr. 1’50. Ogbu
(Nigeria) and Mr. R Driss (Tuniria) took the places reserved
for them at the side o.f the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to recall that a draft
resolution has been submitted by the delegations of Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, the Sudan and
Yugoslavia and circulated in document S/10974.
4. Mr. ABDIJLLA (Sudan): Mr. President, my delegation
is delighted to welcome you back in the Security Council in
order to preside over its meetings in the debate on the
whole Middle East question. It is a matter of great
satisfaction that your Government has seen fit to highlight
the importance of these meetings by calling you back to
preside over the Council during these deliberations. My
delegation is very pleased that the Council is once more
able to profit from your vast experience, skill and admirable character. I am pleased that my Foreign Minister was
here to extend appropriate compliments and appreciation
to your predecessor in the Chair, Ambassador Malik of the
USSR.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973);
(b/ Report
of the Secretary-General under
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929)

Security

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken previously by the Security Council in the course of
the discussion of the item before us, I shall now proceed,
with the consent of the Council, to invite the 20 representatives of States non-members of the Council participating
in the discussion to be seated in this chamber in conformity
with the established practice.

5. I have asked to speak in order to make a short
statement after the introduction by the representatives of
India, Kenya, Indonesia and Yugoslavia, with their wellknown clarity and forceful argument and on behalf of the
eight sponsors, of the draft resolution in document
s/10974.
6. I should like to state that my delegation has sponsored
the draft resolution as a member of the non-aligned
countries and as one of the eight delegations empowered by
the last African summit to convey to the Council the
decisions of the totality of Africa condemning Israel for its
military occupation of Arab lands and demanding the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces
from all the occupied territories and the establishment of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

2. Accordingly,
as I hear no objection, 1 invite the
representatives of Egypt, Israel and Jordan to take places at
the Council table, and the representatives of the United
Republic of Tanzania, Chad, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Nigeria,
Algeria, Morocco, the United Arab Emirates,
Somalia, Guyana, Mauritania, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Lebanon, Iran, Bahrain and Tunisia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, on
the understanding that they will be invited to be seated at
the Council table when it is their turn to address the
Council.

7. My delegation agrees that, as already pointed out by the
representatives who introduced the draft resolution, it was
formulated in what we consider to be the minimum that
can be adopted with unanimity in the Council at this stage.
Therefore, the draft resolution deals primarily with the
actual conditions in the region which frustrate the efforts
being deployed by the Council in order to bring about a
just and lasting peace in the region.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat
[Eg,jptj,
Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. A. N. Sharaf
/Jo&an)
took places at the Security Council table; and

8. During the early stage of this debate Mr. Tekoah
indulged in sweeping gcncralizations and romantic and yet
inconceivable theories like the theory of nations which he

Power, of any weapons to hold back tile tide of’ national
aspiration of any people, and it is equally impossible alld
inadmissible in this age to maintain any military occupation
indefinitely. I,t is tnost certain that persistence on the part
of Israel in maintaining such aggression will render peace
more and more remote from realization.

then volunteered to submit lo this Council. ln order to
refresh his memory, I beg to quote his own words:
“It was at the dawn of tirne . . . that the Jewish people
emerged as a nation, distinct not only in its political
personality but also as a separate cultural and religious
entity. For more than a thousand years this people
maintained its sovereignty over the land of Israel.”
(I ?24th mcetiflg, para. 154.1

13. It is also uur conviction and our position that
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces
from all of the occupied Arab territ.orics is the first step aad
the only step that can pave the way to a political solution.
For achieving a real, a just and a lasting peace, tile
Palestinian people must obtain their inalienable rights.

Iic went on to say:
“In the meantime, the Jews exiled to foreign, lands
preserved their identity as a nation and remained bound
to their homeland by the civilization and religion of
which they were bearers. Their faith, culture, customs . .
and even their clothing made their lives a continuation of
the existence in their homeland.” (ibid., prim. 159.1

14. It ir from this conviction and this position that my
delegation has sponsored the draft resolution before us. It is
our understanding also that, should Israel persist in frustrating and blocking the United Nations efforts to promote
peace in the region, the views expressed by the rnajGrity of
delegations in this Council during the present debate wiil be
presented again and more forcefully to the Council at the
highest level of representation.

9. Since we are now beyond the debating stage in the
Council, I shall refrain from indulging in drawing the
implications of such a wild argument. The facts are these:
The Palestinian Arabs have been in Palestine for over 13
centuries and, until the Ealfour Declaration, they o,wnedas they still own-94 per cent of its total land. At the time
of that Declaration they constituted 94 per cent of its
population, while only 6 per cent was the Jewish community. In addition to factors of religion, culture? civilization, customs, and even clothing and food, they havp: legally
owned 94 per cent of the land of Palestine for the last 13
ccnturi.es, and they constitute a nation of over 2.5 million
people. Such legality cannot be transferred to any people
who have lived under different nationalities and States for
the past 13 centuries, nor can it be justifiably con!‘erred on
a community that constituted only 6 per cent as against 94
per cent at the time of the Salfour Declaration.

15. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the Foreign Minister or Egypt, on whom
I now call.
16. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Mr. Prerident, it is indeed
with a sense of great respect, even of awe, that I address
‘these final words to the Council-under the light in this
chamber. We believed in the Charter of the United Nations;
we decided to guide our steps by its words. You represent a
country that has tried all policies in the furthering of its
national aims and aspirations. Gut victors though you were
at the end of the Second World War you, together with
other uuitcd nations, knew very well that victors and
victims are both losers in any war, and that therefore there
is no salvation for the world except through a decision, a
determination by the peoples of tile world to live by law,
under law, under the Charter freely accepted by all
Members of the United Nations.

IO. Yet the statement of Mr. Tekoah is significant in what
it deliberately omits; I refer, for example, to the implication that the Jewish immigrants should continue the
policy of annexation of Arab lands and eviction of
Palestinians and other Arab citizens. For the same reason,
Israel has committed, and continues to commit, thcsc acts
in the region, even after the Arab side has agreed to abide
by the Charter for a political solution. Indeed, in addition
to the injuries committed by Israel against the Palestinian
people during the Iast 25 years, and in addition to the three
wars it has waged against the Arab States, in 1948, 1956
and 1967, together with the acts of aggression and
terrorism, Israel adamantly refuses to abide by the principles of the Charter and withdraw its military forces from
all the Arab territories it continues to occupy.

17. Mr. President, 1 sit in this hall, and behind you I see a
mural with dungeons and chains depicting the forces of
domination, of occupation, of imperialism, of coercion of
the will and the wishes of the world’s peoples in order to
make them serve some passing national policy. But I also
see that those who have dreamed of a “brave new world”
have seen the chains broken, have seen domination ended.
and indeed have seen the phoenix rise from its ashes to
create a new world under the Charter, under law. In this I
believe. Unlike the sceptics, unlike those who, by reason of
their shortsightedness, believe only in the power of today, I
believe in the United Nations. In the end WC will find that
all power comes to an end; in the end we will find that all
occupation will be removed; in the end we will find that
law and justice will prevail.

11. It is well known now that. the announced policy of
creating facts that is being executed in the occupied Arab
lands through vast evictions and dispersals of Palestinian
people, and through the creation of military settlements
and by changing the physical character of these lands, is in
itself complete evidence of Israel’s policy of permanent
occupation5 to be followed by annexation, to be followed
in turn by yet another occupation.

18. In one of the statements made by Israel here it was
made very obvious that they regard the light in this
chamber as only an artificial light. In other statements they
said that, unless we do this or that, the United Nations will
have no role to play, Waldheim wiLl have nothing to do. We
must really know ,whether or not the United Nations has
any role at all.

12. We have repeatedly affirmed our absolute conviction
that it is beyond the capacity of any aggressor, of any
2

19. We came to this Council in 1967, asking for what we
thought-and
still think-was
right: an order for uncon.
ditional, immediate and total withdrawal of the forces of
aggression that had invaded our lands-while all the big
Powers were admonishing us not to be the first to shoot,
not to be the first to defend our territorial integrity. The
USSK, for epample, is indeed now logical in the light of its
admonition because, having found that this has been defied
by Israel, it has broken off relations with Israel. France is in
the same logical situation. But I am not going to go on
enumerating countries and their positions. As 1 said, in
1967 we came with this request: and I say very openly that
the Council found that the request was perhaps really
logical and indeed legal. The Council thought it had an
opportunity to put an end to all the problems of the Middle
East. They came with a ‘“package deal”; they came with
resolution 242 (1967); they came with the special mission
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
have obeyed, again because we believe in the United
Nations-not
only as a shelter for nations that have no atom
bombs, but because it is really in the best interests of all
mankind, as found by the victors in the Second World War
themselves.

complete, realizing the Zionist dream of ingathering in
Palestine all the Jews now in exile in other parts of the
world. Mr. Ben-Gurion once saidin Londonthat the Israel
of today is only 14 per cent complete-meaningthat since
only 14 per cent of the Jewsof the world are in Israel its
bordersor boundariesmust remainopen-endeduntil it can
indeed ingather the rest of the Jewsof the world and fulfil
the Zionist dream. Many times he told us that it washis
intention not to mention borders for Israel in Israel’s
so-calledDeclaration of Independence-whichwas against
the wishes and the will and the determinationof many
prominent Jewish lawyers. He wasaskedwhat country had
ever been declaredwithout boundaries.Hisreply was,“The
United States of America.” And he saidthat thanksto the
non-mention of boundariesin the AmericanDeclarationof
Independence, the original stateshave beenextended so
that present-day America extends from one oceanto the
other.
23. Expansion was in the mindsof the dreamersof the
Zionist State; it is still in their policiesand in their minds.
That is not really very dangerous,exceptthat wenow have
new theories from the new globalistsof the world. In
President Nixon’s latest report to the Congress,we came
acrossthis sentence:

20. We accepted resolution 242 (1967), we accepted the
mission of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, we accepted his aide-mCmoire of February 1971;
and not a single one of those acceptances was based on our
view that this was the legal or the right thing to do: we
thought that this was what the United Nations, what
mankind, wanted us to do. We accepted this in obedience
to the will of the United Nations.

“New patterns of stability havenot yet beenestablished
in the area of the Middle East.Two world warsand the
rising tide of nationalismhavebroken downthe pre-1914
order”.
Nothing has replacedthe pattern of stability which existed
in 1914. What order wasthere prior to 1914?Colonialism,
great empires, subjugation of the peoplesof the Middle
East-all have existed for decades.Are we to understand
that the solution of the problem of the Middle East really
dependson remappingthe Middle East, on the establishment of another imperial order under which new subjugation and new hegemony would be the new pattern of
stability in the Middle East? Is this really an openingfor
the wild Zionist dream of enlargingthe 14 per cent to 100
per cent’? Are we really to seea new imperialpattern in our
area of the world which, indeed,would allow the spokesman of Israel to speakfor Jordan, to speakfor Egypt, to
invade Lebanon, to take prisonersfrom Lebanonand try
them according to Israeli new law, giving Israel the
possibility of trying any citizen of any country for anything
it considersto be a crime againstthe security of Israel? Is
that the new empire I and my childrenaregoingto see?Is
that really the desireof Israeland its supporters?

21. Again, it would have been our request now to have a
very short draft resolution ordering the occupation forces
to be removed immediately and unconditionally. Again, it
would have been our position now to ask that all the rights
of the Palestinian people be given to them-as, indeed, they
should be given to every nation in the world. But again
there is before the Council a draft resolution prepared by
its eight non-aligned members. Again in deference to world
will, we accept it because if this draft is adopted, the
CounciI would reaffirm that the occupation of the Arab
territories
is contrary to the Charter and that those
territories must therefore be restored. The Council would in
no ambiguous terms support the initiatives of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and confirm that
they were well within his mandate and that, as contained in
his aide-mimoire
of 8 February 1971, they should be
complied with. The Council would express its conviction
that a just and lasting peacefulsolution of the problemcan
be achieved only on the basis of respect for national
sovereignty, territorial integrity and the rights and legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians.That would go some
way towards meetingour request.The Council would also
declare what is obvious: that in the occupiedterritoriesno
changes which may obstruct a peacefuland final settlement
or adversely affect the political and other fundamental
rights of all the inhabitants of those territories shouldbe
introduced or recognized.

24. But today WClimit ourselvesto consideringthe draft
now before the Council, and we saythat voting in favour of
that draft so that it could be adoptedwould be a message
to the Arab peoplesof Egypt and all the Arab countries.
Voting against it will also be a message
to the Arab peoples
of Egypt and all the Arab countries. The first message
would be, “The world is with you, andwith patience,and
supported by our responsibility for collective security,
peacecan be establishedon the basisof justice”. That is the
messagethat will come from every affirmative vote cast in
this Council.

22. Israel’s position has been made only too clear. It
believes in the right of conquest-indeed, the right to
conquer and conquer so that Israel may in the end be

25. The other message,
the message
that we shallget from
any negative vote, is this: “Regardlessof what you think is
3

legal, you must think of what is possible; regardless of the
Charter, you must think of world realities, and those
realities say to you: Either surrender to Israel--and we can
help you save face by saying that the negotiations took
place under occupation, with Israeli pre-conditions, and
that Israel will never go back to the lines from which it
attacked you; that is, that you must negotiate what part of
your country you would “wi.llingIy” give away-or, if you
can, go and fight for your rights and show US what you can
do. We can tell you that you will not be able to do
anything, because no matter what force you have Israel will
be put in a position to frustrate your resistance.”

coercion, the non-acquisition of territory by force and the
determination to live free, proud, and independent. With
respect to Africa, I do not think I have enough words to
express my thanks to the Foreign Ministers wh,o left their
heavy tasks to come to this Council to plead the cause of
the third world, of the world that wants to live free and to
live in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
They gave to the Council the word of Africa and that word,
I am sure, will gain momentum. In the end it will be
stronger than the guns and the bombs.
30. People from the Middle East, if they are really true
sons of the Middle East, can look into the history of the
armies .that passed through our area and of the empires
that were establjahed and later destroyed, and compare
those events to three books: the Old Testament, the New
Testament and the Koran. Those words have proved to be
more permanent and, indeed, stronger than all kinds of
guns
and the ways of coercion and domination-whatever
they were-throughout
the centuries of man’s existence.

26, A great American representative whom I had the
honour and pleasure of knowing, Adiai Stevenson, told us
once, “The hopes of mankind are in the Charter; the
realities of life are in Khe New Ycv-k Times.” But I must
say, in respect to his memory, that he added, “In the end
the Charter will prevail”. Apparently now a negative vote
would tell us, “Never mind the Charter; what is in The New
York Times will prevail”.

31. Having thanked the Council and you, Mr. President,
for the many courtesies that have been extended to me and
our country, I propose to end by repeating my question:
What do I take back to our people: hope or despair?
Strengthening of their belief in a world based on order
wherein every country--especially
every great countrymeets its responsibilities and does not .try to evade them, or
despair because this world will recognize only force and the
resulrs of force? But in asking this, I will say that we will
not do that; we will not recognize force and we will not live
by it-we will resist it. And, in saying that, I send my
greetings frorn this most important hall in the world to
those who are fighting against oppression and occupation in
Gaza, on the West Bank, in Jerusalem, in the Golan Heights
and everywhere else; to those who are fighting and will
fight in Sinai and in every other part of the Arab lands now
occupied and in every part of the Arab lands that are
threatened with occupation if we let this policy of force
dominate.

27. The belief that Egypt is bound eventually to bow to
Israel’s terms, perhaps in two years, is only an illusion. We
have fought empires before and we shall fight now against
any effort to dominate or stifle our life. We do not want to
go back to any other empire. We do not want to lose
another 400, 100 or 80 years of our life. We shall not live in
a world or in an area dominated by ,intirnidation and by the
threat of force.
‘28. It is not really worth taking the Council’s time to say
that the people of the United States of America did not in
1776 accept the facts of power. It is not really necessary to
tell the Council that the French people in resisting Hitler
did not accept the facts of power. I can say the same thing
about the people of almost every Member State around this
table. I can certainly say it about Africa, because indeed the
thesis of the vacuum of the new stability which did not
succeed the empires-that-were is applicable to all countries
in Africa.

32. I always ask people to read the Jarring aide-m&noire,
because this so-called impediment to peace will, in the
future, be shown to be the best piece of paper ever offered
to Israel, to the Zionist State. Mr. Jarring is here; he knows
that this has been my opinion since 1971. If we accept it
now, if it is still acceptable-until it is vetoed by this
Council-it is because we want to make every sacrifice in
order to live in a world of law.

29. Before 1 conclude this last intervention in the Council,
I wish to express my profound feelings to all those who
have supported us. Egypt will forget the wrong done to it,
but Egypt will not forget any good deed. First, to the
representatives of Europe--to the representatives of France,
the United Kingdom and Austria-I should like to state that
I am returning to my country with an obligation to Europe
because of their stand based on what they thought was
right. To the people of the Socialist countries, to whom
Mr. Dayan referred yesterday as Communists-alongside
Africans and Arabs--I say that we shall never forget their
assistance and we shall always depend on it. To the
non-aligned peoples, to the people of Yugoslavia, to the
peoples of Asia represented ia the Council by India and
Indonesia, I say that we know that countries with such
great and ancient civilizations were not expected to take
any stand other than the one they took. To the people of
Latin America, I say that I am indeed proud that we have
the names of Feru and Panama on the draft resolution
before the Council. I am proud but not surprised, because
they are really the foster parents of all the principles that
are the basis for this draft resolution-the
non-use ot

33. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Jordan, on whom I now call.
34. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): As we are reaching
the
moment of voting by the Council on the only draft
resolution before it, my delegation wishes to snake some
comments in explanation of its position on an evaluation of
this or any other draft resolution on the subject.
35. In our opinion, any resolution coming out of this
Council on the problem in the Middle East resulting from
the war of June 1967 must, in order to be fair and
appropriate, embody the following provisions and principles.
4

L

1967. As the Council should never allow territorial aggrandizement by States against others, no matter what the extent
of that aggrandizement, its resolutions s?,o~ld reflect this
basic position from which resolution 242 (1967) initially
stemmed.

36. First, an explicit and categorical call for the withdrawal of the Israeli occupation troops from all the
territories occupied in June 1967. Those territories, which
include the national territories of three States Members of
the United Nations? comprise Sinai, Gaza, the West Bank of
Jordan including Arab Jerusalem, and the Golan Heights.

46. Another concept ,that should not be distorted and
injected outside its proper place in the interpretation of the
past rcsolutjon or the formulation of any new initiative is
the concept of “agreelvent”. While agreement has a
necessary and proper place in the peace-making efforts, it
should not be allowed to be employed as a subversive tactic
and pretext. One cannot reopen every established and
fundamental principle of the Charter and its logical
cortszque;lces co agreement at every juncture at which a
party to a dispu.te deems it serviceable to its Illegitimate
interest ta veto the application of the principles of the
Charter and the logical consequences thereof.

37. Second, an endorsement of the rights of the Palestinian Arzbs who were forced out of thair homes in
Palestine and dispersed in 1.947-1948. These rights have
repeatedly been recognized since 1948 by the General
Assembly.
38. Third, a condemnation of rhe continuing Israeli
occupation of the Arab territories raptured in 1067 and a
clear indication that the absence of a pslitical settlement
and guaranteed peace, while lamentable, is no justification
for the continuing occupation.
39. Fourth, an explicit allocation of responsibility for the
faiIure of the peace-making efforts undertaken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in accordance with his mandate contained in resolution 242 (1967)
of 22 November 1967.

47. This is an essential and incontestable basis for the
philosophy and functioning of the Council. We wish that
complete withdrawal should occur through agreement. We
wish that the establishment of a just peace should take
place through dgreemant. But it’ the party in occupation
and in objective opposition to a just se,ttlement insists on
placmg its non-agreement as a barrier to both withdrawal
and peace, what are we to do? Again, the formulation and
interpretation uf resolutions by the Security Council on the
broad issue should take accour?t of this fact.

40. Fifth, a clear denial of the validity of any changes
undertaken by the occupying Power in any of the occupied
territories
with the aim or the effect of destroying or
eroding the physical character or the demogl aphic composition of those territories or the political and civil rights of
the inhabitants.

48. L?t me now speak on an issue raised both in the
debate and by the draft resolution before us. The issue is
the rights of the Palestinian Arabs. From 1948 until today,
the Jordan Government has consistently supported and
fully identified wit.11 the rights of the Palestinian Arabs
rendered homeless by the violent establishment of lsrael
between 1947 and 1948. It was during tnat holocaust that
the vast majority of Palestinians were dispossessed and
expelled from their homes in what later became Israel.
Those Palestinians were uprooted from their homes in
Haifa, Jaffa, Acre, Tiberias, Bir Sheba, West Jerusalem and
other areas of Palestine. Their right of return has been
recognized by the General Assembly of the United Nations
since December 1948. This recognition has been subsequently reaffirmed every year. The Palestinians of the
West Bank who stayed in what remained of Palestine and
elected to join with their Arab brothers of the East,
democratically and conStitutionally in a solid union, were
spared the misfortune of uprooting and dispersal. IJnited
Jordan remained loyal to the rights of the Palestinian
kinsmen who had lost their homes and the ability to return
to them. The disaster of 1967 brought nearly half the
Palestinians, citizens of Jordan and others, under Israeli
occupation.

41. Sixth, the principle that the United Nations, and its
Charter and resolutions are the framework for the settlement of the general problem.
42. Seventh, the reactivation of the United Nations
machinery
envisaged in and defined by the provisions of
Security
Council resolution 242 (196’7) with a view to
establishing
a just and lasting peace on the basis of the
principles just outlined and the other provisions of that
resolution.
43. Those points are the criteria by which the Jordan
&legation
evaluates any draft resolution on the question as
a result of the present debate. While most of these
principles
were generally valid as a solution to the 1967
conflict,
some are necessary as a judgement on the situation
as it has now evolved and as guidelines for future peace
efforts.
44. In this context I wish to make some comments on
sOme of the interpretations given during and outside the
present
debate on some of the provisions of resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. I make these comments
because any new resolution must not fail to take account of
the need for a corrective formulation, closing the door to
tluz distortions and misinterpretations occasionally given to
/
resolution
242 (1967).

49. When we speak of the rights of the Palestinians we
speak of a concrete and not a rhetorical issue. The
Palestinians are either in exile or under Israeli occupation.
Restoration of their basic rights consists in ending the
occupation and enabling the exiles to exercise the right of
return to their homes. There is no other moral and realistic
way within the Charter of restoring the Palestinian rights.
Surely, least of all is the unthinkable notion that Israel
should absorb and annex the occupied lands and drive the

45. I need not reiterate what my delegation has emphasized on numerous earlier occasions: that the provision for
withdrawal
in resolution 242 (1967) could only mean total
Israeli withdrawal from all the territories occupied in June
5

desire to continue to seek a peaceful and acceptable
solution consistent with respect for the Charter and the
resolutionsof the United Nations.

Palestinians to seek a substitute homeland east of their own
homeland.
50. As I say this, my Government wants to make it very
clear that its citizens under occupation will never be
abandoned or let down. The unity of the Kingdom, built by
consent and social realities, will not be undone by physical
occupation, no matter how long it lasts. We shall continue
to defend the territorial integrity of Jordan against the
existing occupation of its Western wing and make it
possible for its people to determine their future in freedom.
We shall continue to work for an end to occupation of all
the occupied Arab territories. We shall continue to support,
as we have done for over a quarter of a century, the rights
of the Palestinian Arabs victims of the colossal violence of
1948. Jordan has a special link and a deep association with
Palestinian agonies, achievements and aspirations. It will
not fail to live up to the historic responsibility all this
entails.

56. I shouldlike here to pay a tribute to the way in which
Mr. El-Zayyat calmly and objectively put before the Council the position of his Government. I listened to his moving
statementwith rapt attention, and I assurehim that France
shareshis faith in a world that will not be governedsolely
by relations of force, a world that placesover and aboveall
the law and the rights of peoples.
57. Reverting to the draft resolution on which we are
about to vote, I would say that, confronted by the dangers
of a situation that is a standingthreat to international peace
and security, it is for the Council to reaffirm, on the one
hand, its specific responsibility and, on the other, the
principles of a solution acceptable to the parties, and,
finally, our support for the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his SpecialRepresentative.

51. I come now to the draft resolution before us. It is the
product of long and arduous work and reflects a compromise achieved through mutual accommodation. It falls
short of our hopes, goals and expectations, but the draft
resolution moves in the right direction. It tries to be
explicit on the issue of occupation. It registers a judgement
on the responsibility in the failure of the United Nations to
achieve progress towards peace in the Middle East. It tries
to give expression to some essential principles and requircments of peace in the Middle East. It is also the result of
hard and painstaking negotiations and mutual accommodation amonga numberof tendencieswithin the Council. It
reflects positive steps forward by somefriendly countries
that are exploring more and morethe realitiesof peaceand
justice in the Middle East.
52. My delegation, therefore, views positively the spirit
and efforts behind this draft. We hope that its constructive
elementswill becomethe basisfor broad agreementin this
Council and outside it. Wehope that the phasebeyond this
draft, whether accepted or rejected, will witnessrenewed
and effective efforts aimed at a speedyandjust settlement
and the establishmentof a stable,just and creative peacein
the Middle East.

58. I believethat the draft resolution submitted to usdoes
in fact meet this three-fold concern. In reaffirming
resolution 242 (1967), whose principles are still entirely
valid, it definesthe basesof any solution likely to establish
a just and lastingpeacein the region. The only new element
in relation to resolution 242 (1967) is to be found in the
reference to the rights of the Palestiniansbut that reference, which wasalready madein resolution 2949 (XXVII)
adopted on 8 December 1972 by the General Assembly,
only reflects a growing concern of the international
community as expressed in a whole series of official
declarations.
59. With regardto the renewedsupport that the Council is
duty bound to give to the Secretary-Generalandhis Special
Representative,it is quite in keeping with our concern to
emergefrom the present stagnationand thus to encourage
any initiative that may facilitate the searchfor a solution.
As far aswe are concerned,we hope that this support will
not remain a deadletter and that the Secretary-Generaland
his Special Representative will very soon have the POSsibility of resumingtheir consultationswith the parties.
60. In conclusion, 1 would voice the hope that this draft
resolution, which is both balanced and realistic, will be
unanimouslyadopted by the Council.

53. The PRESIDENT: The list of speakers has been
exhausted. There being no further representativeswishing
to addressthe Council at this stage,the Council will now
turn to the consideration of the eight-power draft resolution contained in document S/10974.

61. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translationfrom Russian):Mr. President,the USSRdeiegation, speakingin explanation of vote, would first like to
point out the positive fact that the sponsorsof the draft
resolution submitted for the consideration of the Security
Council are eight non-alignedcountries-eight who express
the unanimouswill and demandsof the peoplesof Africa,
Asia, Latin America and socialistEurope with regard to one
of the most critical issuesin international relations, the
Middle Eastproblem.

54. Before we proceed to the vote on that draft resolution, I shallcall on those representativeswho wish to speak
in explanation of vote before the voting.
55. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation jbom
French): My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by eight sponsorsand contained in
document S/10974. This text, which is the result of
numerousconsultations, doesin fact, we believe, meet the
basicneedswhich, in the matter of the Middle East, should
be the primary concern of our Council. It also meetsthe
concerns expressedby the Foreign Minister of Egypt on
behalf of his Government, concerns which attest to his

62. The very fact that the sponsorshipis so broadly
based-the sponsorsof the draft resolution represent a
majority of the membersof the Council, 8 out of 15, and
an overwhelming majority of the non-permanent members
of the Security Council, 8 out of IO-is, on the one hand,
6

evidence of the deep concern of the peoples of the world at
the continuing explosive situation in the Middle East, which
threatens peace and security throughout the world, and, on
the other, a reflection of the serious and determined efforts
of the international community to achieve a just and lasting
peace in this region.
63. The USSR delegation notes with particular pleasure
that the position of the non-aligned countries, or, as they
are sometimes called in United Nations circles, the third
world countries, coincides almost entirely with the position
of the Soviet Union and the other countries of the socialist
community. We are also deeply convinced that the sponsors
of tllis draft, like ourselves, the Soviet repFesentatives,
would like the Security Council to adopt a stronger draft
resolution on the matter under discussion than that which
they have submitted.
64. The sponsors of the draft resolution have taken into
account the desire and the demands of the overwhelming
majority of the members of the Council and of other States
Melnbers of the United Nations as expressed in their official
statements during the Council’s discussion in June of the
question of the situation in the Middle East. The draft also
reflects
a number of the fundamental provisions and
principles
of the United Nations Charter and of the
well-known
IJnited Nations resolutions on the Middle East.
65. The Soviet delegation is gratified to note that the draft
resolution contains basic provisions relating to the existing
Ullitcd Nations machinery for a political settlement in the
Middle East. lt reaffirms resolution 242 (l967), which is
the basis for a Middle East settlement. The draft reflects
firm support for the mission of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General
and for his well-known aidem&noire of 8 February 1971 as being fully in keeping with
resolution
242 (1967) on all matters, including the crucial
question
of the withdrawal of Israeli forces from all the
occupied Arab territories. The USSR delegationhasalready
pointed out that during consultationson the Middle East
among four permanent membersof the Security Council,
all four participants in those consultationsofficially and
unreservedly supported this initiative of Ambassador
Jarring and his aide-mCmoire.They all recognized and
stated officially that this initiative of AmbassadorJarring
was in full accord with his mandate under resolution
242 (1947). We shouldlike to hope that they all still adhere
to that position with regard to the aide-memoire,despite
the fact that the document is not to the aggressor’s
liking.
66. At yesterday’s meeting of the Security Council,
quotations were madefrom a recent interview of Mr. Dayan
about his dissatisfaction with the United Nations.But ~110
is most dissatisfied with it? The history of the discussion
of
the Middle East question in the United Nations and the
Council’s repeated condemnationof Israel asthe aggressor,
as we11 as the discussionof questionsrelating to decolonization, show that those who are dissatisfiedwith the United
Nations are the aggressors,
who do not wish to leavethe
territories
they have seized, and the imperialists and
colonialist racists, who refuse to grant the colonialPeoples
they oppress freedom and independencein implementation
of United Nations resolutions. It is this very dissatisfaction

and hatred for the United Nations which bring together
such countries as aggressive
Israel and racist South Africa.
67. The Soviet delegation fully supports the basic idea
behind the draft, which is the need to maintain and make
active use of the existing United Nations machinery to
achievea peaceful settlementin the Middle East.
68. During the debate, the aggressorand someof his
protectors have referred constantly to talks. But, when
doing so, they remain silent about just what are the
conditions on which a peacefulpolitical settlementcan and
shouldbe reachedin the Middle East-with the assistance
of
and through the United Nations: shouldit be on conditions
imposedby the aggressorupon the victims of aggression
or
on the basisof the universally recognizedprinciple of the
inadmissibility of the acquisitionof territory by force or
war and the mandatory withdrawal of all Israeliforcesfrom
all the occupied Arab territories, a principle repeatedly
affirmed by the United Nations,conferencesof non-aligned
countries and the recent anniversary meeting of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Governments of the
membersof the Organizationof African Unity? Unlessthis
fundamental principle is recognized, and as long as the
aggressorstubbornly refusesto get out of the landswhich
have belonged from time immemorial to the victims of
aggression,a Middle East settlement is unthinkable and,
therel‘ore, impossible.
69. Talks on the conditions proposed by the aggressor,
whose occupation forces are almost at the walls of the
capitals of the States which are victims of the aggression,
would be like the talks betweenthe Soviet Union and Hitler
when his forces, which hadoccupied a considerableportion
of the European part of the USSR, stood at the gatesof
Moscow. And in the present situation in the Middle East,
no referencesand appealsto the long history of the Jewish
people over many thousandsof years can either justify or
pardon the seizure and annexation by Israel of lands
belonging to others. It is a most repulsivespectacleto see
someoneuse the pretext of pastsufferingsin an attempt to
cover up and justify his own present misdeeds
which cause
suffering to others who are not responsiblefor thosepast
sufferings.
70. The USSR delegationalso agreeswith the provision in
the eight-Power draft resolution to the effect that a just
peacein the Middle East can be achievedonly on the basis
of respect for national sovereignty,territorial integrity, the
rights of all States in the area and for the lawful rights and
aspirationsof the Arab peopleof Palestine.
71. The sponsorsof the draft resolution alsoindicateto a
certain degree the State which bears the major responsibility for the continuation of the dangeroussituation in the
Middle East, namely, Israel,which hasunleashedaggression
against three Arab StatesMembersof the United Nations,
which continues its occupationof thosecountries’territory
in defiance of the wishesof the peoplesof the entire world,
and which challengesthe United Nations and world public
opinion by continuing to sabotage and block a peaceful
political settlement of the Middle East question. At the
sametime, we are obligedto point out that, asthe sponsors
themselvesadmit, this draft representsa compromiseand

tions. Accordingly: the lJSSRdelegationsupportsthe draft
resolution of the non-alignedcountries and will vote in
favour of it.

thus it must be said quite frankly that someparts of it are
not only the minimum that could be expected but are even
too weak. In particular, it doesnot reflect fully enoughthe
principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by war or force, whirh has been recognizedand
affirmed by the United Nations and was supported during
the June discussionby all membersof the Security Council,
as well as by all the Arab, African, Asian and Latin
American Stateswhich participated in the discussion,with,
of course, the exception of Israel. This is a serious
shortcoming in the draft resolution. However, it shouldbe
pointed out in this regard that at the sametime it does
firmly and specifically stressthe principle of respectfor the
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of all Statesin
tlie Middle East.

77. Welistenedwith great attention to the brilliant speech
by the Minister for ForeignAffairs of the Arab Republicof
Egypt, Mr. El-Zayyat, which was an irrefutable accusation
against Israel’s aggressive and a.dventuristic policy in
defence of the causeof the Arab peoples.WearegratcI’uulto
him for the high esteemhe expreTsadof the friendship and
brotherly relations between the Soviet Union and its
peoples and the Egyptian people alld the peoplesof other
Arab countries.
78. In view of this, the Soviet delegationwould like once
again to declareand emphasizethat the Soviet Union will
continue consistentlyand firmly to pursueits fundamental
policy of all-round support for the just causeof the Arab
peoplesand their struggleto eliminate the consequences
of
Israeli imperialistic aggressionand establish a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East on the basis of the
well-known decisionsof the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

72. The USSR delegation once againreaffirms its position
that the basisfor a just solution of the Middle Eastquestion
is the withdrawal of Israeli forces from all the occupied
Arab territories. For this reason, it would prefer to see
included in the draft, resolution a paragraphconcerningthe
need for the immediate, unconditional and complete
withdrawal of all Israeli forces from all the occupied Arab
territories. At the sametime, it notes that the provision in
the draft resolution concerning AmbassadorJarring’s aidem&no&e compensatesfor this shortcoming.

79. Mr. SEN (India): Yesterday when I introduced the
draft resolution on behalf of the eight sponsorsI deliberately did not give theIndian views on it, which are in any
event fully explained in my statementof 14 June[I 726th
meet&].

73. The Soviet delegationis gratified to note that the draft
resolution includes a paragraph providing for a just and
peaceful settlement in the Middle East on the basisof
respect for national sovereignty, territorial integrity, the
rights of all States in the area and for the rights and
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people. These
principles for a Middle East settlement were confirmed in
,the Soviet-United Statescommuniqu6 issuedin connexion
with the visit of the General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
Mr. L. I. Brezhnev, to the United States. Inter da, the
communiquCstressedthat a settlement in the Middle East:
“ . . * should be in accordance with the interests of all
States in the area, be consistent with their independence
and sovereignty and should take into due account the
legitimate interests of the Palestinian people.” [see
S/l 0964.]

80. I shouldlike, however, briefly to give my delegation’s
views before the vote on the draft resolutionbefore us and
also to meet someof the argumentsvoiced yesterday and
today. 1 have the highesrrespect for any man who fights
well for his country in the field or in the Council, whatcvcr
be the quality of his armour or of his arguments.This dots
not absolve us who are not directly involved or whose
specific national interests are not affected from applying
the Charter and consideringthe facts asobjectively aswe
can.
81. The preambularpart of the draft resolution says,inter
alia:
“Emphasizi/zgj&her that all Membersof the United
Nations are committed to respectthe resolutionsof the
Security Council in accordancewith the provisionsof the
Charter”.

74. We considerthat the draft resolution doesnot contain
sufficiently strong criticism or condemnation of Israel’s
responsibility as the aggressoragainst three Arab States
Members of the United Nations or of’ its responsibility for
the continuation of the present dangeroussituation in the
Middle East and the blocking of a Middle East settlement.

This text wastaken from an alternative draft and is much
weaker than a referenceto Article 25 of the Charter, but in
a spirit of compromisewe acceptedit.

75. However, in determining its attitude to the draft
resolution under discussion,the I JSSKdelegation bearsin
mind the position of the non-aligned countries which are
membersof the Security Council and have sponsoredthis
draft and also the positive attitude towards the draft of the
delegationsof Egypt andJordan,

82. Secondly, we reaffirm resolution 242 (1967) and we
are aware that that resolutionhas not madethe necessary
progress, for, unexpectedly, AmbassadorJarring faced
insurmountable difficulty in obtaining acceptanceof his
aide-m6moircof 8 February 1971. It is our hope that this
draft resolutionwill help removethis difficulty.

?6. In the light of this, the USSR delegation views the
draft resolution as a definite positive step towards the
achievementof a peacefulpolitical settlement in the Middle
East and the curbing of the aggressor’simperialist aspira-

83. Alternatively, the threat that Israel will withdraw its
acceptance of resolution 242 (1967) should the present
draft resolution be acceptedwill not in our view be a
welcome developmenteither for Israel’sinterestsor in the
8

-

interest of the Council’s efforts for a peaceful solution.
None the less, speaking to the parties, we perceive that
there are elements on both sides who wish to avoid their
obIigations under resolution 242 (1967) so that they can
revert to the situation before the 1967 conflict. Similarly,
continued refusalby Israel to accept AmbassadorJarring’s
aide-m&moire of 8 February 197I may enable Egypt to
withdraw its initial acceptanceof theseproposals.While
Egypt may legitimately consider itself free to take this
action, we believethat such a developmentwill obligethe
Council, the Secretary-Generaland his Special Representative to start all over againand will therefore meangoing
back even on the smallprogresswe have made,
84. It is becauseof those two considerationsthat we have
indicated thal resolution 242 (1967) still provides a valid
basis for a solution, and that AmbassadorJarring’s aidernemoire shouldbe the point of resumption.

timing have beenplanned,and of how at one stagethis visit
was cited as a reason for the Council to delay its
consideration of this problem. We wish the SecretaryGenerala successful
trip.
88. We have been told that this draft resolutionwill be
vetoed. This is a privilege of all permanentmembers.But 1
would ask the Council to reflect on whether decisions
regardingthesedistant wars,takenunilaterally andwithout
adequate attention to the views of the countriesof the
conflict area, as distinct from the parties,have always
produced the bestresults.The responsibilitylieswith all of
usand indeedWCareall awareof it.
89. Finally, before I conclude,I shouldlike to thank the
representativeof Israelfor the particularnotice he took of
my country in his statement yesterday. He paid many
compliments to India. Most of them are, however, undeserved.He paid complimentsto usfor our fidelity to our
clients. This is, of course,admirable,except that clientsdo
not exist, and Indian foreign relationsarenot conductedon
the basis of a patron-client equation, as is done in some
other bilateral relations.We are friendly, or at leastwishto
be friendly, to all countries,includingIsrael.But friendship
involves a two-way traffic and requiresfrom all Membersof
the United Nations adherenceto the Charterin its totality.

85. As regardswithdrawal of the Israeli forces from the
occupied lands, we makeno distinction amongthe types of
territories captured and occupied. Israel’swithdrawal is to
take place from the lands of the three Member States as
well as from C&a. In this respect we abide by our
statement in 1967 that suchadjustmentsasmay be made
by agreement betweensovereignStateswould of coursebe
acceptable, provided that suchagreements
are reachedafter
the troops have been withdrawn, provided that there is no
coercion, and provided also that they relate to minor
adjustments or insignificant changesor do not reflect the
weight of conquestor victory or military su,periority.

90. This should also explain why Israel’s diplomatic
recognition has not been as widespreadas it could have
been, either among the membersof the Council or the
Membersof the GeneralAssemblyasa whole-a grievance
to which Israel constantly refers.

86. Now we come to the need for negotiationsbetween
the parties. I think we are all agreed that eventually
negotiations will take place, but at the momentconditions
simply do not exist for opening such negotiations.The
Ambassador of Tunisiahasdescribedthe presentconditions
as ilnpossible, and it is becauseof this that we areaskingin
our draft resolution that theseconditionsbe brought about.
As stated in operative paragraph7 of the draft resolution,
the Secretary-General and his Special Representativeare
“to resume and to pursue their efforts to promote a just
and peaceful solution”. When we say “resume” we mean
exactly what we say-to resume at the point where
Atnbassndor Jarring left off and within the framework of
resahltion 242 (1967). Ilowever, we totally reject any claim
that either resolution 242 (1967) or the cease-fireagrecmerit in any way givestolerance,much lessauthority, direct
or indirect, tacit or implicit or explicit, for Israeliforcesto
continue to occupy Arab territories.

91. AmbassadorTekoah wonderedwhy our friendshipfor
Egypt is not usedto better purposes.In my statementof 14
June I explained why India, asa friend of Egypt, could not
advisea course of action as suggested
by Israel.I should
againdraw the attention of the delegationof Israelto that
statement, in which I askedfor a declarationfrom Israel
accepting the principle of the non-admissibilityof the
acquisition of territory by force-but no suchdeclaration
wasforthcoming.
92. Israel also said the Council had put itself into the
handsof such countriesasIndia and Yugoslavia.I havefar
too great a respectfo; truth and for the integrity of the
other membersof the Council to acceptthis compliment.
Out of eight sponsorsof the draft resolution,only India
and Yugoslavia were mentioned.This doesnot surpriseus,
asany wider referencewould have beeninconsistentwith
the recent practice of the Israeli delegationnot to bc
critical of the Africans after the resolutionof the Organization of African Unity was adoptedabout two monthsago.
But of course I know to my cost that instructionsto
ambassadorsare often lessflexible than thoseto cabinet
ministers, and presumablythat is why Defence Minister
Moshe Dayan wasable to say that oneof the defectsof the
United Nations is that it is full of Communists,
Arabs and
Africans.

87. We are glad that the Secretary-Generalwill shortly be
visiting the countries of the areaand that he will have an
opportunity
to speak to their leadersand make his own
assessment. For this purpose he does not riced any
resolution from the Council. He has already visited many
other Member States, including my own, and he will no
doubt visit many others. In thesecircumstances,to relate
the Secretary-General’s visit to the draft resolution is, in
our view, both irrelevant and undesirable.After hisvisit to
the area, he and his Special Representativewill be better
able to contribute to each other’s thinking and thus to
make greater headway. I do not wish to say much on this
albject, for we are all awarehow this intendedvisit andits

93. Lastly, Ihe Israeli representativewondered if the
Indian impact on the United Nationsis due to our record
for upholding international peaceand security. 1 do not
believe that our impact is due to that at all. But if it is,
9

firmly maintains that a Security Council resolution must
strongly condemn the Israeli Zionists for their prolonged
aggression against the Palestinian people and other Arab
countries and peoples: it must ask the Israeli authorities
immediately to withdraw from the Egyptian, Syrian and all
the other Arab territories they have occupied; it must call
for the restoration of the Palestinian people’s national
rights; it must call upon all Governments and peoples to
give firm support to the Arab peoples and the Palestinian
people in their just struggle to resist aggression, recover
their lost territories and restore their national rights.

there is nothing to prevent the Israelis from following
Indian ways and to persuade itself and its friends to do
likewise. I can assure them all that they will find me ever
ready to give whatever help I can to make progress in that
process.
94. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation fiorn Spanish):
My delegation is honoured to see you, Sir Colin Crowe,
presiding over these historic meetings of the Council. Your
wisdom and your kindly manner have guaranteed a proper
atmosphere for the very delicate deliberations that are now
drawing to a close.

100. The Chinese delegation has consistently held that the
Middle East question is, in essence, a question of aggression
versus anti-aggression, a question of the Palestinian and
other Arab peoples striving for national independence and
their national rights and a question of opposing the
super-Powers’ interference and contention for spheres of
influence in the Middle East.

9.5’. At the 1726th meeting, on 14 June 1973, the
Government of Panama made known its views regarding
how the complex and difficult situation obtaining in the
Middle East might be resolved.
96. At this time we wish only to add that we have
sponsored, together with the delegations of Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Kenya, Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia, the
draft resolution contained in document S/10974, which
will doubtless receive the support of the great majority of
members of the Council. This is our view because it seems
to us that the draft resolution contains a certain number of
constructive elements on which the majority of members of
the Council has already agreed. We feel that if those
elements are supported and approved by the Council,
constructive steps will have been taken towards the
achievement of peace in the Middle East,

101. In view of the fact that the present draft resolution
has failed to reflect fully the principles of the United
Nations Charter and the aforesaid position of the Chinese
Government, the Chinese delegation has decided not to
participate in the voting on that draft resolution.
102. The Chinese delegation reaffirms that the Chinese
people will, as always, stand together with the Arab peoples
and the Palestinian people and firmly support them in their
just struggle to resist aggression, safeguard national indepcndence and territorial integrity and restore their national
rights. The Chinese delegation is deeply convinced that,
persevering in unity and struggle, the Arab peoples and the
Palestinian people who have been tempered through antiimperialist struggles will certainly overcome the difficulties
on their road of advance and finally realize their national
aspirations.

97. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution sponsored by Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia and
contained in document S/l 0974.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Australia, Austria, France, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia.

103. Mr. MADDY (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
In becoming a sponsor of the draft resolution in favour of
which my delegation has just voted, we wished once again
to express our total solidarity with the Arab peoples and
the Palestinians whose territories are illegally occupied by
the forces of the military State of Israel. Apart from this
manifestation of solidarity, we considered that the draft
submitted for the consideration of the Council today could
only represent a strict minimum that would open the way
to progress towards a fair solution of the distressing
problem of the Middle East, where the rights of peoples are
denied and flouted by a Member of our Organization-a
country which has, however, subscribed to the principles of
and respect for the Charter and which, moreover, owes its
birth to the United Nations, upon the effectiveness of
which it is casting doubt. For our part, we are firmly
convinced tl>at our Organization remains the hope of all
peoples-strong or weak, rich or poor.

Against: United States of America.
The result of the vote was 13 in favour, I against.
T&e draft resolution was not adopted, the negative vote
being that of a permunent member of the Council.
One member (CT&ta) did not participate in the voting.
98, The PRESIDENT: I shall now call upon members of
the Council wishing to explain their vote after the vote.
99. Mr. HUANG
Hua (China) (interpretation
from
Qzinese): The Chinese delegation has seriously studied the
draft resolution on the Middle East question. At the 1726th
meeting of the Security Council, on 14 June, the Chinese
delegation clearly pointed out that when the Middle East
situation was being reviewed in its totality the Council
should truly act upon the principles of the Charter, draw a
clear distinction between the right and the wrong, uphold
justice and speak up for the right. The Chinese delegation

104. It was with great regret and disappointment that we
noted the negative vote of the United States delegation, a
vote which not only renders even more remote the chance
of peace in the Middle East but reinforces the determination of the peoples of the occupied territories to
continue their liberation struggle. We ask the allies of Israel
to search their consciences more profoundly so as to bring
10

peace to that part of the world. We remind them that every
subjugated people will continue to struggle by all possible
means until final victory. That is inexorable.

elements for a settlement of the Middle East problem. By
the same token, it is no less than reasonable that the
Council, while reaffirming the principles contained in
resolution 242 (1967) nearly six years after its adoption,
should wish to review and comment on the impact of that
resolution in the light of the demonstrably insignificant
progress achieved in those six years.

10.5. Sir Laurence MclNTYKE (Australia): Mr. President,
let me first, of all join my colleagues in expressing our
pleasure over this belated opportunity of conducting our
business under your presidency, Of course, this gives me
special pleasure as a colleague and friend of some 30 years’
standing. We should all like to think, or at least to hope,
that the sense of gratification with the power of the gavel
which you have so far been denied in your long and highly
distinguished service to your Government and country in
the United Nations and elsewhere may offer cumpcnsation
for being temporarily separated from the charms of rural
Gloucestershire.

110. I am confident that there is no member of this
Council who has found the text altogether satisfactory
from his or his Government’s point of view. It may be a
slightly blurred reflection of an intensive exchange of views,
but it is all that could be obtained, and that is what the
United Nations is all about. This is the only way the United
Nations, and with it this Council, can operate. And that is
why, in order to support a continuing and active effort by
the United Nations in the Middle East, we decided to vote
in favour of that text.

106. As 1 have made clear on earlier occasions in this
Council, the Government and people of Australia have
enjoyed and hope to continue to enjoy the most friendly
relations with Israel and with Egypt and its Arab neighbours alike. But, of course, that does not mean that we can
or would wish to close our eyes to their long-standing and
bitter dispute, painful as it is to us. We are fully alive to all
its inherent dangers, to its deplorable consequences for the
whole of the Middle East and to the tensions it has created
around the world. We can no more dissociate ourselves
from it than can the rest of the international community,
which can only mean that we must continue to support the
efforts of the United Nations, and particularly the role of
this Council, in helping to bring this intolerable situation to
an end through a just and lasting peace that would ensure
tile right of all States in the area to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries.

111. In view of the fact that the draft resolution has not
been adopted because of the negative vote of a permanent
member, my delegation would still greatly hope that the
threefold message contained in its operative paragraphs 7 to
9 can be accepted and acted upon by the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, by the Council as a whole
and by all the parties concerned, so that the SecretaryGeneral can carry out his proposed visit to the Middle East
and lend his personal efforts to the search for a just and
lasting peace.
112. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): Mr. President, before
explajning the vote of my delegation, I should like to
express the satisfaction and indeed the delight of my
delegation that this last and dramatic phase of our debate
has taken place under your guidance. Wise leadership is an
epithet often applied to the context of the presidency of
this Council. I feel, on my part, that there have been few
occasions on which this epithet has been applied with more
justification than in the case of the presidency of Sir Colin
Crowe.

107. That brings me to draft resolution S/10974, on
which the Council has just voted. In the view of my
delegation, it is by no means an ideal text. It is lacking in
balance and the Australian Government had a good deal of
hesitation in authorizing us to vote in favour of it. For one
thing, it makes no specific mention of the ultimate
necessity
for negotiations between the parties directly
concerned. My delegation is well aware of the difficulties
that stand in the way. But whatever independent role the
Council can play in helping them towards a settlement,
both sides must surely recognize that neither of them
would be willing to accept a solution imposed from outside;
that only ,thcy themselves, whether in the short or long run,
can reach a mutually acceptable settlement; and that this
can come about only through some process of negotiation,
whether direct or indirect.

113. The Council has just voted on a draft resolution
submitted by eight of its members with a view to translate
the efforts of this Council on the problem of the Middle
East since the beginning of June into meaningful action.
This is the occasion for my delegation to restate the spirit
and the attitude in which it has approached this debate and
in which it has cast its vote. When I had the first
opportunity to address this Council on the problem of the
Middle East on 14 June 1973 [I 725th meeting], I made it
clear that our approach was based on friendship and respect
for the peoples and nations of the Middle East, to which
my country feels bound by past and present history and a
wide variety of human, cultural, economic and political
links.

108. Again, while WC can understand very well the deep
concern of Egypt and its Arab neighbours over the present
and future welfare and status of the Palestinians, we see
~(lme complex problems ahead that suggest to us that it
might have been preferable at this stage to refer to the
Palestinian refugees, or simply to the refugees, as in
resolution 242 (1967).

114. It is therefore not in a spirit of narrow partisanship
that we have taken part in the work of the Council over the
past weeks and that we have cast our vote, but because my
country shares the feelings of concern so often and SO
emphatically expressed by the international community at
the tragic conflict besetting that region.

109. The positive features of the text, as seen by my
delegation, include the unqualified reaffirmation ill the
prealnble of resolution 242 (1967), which the Australian
Government continues to regard as containing the essential

115. Whatever judgement we may bring to the problem of
the Middle East can only be the expression of the search for
1

anomalous

an independent, objective and impartial eVaiUatiOn
Of
international problems to which my country is committed
by the very nature of its international status.

and

most

dangerous

011~.

The

CJld

Of

lllilitac

occupation must mean, however, the reaIizatiur1 of &I ahe
other goals set out so clearly in paragl’apI% 1 of reSJIur&‘~
242 (1967), namely:

I 14. As the members of the Council know, my delegation
has developed a number of procedural ideas to break the
existing deadlock without at this stage going into the
substance of the matter. We still believe that such an
approach would have been in the interer? of the parties
concerned and in lint with the prevailing spirit of dCtente in
the warId. We have thus not found it easy to come to a
decision concerning the draft resolution on which the
Council has just voted. What our vote has expressed, above
all, is our firm attachment to the principles contained in the
widely recognized basis for the solution of the Middle East
conflict, namely, resolution 242 (1967).

“Termj~~atjo~]

of

al]

cla.irrls

or

StilteS

Of bCl~&$r~~~~~

~~~~

respect fir and acknowledgemet~t
of the s~~vcreiW~$,
territorial integrity and political iIld~?~lCIld~~~~~
of
*v&V
State iI1 the area and their right t0 Iive ifI peace % itiign
secure and recognized boundaries free from threats w
acts of force”.
121. It was witI1 those considerations in nlind and with
that view that we gave support to the mairi principles Of’ tB$e
draft resolution and its search for peace.
122. The Council, despite many weeks of hard work hY
its mem,bers, has not been able to reach a decision. It is nor
our intention at this stage-as, indeed, it WBS 110t (X~F
intention at any previous stage--of the debate to nttrilnslc
blame and dispense judgement. We feel there k 01llY cms:
hope that we can now express: the hope
flatit. n~t~~il~~=
standing the fact that at this point the Co~rlcil c~t]Id r~$qZ
reach agreement on the draft resolution,
the SCWC~ ~SV
peace will continue and no avenue will be left u1~~plt~r~~8
to bring the parties closer to an agreement and to ntt:lill s
peaceful settlement. All &forts towards this gt)vl de~~r-l;@,
today more than at any time befc>rc, our ftill and Ir>~:~li
support.

117. Our vote has expressed, furthermore, our equally
firm attachment to the principle of a peaceful solution of
the conflict, making available all peaceful means which the
Charter of the United Nations provides. It is the thrust of
the draft resolljtion in affirming those principles and in
mobilizing such peaceful means as are specifically provided
in resolution 242 (1967) that has had a decisive influence
on our attitude towards it.
118. Since it became a Member of the Lmitecl Nations,
Austria has consistently given its support to the role and
functions of the high office of the SecretaryGeneral of the
United Nations. In a similar vein, Austria has supported the
tireless efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to promote agreement and assist efforts to
achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement. Austria, therefore, could not fail to lend support to initiate a new United
Nations effort based on the longstanding experience of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative and on the high
moral power of the office of the Secretary-General. In
expressing this support, we also have a duty, however, to
state clearly our understanding of other parts of the draft
resolution. Austria has never been insensitive to the plight
of the Palestinian people, in the same manner in which my
country has always felt a moral obligation when confronting the problem of the large refugee populations which
were such a frequent phenomenon of post-war European
history.

123. Mr. SCALI (United States of America):
Mr, t’rc,“xf=
dent, I wish to express my warm apprccintic~n liar lit?
impartial, considerate way in which you have I>rcsidcd n\;~8
this Council during the past few difficult days. I nlst~ wi&
to express my admiration for your patience, your taut :II~~R
the great efforts you have made to achieve u lmrnionir*lls
result.
124. The history of the Middle E&t problcnl is a histtrrb
Of Iost opportunities. Today’s action by tile Ctrurw~l
represents another opportunity
In&cd.
My Ilelcgat ilxgn
profoundly regrets that the Council has not :lchievcrl ;a
result that would give impetus to realistic effL,rts ttr wt4r”h.
towards peace and stability in the Middle East. Tltu Lfnit~4
States Government is committed witliout
qualificatioll
fi*
continue such efforts.

119. It is a measure of the legitimate attention of the
international community to the inaisputable existence of
this problem that many important international documents
have confirmed the need for its just settlement which must
bc a part of any solution of the Middle East conflict. The
most important of those documents is resolution
242 (1967); another is the recent communiquC issued at the
conclusion of the talks between President Nixon and
General-Secretary Brezhnev, which reaffirms that any
settlement “should take into due account the legitimate
interests of the Palestinian people” /see S/10964/. Our
understanding of the relevant provisions of the draft
resolution is therefore based on the language and spirit of
resolution 242 (1967).

125. In my statement of I4 .Iune hefore this Ct>iln~i~ I
said:
“MY Government views this meeting of the Council ~5 3
and an opportunity. It is a challcllgr: to ~ILX~I
wmnsibty with one of the most , . . c:ifficLlIt . . . prtr6+
Iems facing the world community. , , . It is ~lrl r,pi~r’rrti
tunity to createcircumstancesin which, at 1011~last, nrai3
and Israeli might engage in a genuine rlcgclti;rliI?p
process.”[I 726th meeting,para.2.j
ctlallenge

Unhappily, the Council did not meet the CI~~IIC~~~~; it lost
the opportunity.

120. We have also made it clear that we consider a
situation characterized by tension, military occupation and
a persistent threat of the outbreak of hostilities an

p;lrtis;jlr
126. The draft resolution before US was tligtlly
and unbalanced. Its adoption COUI~
only Ilavc iIlldC!d
another obstacle to getting serious negotiatiolls stnrtcl~
12

between the parties. It would have contributed another
impractical and cosmetic result invoking the unreal rather
than the real world. It is our hope that one day the choice
will be made to face up to the hard reality that the job of
peace in the area-the procedures and i,ts contents-must be
assumed by the parties themselves in an unprejudiced way.
1
b
d:’
!

131. To our regret, these proposals did not evoke the
response, the careful consideration we believed they
merited. Some argued that the proposals came too late. I
understand what that implies about tactical factors in the
processes of the Security Council. But, I submit that, if
there is the will, it is never too late to work for peaceand
security. It is not too late now, andmy delegationbelieves
that, while this debate is ending, our responsibilityto
searchfor solutionsto the Middle East problemcontinues.

127. Unhappily, the draft resolution put to the ,votc
toclay, instead of focusing on possibilities for efforts
towards
agreement between the parties and trying to
encourage such efforts, concerned itself with moral judgcments about the past. The past is too much with us. We
have been looking backward to grievances rather than
forward to solutions. To put it most succinctly, if this draft
resolution
had been adopted, it would have changed
fundamentally, it would have overturned Security Council
resolution
242 (1967). It would, in other words, have
undern;ined the one agreed basis on which a settlement in
the Middle East could be constructed. That is why my
Government Felt compelled to veto the draft resolution.
128. As membersof the Council are aware,my delegation
did its utmost to avoid this result. We presentedt0 the
sponsors a seriesof reasonableand carefully thought-out
amendments. Had they been accepted,the Council would
have taken a modest step forward rather than a confused
ste!) backward. Our suggestedamendmentsare known to
the members of the Council and I neednot review them in
detail here. One, however, hearsspecialemphasis
becauseit
goes to the Iteart of the distortion which the draft
resolution voted on today would have perpetratedif it had
been accepted.
129. Operative paragraph2 of that draft resolutiontreats
in isolation the Israelipresencein territories occupiedin the
1967 conflict. It speaksof “the” territories, ignoring the
significance--recognizcd when resolution 242 (15167)was
adopted-of the omissionof this definite article, the word
“tile”, from the text of resolution 242 (1967). And it takes
no notice of the otller fundamental and inseparable
elements of that resolution, namely: th:lt the endingof the
occupation must be in the context of peacebetween the
parties; that it must be in the context of the right of all
States in the area to live within secureand recognized
boilndaries; and that it must be on the basisof agreement
between the parties. Operative parugraph2 bearsno relationship to the provisions and principles of resnlution
242 (1967). It would constitute an entirely different
resolution, contrary to the entire concept of resolution
242 (1967). Our proposedamendmcnl.-oneof severalwe
offered--read asfollows:

132. The purpose of our amendments
was to bring the
eight-Powerdraft resolutioninto somemeasureof conformity with the essential provisions of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967”, which remainsthe only agreed-1
repeat: agreed-basisfor a peaceful solution. The draft
resolution voted on today would havedoneirrevocableand
permanent damage to that landmark resolution of this
Council-a resolution which adrnittedly is interpreted differently by the two sidesandwhoseconstructiveambiguity
can be resolvedonly in the caldronof negotiationsbetween
the parties,not by fiat of this Councilor a groupof outside
Powers.
133. Casting a veto is never easy. It is a most serious
decision-oneWC.do not take lightly. However,the essence
of statesmanship
is to take a longerview, to perseverein the
tougll task of peacemaking,to find waystoward a lasting
peace, and not to seekto scorepolitical debatingpoints
which haveno lastingvalue.
134. All need not be lost. We note that the SecretaryGeneralhas the agreementof the parties to consult with
them in the area. He has the continued support of the
United States f0r this renewedeffort; and, despiteIhe
differencesrevealedin our deliberationshere today, there
are no differenceson tllis point. I believewe a!1agreewith
the Secretary-General’sstated intention to engagehimself
in the pursuit of peacein the Middle East.He needsno new
mandate. Security Council resolution242 (1967) remains
the basicframework.
135. Allow me to make one more generalobservation
about the approachembodiedin the draft resolutionwe
have today rejected. I would earnestlyurgethosewho share
my delegation’sprofouild desirefor a stableMiddle Eastto
ponder the lessonof history-that step-by-stepdiplomacy
most often leadsin an orderly way to important results.
The effort to get acrossa broadchasmof differencein one
leap involvesthe risk of fallingall the way to the bottom of
the chasm.

136. In closing, 1 would like to commenton allegations
about the ineffectivenessof the Security Counciland the
United Nations made by certain speakersin this chamber
“Dee& iq-rets the failure to reacll agreementon ajust
arlcl lasting peace, including Israeli withdrawal from
yesterday. I do not concur for a moment with these
tcrritnries occupied in the 1967 conflict and secureand counselsof despair.It is true that we have not yet found
recognizcd boundaries”.
the institutional antidote to manyof the ills of mankind.I,
too, am deeply disappointedby the outcomeof thisdebate.
130. If accepted, our proposed amendmentwodd
have In past years of observingthe United NationsI have been
preserved the essence and balance of resolution disappointedmany times, But there is also a record 0f
242 (1967)-agreement, peace,withdrawal, and secureand IJnitcd Nations successes
on important issues.My Govern,.
recognized bounda,ries-..which,I submit, remainthe 0111~ ment believesthat through sincere,patient and determined
efforts by its Membersthe United Nations,and in particular
hope if ultimately there is to be a just and lastingpeacein
the Secul,ity Council, can becomem0re effective, can deal
the Middle East.
13

successfully with the complex and difficult problems that
face us. Our vote today was a carefully considered action
calculated to move the United Nations away from empty
judgements on the past and toward concrete, positive
results in the real world. It is only through such positive
results that we can restore the confidence of those who
doubt the United Nations-the institution which, in our
view, still embodies some of the noblest aspirations of
mankind.

constituted the quid pro quo that might have allowed the
consulthtion procedure to continue.
142. This draft also contains the basic concept that a just
and peaceful solution can be achieved only on the basis of
respect for the national sovereignty, territorial integrity and
rights of all States of the region, as well as the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinians. This again is in keeping wit11
the statement I made in the Council that the key to
security in the Middle East lies in recognition of the State
of Israel, the withdrawal by that nation of its forces from
occupied territories and the solution of the Palestine
problem. The declaration that in the territory they occupy
there should be no changes that might affect the achievement of a final settlement or might adversely affect the
fundamental rights of the inhabitants is only the statement
of something that flows logically from the principle of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, a
principle which all members of the Council have stated and
reaffirmed in the course of the June debate.

137. Mr. PEREZ DE CUELLAR (Peru) (interpretation
porn Spanish]: Mr. President; at the very outset may I
express my happiness at seeing you preside over our debates
with your well-known competence. However, that pleasure
is somewhat tinted with sadness at the knowledge of your
approaching departure from the United Nations. You are
leaving on the United Nations an indelible mark of
distinction, experience and ability.
138. My delegation sponsored and voted in favour of the
draft resolution in document S/10974: first of all, because
we considered that it stood as a true contribution to
solution of the Middle East problem and, secondly, because
it coincided with the position that my own delegation
stated to the Council in the course of the general debate six
weeks ago (1725th meeting].

143. Furthermore, the request to the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative to resume and continue their
efforts and the statement of the support to be given them
also fully coincide with the declaration of my delegation
that there is an urgent need to resume and reactivate the
diplomatic machinery of the United Nations.

139. Thus my delegation fully adheres to the reaffirmation of the validity of resolution 242 (1967) which
appeared in the preamble to the draft resolution, since we
have always considered that resolution to be the juridical
framework for a just solution of this problem, containing as
it does the necessary elements for its achievement, The
responsibility of the parties and of the Organization is to
ensure the effective implementation of that resolution,
without letting themselves be distracted by questions of
semantics or of intentions, since the golden rule in the
interpretation of juridical instruments is that nothing in
them can oppose the general principles of law and
jurisprudence, which in this case is the Charter of the
United Nations.

144. My delegation is convinced that the document that
we voted upon, despite the fate meted out to it, will be a
new standard and a new step in the peaceful solution to the
question of the Middle East.
145. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): It is the firm belief of
my delegation that the solution to the Middle East situation
lies in honest vindication, affirmation and implementation
of the formulas and principles contained in Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). My, delegation voted for
draft resolution S/10974, which has just been vetoed,
because we believe that that draft very carefully reflects the
spirit and principles of resolution 242 (1967).
146. Specifically, we voted for the draft in order to
register our complete rejection of occupation of the
territories of other States by force. Secondly, we voted for
the draft in order to register our support for the rights of
the Palestinian people. Lastly, we voted for the draft in
order to exemplify our commitment to the Charter and the
principles of international law.

140. In the operative part of the resolution on which we
have just voted, the Security Council deplores the continuing occupation of the territories occupied as a result of
the 1967 conflict; and we believe it could do no less,
considering, on the one hand, the Council’s responsibility
for the presentation of international peace and security and,
on the other hand, the obligation of all Member States to
comply with resolutions of the Security Council; and
considering furthermore, the tacit obligation of this organ
to ensure implementation of and respect for the principle
of respect for the tenets of the Charter and of international
law.

147. Peace, justice, human dignity, the territorial integrity
of our States and the integrity of the political sovereignties
of our countries are indispensable matters; they are matters
which are universal in their application. If we do not insist
on their application to the present case, if we do not
support the Palestinians, if we do not support Egypt in its
quest to recover its territories, we will have lost moral
authority in relation to other troubled situations, such as
those in South Africa, Rhodesia, Mozambique, Angola and
Guinea (Bissau), or for that matter any other, similar
situation where justice, law, peace and human dignity are
threatened.

141. The draft expressed concern over Israel’s lack of
co-operation with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and supported the efforts of the Special
Representative,
contained in his aide-mdmoirc of
8 February, which leads me to recall that in my previous
statement I had mentioned the fact that the document
presented by Ambassador Jarring raised fundamental questions flowing from paragraph 1 of resolution 242 (1967)
and that positive replies by both parties would have

148. It is in support of all those principles that WC voted
for the draft resolution which has just been vctocd.
14

149. The PRESIDENT: There being no further names on
my list of speakers for explanations of vote, I should like to
make a brief statement as UNITED KINGDOM representative in order to explain my own delegation’s vote.

genuine negotiating process has been instituted that progress will be made towards solving the problem. It is
unfortunate that the Council has not gone on record with a
specific request to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to resume their efforts. But I am sure they
would be the first to agree that even without a specific
request their existing responsibilities both entitle and
indeed require them to act accordingly.

150. The United Kingdom’s vote in favour of draft
resolution S/1.0974 marks no change in the position which
successive British Governments have taken on the Middle
East question since the adoption of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) in November 1967. Our position has
been explained sufficiently often for it to be unnecessary
for me to repeat it here. But the draft resolution reaffirmed
242 (,1967) and I too should like to reaffirm that in our
view resolution 242 (1967), which reconciles the Arab
requirement for Israeli withdrawal with the Israeli requirement for secure and recognized boundaries, continues to
provide the only firm foundation on which a Middle East
settlement can be built; and my delegation does not accept
that its value has been weakened or down-graded by
anything said in the course of this debate or contained in
the draft resolution. I should make it clear in particular that
our views on withdrawal remain unaffected; they are in
accordance with the text of resolution 242 (1967) and of
my Foreign Secretary’s speech at Harrogate in October
1970. My delegation accepted the wording of operative
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution because it in essence
reflects the undoubted fact that Israeli armed forces remain
in occupation of the territories which they occupied in the
June 1967 war. We deplore this fact. We also deplore the
fact that a just and lasting peace has still not been achieved
in the Middle East although more than six years have
elapsed since the June war. We thus welcomed the inclusion
of a reference to this fact in operative paragraph 1 of the
draft.

153. Speaking as PRESIDENT, I invite the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic, the next speaker on the list,
to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
154. Mr. KELANI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
j?om French): Mr. President, permit me to convey to you
the high regard in which you are held by the delegation of
the Syrian Arab Republic. Your return among us to
conduct the proceedings of the Council in a debate so
important for the cause of international peace and justice
testifies to your statesmanlike qualities and your human
compassion.
155. Your predecessor, Ambassador Yakov Malik, as all
honest people have had ample opportunity to realize,
discharged admirably his duties as President. We should like
to pay him a tribute and to express our great gratitude to
him for his firm attitude, based as it is upon right and
justice.
1.56. The Syrian Arab Republic delegation believed that
the fact that six years had elapsed since the Zionist
colonialist act of aggression was more than enough to
convince the Security Council of the need radically to
re-examine the situation in the Middle East. It could not
have done this without going deeply into the root causes of
the Israeli-Arab conflict, nor would any action have been
effective if its principal aim was not to prevail upon Israel
to respect the principles of the Charter with regard to the
right to self-determination of the Palestinian people and the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of the territory of others
by force. In any case, the Council could not possibly be
casual about applying these principles in the firmest
possible way, permitting neither the aggressor nor his
protectors to enjoy the least advantage as the result of
aggression and complicity in it.

151. I should also make clear that there has been no
change in my Government’s position with regard to the
question of the “rights of the Palestinians”. In our view this
phrase as used in the draft resolution refers essentially to
the refugees and their rights under General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) and its inclusion here does not constitute a fresh prerequisite for a settlement or affect the
provisions
of Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
Nevertheless, as I have said elsewhere in the United Nations,
we believe that any peace in the Middle East, if it is to be
truly just and lasting, must take account of the legitimate
interests and aspirations of the Palestinians.

157. However, the Council has found itself unable to
impose upon Israel the application of the principles of the
Charter because of the negative attitude of a permanent
member, the United States of America, which has paralysed
all efforts to this end and which continues to do so every
time the roots or the ramifications of the Palestinian
question are under discussion or when it is simply the
incessant acts of Israeli aggression against the neighbouring
countries which are under consideration.

152. That said, the draft resolution seemed to my delegation a reasonable distillation of the views held by the
bulk of the members of this Council on the Middle East
problem as it now confronts us, and we regret that it has
not been adopted. The non-adoption of the draft neverthcless should not be allowed to obscure what seemed to me to
be unanimity among Council members on a number of the
elements contained in it. One point on which I am sure
there was full agreement was the request to the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative to resume and
pursue their efforts to promote a just and peaceful solution
of the problem. As my delegation said here on 11 June
[I 721~ meeting/, it is not the task of this Council to
impose a solution on the parties to the conflict; but it is the
task of the Council to do what it can to provide renewed
impetus
to the diplomatic process. It is only when a

1.58. Of course, the Syrian Arab Republic delegation
believed that these facts would have focused the attention
of the Council on an examination of the roots of the
conflict and not simply on its symptoms,for the origin of
the conflict lies in Zionist colonialist aggression
against
Palestiniansoil and the Palestinianpeople. Unlessthe Arab
people of Palestine has restored to it its inalienable,
5

legitimate national rights to its land, its homeland, and
self-determination; unless there is an Israeli withdrawal
from all the occupied Arab territories, Zionist aggression
will persist interminably and, hence, the security of th.js
region will remain vulnerable and constitute a dangeroIls
source of conflict which will inevitably expose international
peace and security to the gravest peril.

242 (1967), which constitutes the basis for the search for
peace in the Middle East-bars the Secretary-General’s
Special Represenpdtivc from its territory, and then comes
before this Council to exploit its facilities and advise us on
international law and proper conduct, really needs no
reaction whatever.

1.59. Any resolution which failed to embody these two
conditions without the least ambiguity could not contribute to peace in the region. Superficial and temporary
solutions would only serve to tempt Israel to pursue its
aggressive expansionist designs. The Syrian Arab Republic
delegation has absolutely no doubt that Israel has been able
to pursue its expansionist policy only because of the
material, military and moral support provided by the
United States of America, which has made it possible for
Israel to pursue its aggression and to consolidate its
acquisition of the territory of others by force.

166. The representative of India was kind enough to
suggest that Israel should follow India’s ways in the United
Nations. As far as the Arab delegations are concerneddelegatjons which are critical of Israzl’s attitude to resolutions of the United Nations-Israel
in fact is already
folfowing India’s ways, is it not? As far as other delegations
are concerned, I am certain that they would advise us
against following India’s exampIe in the United Nations.
But I should like to assure the Security Council that Israel
will continue to pursue its own course, a course determined
by the defence of its legititnate rights under international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, and by the need
to resist Arab aggression pursued against it since 1948.

160. Thus, the United States of America rallies to the side
of the aggressor against its victims, supporting the law of
the jungle against the Charter and assisting in the dispersal
of the Palestinian people, who have been reduced to refugee
status, living in tents, and denying the right of this people
to decide freely its own fate.

167. The representative of the Soviet Union found it
necessary to support the Egyptian refusal to enter into
negotiations with Israel, by saying that lsrael should first
withdraw
from territories held by it since the 1947
host&ties. To what is this suggestion similar? To a
suggestion to an Admiral Doenitz, who followed a Hitler, to
inform the Soviet Government and other Allied Governments that until and unless the Soviet and Allied armies
withdrew from German territory, the Germans would not
sit down at a table to establish peace, tranquillity, a
cease-fire and an armistice in Europe.

161. We have just seen the United States once again
confirming this policy today by vetoing a draft resolution
which in any cast did not embody with the necessary
clarity and without ambiguity the two conditions just
mentioned-the rights of the Palestinian people and total
withdrawal from occupied territories. The United States is
denying the Palestinian people even the right to be called
Palestinian, a right which is supported by ancient and
contemporary history and which the whole world recognizes because of that people’s constant struggle to recover
its usurped motherland and legitimate rights.

168. For 25 years Israel has been subjected to aggression
by the Arab States, with Egypt at their head. Today we
have finally succeeded in repelling the aggressor, in pushing
back its armies. Are we to turn the wheels of history back
and restore the situation of vulnerability and chaos which
invited the Arab Governments to resist peace, to continue
illegitimate warfare against us for two and a half decades?
Or are we, as the founders of the United Nations did, to
insist that, after a war of aggression lasting 25 years, the
time has come for the Arab States to sit down and start
building peace with us?

162. The Security Council, whose members are moved by
the best of intentions and inspired by wisdom and goodwill,
could have dealt with the problem in depth in the light of
the principles of the Charter if the action of a permanent
member of the Council had not paralysed it and prevented
it from taking the necessary measures to bring about the
withdrawal of Israel from all the occupied territories and to
create the conditions necessary for the return of the
Palestinian people to its homeland and the recovery of its
national rights and the exercise of its right to self-determination. This is a new blow at peace and security in the
Middle East, and Israel and its protectors are entirely
responsible for it.

169. May I say, therefore, to Ambassador Malik: Do not
suggest to Israel what you yourselves would not have been
ready to do, whether in the Second World War or at any
other time. By now the Soviet Union knows that in its
relations with the Jewish people no discrimination and no
inequality under law will be accepted. And this applies also
to the Soviet attitude to the Jewish State.

163. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Israel, on whom I
now call.

170. 1 have listened with attention and great interest to
the statement made by the representative of Jordan
regarding the question of the so-called Palestinian rights. I
take note of his comments. Ilowever, as he himself and all
of US know, the views expressed by hitn are not the views
held by Egypt and by the terrorist organizations which,
when using the term “Palestinian rights”, call for the denial
of Israel’s sovereign rights and for the dismemberment of
Jordan. This fact in itself is sufficient to make references to
the so-,called Palestinian rights contrary to the principles
and provisions of the Charter and detrimental to the cause
of peace.

164. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): This being my closing statement in this debate I should like to precede it with a few
observations on some of the statements we heard today.
16.5. The last statement, that delivered by the representative of Syria, requires no comment. The spectacle of a
State which openly calls for the destruction of a State
Member of the United Nations, rejects all United Nations
resolutions-in
particular,
Security Council resolution
16

--

171. The mantle of innocence, of kindness and respectability does not lie well on the shoulders of those who
violate law and sow bloodshed. Today’s statement by the
Foreign Minister of Egypt reminded me of an old Arabic
proverb: “He hit me, and he cried out; he came out ahead
of me, and he complained”.
172. For 25 years, as I sajd, Egypt has been waging a war
of aggression against Israel, and now that Israel has finally
seized Egypt’s arm, Egypt comes to complain before the
very Organization whose Charter it has been violating for
years and years in its attitude, in its policies, in its actions
towards
Israel. Minister El-Zayyat has spoken almost
lyrically of a new world, a world of law, a world in which
all of us would live under the Charter. These are laudable
slogans, but only slogans as far as Egypt is concerned. For
110~
has Egypt contributed throughout these decades to the
construction
of such a world, to making sure that international law and the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations are respected in our region, in the Middle East? Is
it by tearing the Charter to pieces in its policies and actions
against Jsrael? The Foreign Minister of Egypt says ‘that his
country has accepted resolution 242 (1967) and remains
faithful to its provisions. How did Egypt accept the basic
principles and objectives of that Security Council resolution? By adopting the Khartoum resolution in 1967, which
declared no peace, no recognition, no agreement with
Israel, and which was again reiterated, in a speech by
President Sadat of Egypt only three days ago, on 23 July?
Did Egypt accept and respect resolution 242 (1967) by
rejecting Ambassador Jarring’s proposals one after another,
in particular the crucial proposal, made as far back as 1968,
that Israel and the Arab States should send delegations for
conferences
in Cyprus? Or did it respect resolution
242 (1967) by resorting again to force, contrary to that
resolution and contrary to the cease-fire established by the
Security Council, and by waging a war of attrition for
almost two years against Israel in the hope that in this way
it would bc able to avoid tire need for agreement on
genuine peace with its neighbour? Or did Egypt show
respect for resolution 242 (1967), which called for just and
lasting peace in the area, by supporting terrorist attacks, by
expressing its approval of the Lod massacre, by praising the
Munich murderers?
173. Did Bgypt really show respect for that resolution by
insisting that the Secretary-General’s representative should
in his aide-mCmoire of February 1971 submit Egypt’s
dfktcrt to restore the old insecure lines of 1967, while
resolution 242 (196’7) called for the establishment through
agreement of secure and recognized borders?
174. Finally, there has never been a Middle East without a
Jewish people. In a Middle East of independent nations the
sovereign Jewish State is the fulfilment of basic precepts of
law and of the principles of self-determination and equality
of peoples. It is high time that the Egyptian Government
accept this truth and not speak of the restoration of the
Jewish people’s independence in its historic homeland after
a struggle of centuries in a derogatory manner, as Egypt’s
Foreign Minister did today. Such expressions can only
increase the feeling that nothing has changed and not,hing
has moved forward in Egypt’s destructive attitude towards
Israel since the days wllen Egypt went to war against the

Jewish State and announced that its purpose was to deprive
Israel of its life and to annihilate its people.
175. The result of the vote just taken has averted a grave
development in the Middle East situation. The draft
resolution contained elements which would have undermined resolution 242 (1967) aud which, if adopted, would
have destroyed that resolution as an agreed basis for a peace
settlement. The vote preserves resolution. 242 (1967) as a
basis on which agreement can be sought between the parties
when the Arab Governments decide to engage in a serious,
constru.ctive peace-making process.
176. Egypt, which came to the Security Council in order
to obtain support for its persistent war and confrontation
with Israel, carried on in defiance of international law and
the: United Nations Charter; Egypt, which came to the
Security Council in order to subvert resolution 242 (1967)
by distorting its substance, upsetting its balance and adding
to it new and controversial elements, has thus failed in its
designs. The objective of establishing peace in the Middle
East through agreement between the parties remains untampered with; the concept of imposition of terms of
settlement from the outside has been barred. The fundamental premise uf resolution 242 (1967) that secure a,nd
recognized boundaries must be determined in agreement
between the parties, and that until such time the Israeli
presence cont.jnues to be delimited by the cease-fire lines,
has been safeguarded.
177. In the course of the debate, the one-sided, extreme
Egyptian demand-for instance, that the Security Council
should call upon Israel to withdraw to the insecure
provisional lines of 1967, or that it should give support to
the idea of an additional Arab Palestinian entity at the
expense of Israel and Jordan-have one after another been
revealed as specious and dangerous. Those demands have
been gradually whittled down, and towards the end of the
debate Egypt attempted to cloak them in less specifjc
phraseology. Non-adoption of the draft resolution has
thwarted that design as well.
178. Thirteen members of the Security Council voted in
favour of the draft resolution. That may be regrettable. It
illustrates the degree to which voting in the Security
Council is divorced from the truth and realities of the
Middle East conflict and the merits of the parties’ positions.
However, that is not new or surprising. The parliamentary
imbalance in United Nations organs on MiddIe East
questions is a known and permanent feature. One cannot
change the fact that Israel is 1 while there are 18 Arab
States and others which automatically vote against Israel
irrespective of the merits of the issue. The mechanics of
voting and vote-trading have frequently driven further
States into joining that large group. Those are the elamentary facts of Llnited Nations proceedings. and they have no
relation whatever to the morality or lawfulness of the
position of one side or the other,
179. In any event, few are those who would seriously
assess the realities of an interna;ional situation in the light
of the arithmetical combinations of votes by States and
blocs. Israel, defending its independence against Arab
onslaughts for 25 years, has always known that its strength

lies not in such numerical permutations but in the justice of
its cause and in the faith and determination of its people.

aggressors who are attempting to appropriate lands belonging
to others, The sooner the modern-day aggressors and
adventurists understand this elementary truth and the
eloquent lessons of history, the better it will be for them
and for the cause of peace in the Middle East and
throughout the world.

180. The outcome of the present debate must inevitably
strengthen the realization that the only way to attain
agreement and peace in the Middle East is negotiation
‘between the parties to the conflict. If the Government of
Egypt wishes to be true to itseIf and to its people, that is
the conclusion it will draw from the debate. Israel stands
ready to begin, together with Egypt, to build peace in the
region, Israel calls on the Govkrnment of Egypt to open a
new chapter in the history of the Middle East-a chapter of
quiet, constructive peace making, of mutual understanding
and respect, of harmony and creativity for the good of all
the peoples of the area.

184. Nor can I overlook the Israeli representative’s remarks about the position of the Soviet IJnion with regard
to Israel. This position of principle was, and is, unchanged.
We voted in the United Nations in favour of the creation of
the State of Israel and we are not going back on that. And
now our position of principle has been officially recorded
in the joint Soviet-United States communiquk signed by
Mr. L. I. Brezhnev and Mr. Nixon, in which it is stated that
a settlement in the Middle East:

181. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, who wishes to
exercise his right of reply.

“ . . . should be in accordance with the interests of all
States in the area, be consistent with their independence
and sovereignty and should take into due account the
legitimate interests of the Palestinian people.” [see
S/10964.]

182. Mr. MALTK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): Mr. President, speaking in
exercise of the right of reply, I should like first of all to
point out that for the first time in the statement of the
Israeli representative the attacks and insinuations were
focused not only against the Soviet Union but also against a
number of other members of the Security Council, whom
he named, and, finally, against all the members of the
Security Council who voted in favour of the resolution
which was not to the aggressor’s liking. This was a novelty
in his statement. In the past he has concentrated all his
hatred and insinuations against the Soviet Union alone. This
is a clear indication that Israel is in total international
isolation and no fabrications or insinuations against the
USSR, against other members of the Security Council or
against the Council as a whole can help to cover up Israel’s
aggressive and adventuristic policy and position.

18.5. That is our fundamental policy. It is the same with
regard to all States. But why have we changed our positiotl
with regard to Israel? Why has the USSR broken off
diplomatic relations with Israel’? Why do we categorically
condemn Israel as an aggressor? Why arc we fighting with
all the means at our disposal against aggression and giving
support to the victims of aggression, the Arab peoples?
Because the position of principle of the Soviet Union
always was, is and will be one of struggle against aggression
and aggressors. We have suffered too much from aggressors
and aggression; that is why we hate them so much and do
not want anyone to be subjected to aggression.
186. We have helped and will continue to help the Arab
peoples to eliminate the consequences of Israeli aggression;
we have stated this in the past, state it now, and will state it
in the future; we have done this, are doing it and will
continue to do it. As far as talks and a settlement in the
Middle East are concerned-yes, we do constantly emphasize that the key question in a Middle East settlement is the
withdrawal of all Israeli forces from all the occupied Arab
territories. Its solution would ensure the solution of all the
other aspects of a settlement on the basis of respect for
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and
protection of the legitimate rights and interests of all the
peoples of the region, including the Arab people of
Palestine. That is the USSR’s position of principle. We
supported Israel when it was fighting for freedom and
national independence. We are decisively opposed to it and
condemn it now that it has become the aggressor. 1 would
like the Israeli representative to understand this and not
return to the question in future.

183. In his customary manner, he attempted to juggle
with historical facts, distorting and falsifying them. The
whole world knows that Israeli and Zionist propaganda
distorts the facts of history just as Goebbels distorted them
in his day. It would be a good thing if the Political
Department of the United Nations Secretariat were to
analyse the statements of Israeli representatives from the
point of view of their consistency with actual historical
truth. That would be a very interesting piece of research. It
would show how the representatives of Israel juggle with
the truth and with historical facts. He mentioned Hitler’s
order to Doenitz. Read the book, The Last Ten Days of
Hitler, which was recently published here in the United
States. The author of the book was the personal aide-clecamp to the Chief of the General Staff of Hitler’s army who
remained in the bunker in Berlin until the last days of
Hitler’s downfall together with his chief, the Chief of the
General Staff of Hitler’s army. Hitler gave orders to Doenitz
and others to contact the Western Powers in order to set
the Soviet Union and its allies at odds in the joint war
against Hitler’s Germany. But this bid of Hitler’s failed. The
course of events and the outcome of the war did not follow
the path along which the despairing Hitler, having lost all
hope of implementing his delirious plans for world domination, tried to direct them. And there can be no doubt that
the same fate awaits the delirious plans of the modern-day

187. Israel itself is trying to use the methods of Hitler and
Doenitz and this is obvious to all. The reference by the
representative of Israel to the Jewish question is using the
very methods of Hitler. The goal is one and the same: to set
at odds, to stir up individual States against each other and,
in this case, to set the American Jews against the Soviet
Union. And some American Jews have swallowed this
deception as a fish swallows a hook. By remarks of that
18

kind the Israeli represeiltativc has just shown the Security
Council, the many representatives of other States Members
of the Lrnitcd Nations present here, and public opinion
tl~r0ughOut
the entire world that Israel, by inspiring
anti-Soviet feerings and sentiments among American Jews,
is pursuing its objective of diverting the attention of the
United Nations, the world communit,y and the American
people from itA policy of aggression and adventurism in the
&Iiddie East.

frightening and full dimensionsof the crisis. With the
failure of the /{raft resolution the seriousnessof the
situation has been doubly compounded,for if the highest
implementation organ of the United Nations finds itself
helplessand imnlobilized, from where could constructive
hope be expectetl to come? But, be that as it may, the
failure of the Se.:urity Council to act doesnot end the
acute problem w!lich we face and will continue to face in
the area. A totalbJ unjust and intolerablestatusquo which
has stemmedfrown a flagrant act of violence will continue
to torment the area and world peaceat largesolong asit is
allowed to persist.

188. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the Foreign Minister of Egypt, on whom
I now call.
189. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Mr. President, 1 ask your
indulgence for just two minutes. First 1 should like to say
that the draft resolution, which had reflected the will of
four continents, now reflects, thanks to the vote of
Australia, the will of five continents.
190. This is an opportunity to thank all the members of
the Council and to welcome into our “mechanical majority” at least 14 members-I am sure that China did not
participate
in the vote not because it found the draft
resolution
unjust, but becauseit found it insufficient.
However, I did not ask to speakin order to say &hat.I asked
to speak because of the explanation just given by the
representative of Irracl of resolution 242.(1967), that is,
that. what he regardsas the fundamental premiseof that
resolution has been safeguarded-that is, the premisethat
the secure and recognitcd boundariesmust be det,crmined
by agreement between the parties and chatuntil such time,
namely, until Israel agrees,.&lieIsraelipresencecontinuesto
be delimited by the cease-fire lines. That explanation
necessitates a11immediateand unequivocalstatementby us.
lf that ilkdeed is the meaningof resolution242 (1957), then
that explanation of the resolution is far from agreed.That
explanz?tion is simply rejected not only by us, by Syria and
by Jordan, but, I fervent111
hope, by all the membersof the
Security Council. Indeed, implying that this, the highest
Council of the L’nitcd Nations has decreedthe occupation
of Syria, Egypt, Jordan and PalestinianGazais a calumny
and iin insult to this Council which doesnot deserveany
more words from me.
191, Mr. President, I saidthat I anticipateda message,
but
I Ilave received two. You will leave this Council as 1 shall
leave it now; you will go to your world and I shall go to
mine. I wish you well; I hope you wish mc the same.
192. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representativeof Jordan,on w!lom I
now call.

195. My delegation has been motivated all along by a
genuine desire to seea real and not a rhetoricalmovernellt
towards a just and lasting peace.In associationwith our
brothers in Egypt and with all the other true friends of
justice and the rule of law, we have unfailingly been
open-minded and flexible., the aimbeingto achieveprogress
and not to score points in a gameof words. The same
cannot possibly be said of Israel’sposition and irs intransigencc and obstructionism. Let us all rememberthat it is
Israel which still occupiesthe territories of three Rlember
States; that it is Israelwhich adamantlydeniesany rights to
its first victims, the Palestinians,by its denymgthem their
homes and forcing them into exile and by its present
dismembermentof Jordanand occupationof Gaza.
196. The Security Council’sfailure to act cannot and does
not cxoneratc it from its primary responsibilityfor international peace and order, for resistingblatant aggression
and for ensuringthat in relationsamongnations force and
violence shall not be allowed to prevail over the priaciples
of the Charter.
197. The PRESIDENT: That concludesour consideration
of the item on our agenda.

Expressionof farewell to Sir Colin Crewe,representativeof
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
198. Mr. DE CUIRINGAUD {France)(interptution from
Mr. President, now that our work has been
concluded may I, in a very few words,perform a duty with
which my colleaguesaround the table have entrustedme,
the pleasantduty of speakingfor them alsowhile I express
views that I personally hold in the light of the very close,
trusting and friendly relations that have always existed
between you and me.
Fmzch):

193. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): It is most regrettable that
the Security Council should have concludedits exhaustive
review of the grave Middle Eastcrisiswithout beingableto
irlitiate any positive or categoricalenergeticstepstowards a
just solution in conformity with justice, the United Nations
Charter and the exigenciesof the situation.

199. All the delegationsrepresentedaround the table and
all those who for the past two years have sat around the
table very sincerely regret the fact that you will soon be
leaving. The active and constructive assistance
that YOU
have constantly brought to the deliberationsof the Cou.ncil
have now culminated in the presidency that you have
assumedwith the competenceand authority that all of US
here have learnedto expect from you.

194. Earlier I expressedcertain reservationsconcerning
the final text of the draft resolution,becausemy delegation
felt that it did not rise in adequate measureto the

200. During the discussions
by the Council of one of its
most difficult problems-indeedone of the most difficult of
those before the Organization asa whole--your experience

19

as a diplomat and your knowledge of our procedures and
usage have been most valuable to us and have duubtIess
assisted us in concluding this debate in the atmosphere of
calm which was to be desired and which alone was in
keeping with the gravity of the subject.
201. Now that you will be leaving us to enjoy a peace and
quiet that I am sure will not stand in the way of your
continuing to make a contribution to the international
community as well as to your country, I know that I speak
for all your colleagues and all those who have worked with
you in saying that we will all retain a particularly pleasant
memory of the relations that we have enjoyed with you
during your passage through the United Nations and in

20

expressing to Lady Crowe and you our sincerest and most
friendly wishes.
202. The PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, Ambas
sador de Guiringaud. If I had known what you were going
to say I should have banged the gavel a good deal earlier,
But I am really very deeply touched by the remarks that
you have all made. I have valued cnormousIy my collabo.
ration with you and indeed with all my colleagues around
this table, and I can only say thank you very much indeed
for your indulgence and for all the friendship that I have
enjoyed over these years.
T!3emeeting rose at 2.10 p.m.

HOW

TO

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

IVJBF~ICATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may be ohli-‘ined
from bookstores
sntl cijstributors
throughout
the world. C3nsult
yaw bookstove
01’ write to: United
Nations.
Salts
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Lcs publications
des Natmns
IJnies sont cn verrte dans les librnirias
et len agenccs
d&xituires
du monde entier. Informez-vow
aup&
de votre iiI,rnirr
ou adressex-vow
B : Nations
[Jnies. Sertion des ventes. New York DU CenPve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUHLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publi[~sziolles
de !a~ Naciones Unidas eslin
buidoras
WI lodas paltes de1 mundo.
Consultc
L’nidas, Seccicin de Ventas, MLKW~ York o Ginehrl.

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venia en lihrcrias
y casss Ilistrin ev librwo
o diri]ase
a: Nacioncs

.-.--p-_

--

Litho

---

in United

Nations,

-

---.---

New York

Price: $U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73-82001-June

1979-2,200
