S/2017/478

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 June 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2295 (2016), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2017 and requested me to report on a quarterly basis on
its implementation, focusing on progress in taking forward the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali (see S/2015/364 and Add.1) and the efforts of
MINUSMA to support it.

II. Major political developments
A.

Implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali
2.
The signatory parties to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
continued to take important steps to implement some of the key interim measures of
the Agreement, with the support of the international mediation team. The conférence
d’entente nationale (conference for national harmony), which was held in Bamako
from 27 March 2 April 2017, brought together more than 1,000 Malian stakeholders,
including opposition parties, signatory armed groups and women and youth
representatives. The conference resulted in a set of recommendations, which will
inform the charter for peace, unity and national reconciliation envisaged in the
Agreement. These recommendations include, inter alia, the need to address
governance and security issues, especially in the central regions, cultural diversity,
the lack of inclusiveness in the political process and socioeconomic issues, as well
as the need to fully implement the Agreement. The Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad (CMA) rejected the conclusion that the term “Azawad” remained a
sociocultural and symbolic reality but carried no political status. A special
commission in charge of drafting the charter was set up on 3 May an d is expected to
submit a draft to President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita by 20 June. Of the 53 members
of the commission, only six are women, despite the substantial participation of
women in the conference. MINUSMA contributed to the organization of the
conference, including through its good offices to facilitate the attendance of CMA
and the provision of technical and logistical support. The Mission used its public
information tools, especially Radio Mikado, to ensure that the conference could be
followed by Malians across the country. It also strongly promoted the participation
of women with funding from the Peacebuilding Fund.

17-08909 (E)

130617

*1708909*

140617

S/2017/478

3.
The Agreement Monitoring Committee continued to meet monthly and
followed up on the conclusions of its high-level meeting held on 10 February. The
activation of a consultation framework chaired by the High Representative of the
President and the appointment of an independent observer are still pending. At the
meeting held on 2 May, the Committee approved the terms of reference for th e
independent observer and established a commission led by the High Representative
of the African Union for Mali and the Sahel, Pierre Buyoya, to propose candidates.
At the same meeting, the Government announced the extension of the mandate of
the interim authorities beyond 20 June to honour the minimum duration of six months that they were established for. It also stated that all institutional and
operational requirements had been met to launch mixed patrols in Kidal and
Timbuktu by the end of April, for which CMA and the Platform coalition of armed
groups had submitted their lists of participating combatants. CMA committed itself
to vacating the camp of the Malian armed forces in Kidal to allow for the
construction of a camp for mixed patrols.
4.
The last two interim authorities to be established were created in Taoudenni
and Timbuktu on 20 April, after a series of negotiations facilitated by the
international mediation team and MINUSMA. Further to the occupation of
checkpoints of the Malian armed forces by the Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad
(MAA) in the outskirts of Timbuktu on 5 March, MINUSMA issued a statement the
following day condemning the ceasefire violation. The subsequent reinforcement of
the Mission’s presence in Timbuktu to protect the population eventually led to the
withdrawal of MAA in late March. On 20 April, the Congrès pour la justice dans
l’Azawad, another group that opposed the establishment of the interim authority in
Timbuktu, vacated a checkpoint located west of the city, which it had occu pied
since 3 March. However, the fact that the effective operationalization of the interim
authorities has yet to be achieved limits their ability to govern and provide basic
social services. In Taoudenni , tensions persisted between the Government and oth er
members of the interim authority. The mixed patrols in Kidal and Timbuktu decided
on by the Committee on 2 May were not in place by the end of April. With help
from the Trust Fund in Support of Peace and Security in Mali, MINUSMA and
partners provided training on administrative functions to the members of the five
interim authorities. On 24 April, the Peacebuilding Fund approved a project aimed
at strengthening the capacity of the transitional councils of Ménaka and Taoudenni
regions.
5.
Despite the establishment of the interim authorities, the presence of State
officials in northern and central Mali decreased, primarily because of persistent
insecurity. As of 26 May, 34 per cent of State officials were present in those regions,
which represents a decrease of 4 per cent compared with the previous reporting
period. The Governors of Kidal and Taoudenni have not yet joined their duty
stations. The percentage of judicial officers stayed the same in the northern regions,
at about 33 per cent, as well as in the Mopti region, at 75 per cent.
6.
The Government continued its efforts to integrate combatants into its armed
forces. On 3 April, it requested technical and logistical assistance from MINUSMA
to initiate a special programme for cantonment; disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, as well as the integration of the 529 members of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Gao from CMA, the Platform and some splinter groups.
The programme is expected to be replicated at the cantonment site in Fafa, in the
Gao region, with a view to extending it progressively to other sites. Once the
integration modalities are finalized by the Government, MINUSMA will support the
vetting of combatants before they are integrated into the Malian armed forces.
7.
On 13 April, in support of the Government, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali and Head of MINUSMA, Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
2/27

17-08909

S/2017/478

convened a meeting of the MINUSMA strategic committee for security sector
reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration with the diplomatic
community in Bamako. Participants in that meeting stressed that a national strategy
for security sector reform was needed to guide the implementation of the defence
and security provisions of the Agreement. MINUSMA continued to support
capacity-building among the members of the National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission, the Commission on Integration and
the National Council for Security Sector Reform.
8.
MINUSMA military observers and the mixed monitoring and verification team
conducted investigations into allegations of ceasefire violations. They concluded
that the Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés (GATIA) and the
Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad (MSA) had violated the ceasefire by looting
the town of Tiderme, Ménaka region, on 10 February. They also confirmed that the
ambush by GATIA of Ganda Izo combatants in the Ansongo area, Gao region, on
22 April, which resulted in one Ganda Izo combatant being injured, constituted a
ceasefire violation. The clash between the Coordination des mouvements et forces
patriotiques de résistance 2 and GATIA in the proximity of Arbichi, Timbuktu
region, on 2 May, which resulted in the deaths of four combatants of the
Coordination and one GATIA combatant, was confirmed as a ceasefire violation.
The Technical Commission on Security recommended on 23 March that the
Agreement Monitoring Committee consider imposing sanctions against those who
had attacked the checkpoints of the Malian armed forces near Timbuktu on 5 March.
The Committee has yet to discuss this issue.
9.
Further to the killing of a GATIA commander by unidentified individuals in
Ménaka on 17 March, the Malian defence and security forces, G ATIA and MSA
established local security arrangements in Ménaka on 31 March, outside the
framework of the Agreement. They conducted tripartite patrols and the armed
groups established checkpoints around the town.
10. Annex I to the present report contains an assessment of progress made towards
the achievement of benchmarks against indicators since the issuance of the report of
30 December 2016 (S/2016/1137), in accordance with resolution 2295 (2016).

B.

Other political developments
11. On 8 April, Mr. Abdoulaye Idrissa Maiga of the ruling party, le
Rassemblement pour le Mali, who had served as Minister of Defence and Veterans’
Affairs and as campaign manager for the President, became the fourth Prime
Minister under President Keita. A new cabinet was announced on 11 April,
comprising 35 ministers, including eight women, eight members from the northern
regions and seven members from the Mopti region. Members of opposition parties
and CMA were not represented. On 20 April, the opposition party, the Union pour la
république et la démocratie, requested the Supreme Court to invalidate the decree on
ministerial nominations as it had failed to meet the 30 per cent quota for the
representation of women stipulated in Act No. 2015 -052 of 18 December 2015.
12. Following the adoption of the bill on the revision of the Constitution by the
Council of Ministers on 10 March, the National Assembly Law Commission began
consultations with political and civil society actors on the draft constitution. The bill
proposed to strengthen the powers of the President over the Prime Minister and the
Parliament. It also suggested maintaining the President’s control over the judiciary,
despite the recommendation by the Committee of Experts to ensure its
independence. In line with the provisions of the Agreement, the bill included the
creation of a senate as a second parliamentary chamber. However, there was no

17-08909

3/27

S/2017/478

mention of the integration of traditional authorities, women and youth into the High
Council of Communities, the reform of which was envisaged by the Agreement to
increase inclusivity. The Government has not clarified how the proposed revisions
to the Constitution will reflect the institutional reforms corresponding to the
recommendations of the conférence d’entente nationale, including more attention
devoted to the regions.
13. The Government has updated the electoral rolls in preparation for the
forthcoming district, regional, legislative and presidential elections, municipal byelections and constitutional referendum. Owing to the delay in convening the
electoral college, however, district elections and municipal by-elections scheduled
to be held on 28 May were postponed to a date yet to be established. MINUSMA
provided training on the new electoral law to more than 300 potential women
candidates in eight regions. Following the Government’s request to the United
Nations to renew its electoral assistance through the electoral cycle of 2 017-2019,
an electoral needs assessment mission was deployed in Mali from 17 to 28 April.
The mission recommended revising the mandate of MINUSMA to include technical
assistance and extend the good offices of the Special Representative to the electoral
process, as well as establishing a new basket fund aimed at pooling funding from
the international community in support of the 2017 -2018 elections. On 21 April,
President Keita announced his intention to run for a second term in the election
scheduled for July 2018.
14. Discontent among civil servants with their employment conditions, including
concerns for their safety, continued, with strikes by health workers, teachers,
magistrates and clerks. The strike by university professors nationwide began on
20 March and ended mid-May, causing demonstrations by students calling for the
resumption of classes. All public primary and secondary schools in Mali were
closed during a 10-day strike by teachers’ unions in April.

C.

Regional developments
15. On 13 April, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union endorsed the
strategic concept of operations for the joint force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G5 Sahel) and authorized the deployment of the joint force with the strength of up
to 5,000 personnel for an initial period of 12 months renewable. The concept of
operations envisages the operating areas to be initially along the borders of member
States of the G5 Sahel and, at a later stage, throughout the member States’
territories. The Peace and Security Council urged the Security Council to adopt a
resolution approving the deployment of the joint force and authorizing the
Secretary-General to identify options for providing sustainable and predictable
financial, logistical and technical support to the joint force, including through
MINUSMA. The Secretary-General conveyed this request to the Security Council
on 15 May for its consideration.

III. Major security developments
16. The security situation in northern and central Mali remained volatile. A ttacks
against Malian, French and MINUSMA forces and signatory armed groups
persisted, as did targeted attacks against civilians in the central regions. On
28 April, the National Assembly extended the state of emergency for an additional
period of six months, that is until 31 October, owing to the persistent insecurity in
the northern and central regions. MINUSMA maintained a robust posture to protect

4/27

17-08909

S/2017/478

civilians and continued to provide operational and logistical support, as well as
training, to the Malian defence and security forces.

A.

Asymmetric and other attacks
17. Violent extremists and terrorist elements have conducted 105 attacks against
the Malian defence and security forces, 76 against MINUSMA and 20 against the
French forces since June 2016, compared with 84, 66 and 15 attacks, respectively,
during the previous mandate period. In total, 131 members of the Malian defence
and security forces were killed and 176 injured in attacks, compared with 49 killed
and 33 injured in the previous mandate period. There has been a 42 per cent
increase in attacks against Malian defence and security forces in the Mopti and
Ségou regions. The main modus operandi continued to be the use of improvi sed
explosive devices, mortars and rockets as well as complex attacks. While efforts by
MINUSMA to mitigate security threats, such as measures to counter improvi sed
explosive device attacks, contributed to a decrease in casualties among
peacekeepers, the Malian defence and security forces have been increasingly
targeted in the central and southern regions by terrorist groups. Eight peacekeepers
were killed and 64 injured, compared with 28 killed and 89 injured in the previous
mandate period. Two French soldiers were killed and 11 injured, while 3 were killed
and 16 injured in the previous mandate period. Among the signatory armed groups,
78 combatants have been killed and 78 injured since June 2016, compared with
18 killed and 5 injured during the previous mandate period.
18. On 4 April, the leader of the terrorist group known as the Group for the
Support of Islam and Muslims, Iyad ag Ghaly, reiterated his intention to continue to
fight the national and international armed forces. The attacks claimed by that group
included:
(a) An attack with small firearms against a convoy of the Malian armed
forces that had struck an explosive device approximately 45 km south of Nampala,
Ségou region, on 2 May, which killed nine soldiers and seriously injured five others;
(b) A mortar attack against the MINUSMA camp in Timbuktu on 3 May,
which killed one peacekeeper and injured eight others inside the camp;
(c) An attack against a convoy of the Malian armed forces that had stopped
because of the explosion of a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device in
Almoustarat, Gao region, on 7 May, which killed 7 soldiers and injured 17 others;
(d) Another mortar attack in Timbuktu on 15 May, which injured three
members of the Malian defence and security forces and four peacekeepers.
19. Security incidents in the border areas also continued. On 28 March, in the
Mopti region, near the border with Burkina Faso, unidentified individuals attacked a
gendarmerie post in Bouklessi, killing two gendarmes. On 5 April, unidentified
assailants launched a complex attack against the French forces in t he Foulséré forest
in the Mopti region, near the border with Burkina Faso, killing one soldier and
injuring two others. On 6 and 15 April, in the Ségou region, unidentified individuals
attacked the gendarmerie posts in Belenitieni and Téné, respectively, b oth close to
the border with Burkina Faso. The Group for the Support of Islam and Muslims
claimed responsibility for the attack of 15 April.
20. In coordination with the French forces, the Malian armed forces conducted
seven counter-terrorism and other security operations, inter alia, in and around Gao,
Sévaré in the Mopti region, along the Anéfit-Tessalit axis in the Kidal region, and
along the border with Burkina Faso. In March and April, the Burkina Faso, Malian
and French forces conducted joint counter-terrorism operations between the south of

17-08909

5/27

S/2017/478

the Douentza-Hombori-Gossi axis and the border with Burkina Faso in the Mopti
region.

B.

Protection of civilians
21. In the central regions, targeted attacks against civilians persisted in a context
of a weak presence of State authority. Intimidation of school officials by armed
individuals demanding that strict religious ideology be followed continued to be
reported.
22. Clashes between the Dozo self-defence group and suspected radical elements
in several locations in the Mopti and Ségou regions on 22 March resulted in 10
individuals being killed and 14 injured. In March, MINUSMA organized workshops
on conflict resolution mechanisms for the local land commissions in the Mopti
region to help to address land issues. Dozo leaders convened a meeting in
Ténenkou, Mopti region, on 21 April to facilitate reconciliation with the Fulani
community. Further to the adoption of the multidimensional strategy for the central
regions by the Government in February, a regional consultation aimed at discussing
insecurity in the Mopti and Ségou regions was held in Mopti on 3 and 4 May.
Participants included ministers, regional and local authorities, and religious,
community and civil society leaders. They presented a series of recommendations to
the Malian authorities, including the need to increase the presence of the State,
improve governance, stop the spread of radical ideology and support intra- and
intercommunal dialogue.
23. In April, the Commission of Inquiry established by the Government on
2 March to investigate violence affecting civilians in the district of Macina, Ségou
region, on 11 and 12 February, which had resulted in at least 20 civilians being
killed and 18 others injured, identified suspected perpetrators. Fifteen persons were
arrested, including for murder, criminal conspiracy and illegal possession of
weapons. The judge in Macina originally seized of the matter relinquish ed
jurisdiction owing to concerns for his own security and the authorities have
requested the designation of another judge.
24. In three separate explosive hazard incidents in March and April in the Kidal
region, two civilians were killed and five others injured. In April and May, three
cases of killing and maiming of children, owing to crossfire and the explosion of
unexploded ordnances, were reported in Tessit, Kidal region, and Douentza and
Youwarou, Mopti region. On 25 April, a 14-year-old boy sustained several gunshot
wounds during an attack on a gendarmerie post in the Youwarou district, Mopti
region.
25. MINUSMA maintained a robust posture to protect civilians, including through
coordinated operations with the Malian armed forces, police and gendarme rie, as
well as the French forces. The Mission carried out a total of 2,172 independent and
coordinated operations during the reporting period. It continued to patrol key
population centres in northern and central Mali and Bamako, as well as the border
area with Burkina Faso, through 1,434 medium-range and long-range military and
police patrols.

C.

Support to the Malian defence and security forces
26. MINUSMA continued to provide training and operational and logistical
support to the Malian armed forces, including in the areas of surveillance and
reconnaissance, intelligence sharing, air support and medical evacuation. The Trust

6/27

17-08909

S/2017/478

Fund in Support of Peace and Security in Mali supported the security reinforcement
of six checkpoints of the Malian armed forces in the Timbuktu region, two of which
were handed over to the armed forces. MINUSMA trained 93 Malian defence and
security forces personnel on the mitigation of explosive threats and assisted with the
training of Malian explosive threat mitigation teams in the northern and central
regions. Preparations to hand over the MINUSMA camp in Léré, Timbuktu region,
to the Malian armed forces continued. The Mission continued to ensure compliance
with the United Nations Due Diligence Policy on Human Rights by the Malian
authorities and pursued the effective implementation of mitigating measures, as
necessary.
27. MINUSMA continued to explore the need for further support to the Malian
armed forces, including through ongoing discussions on a memorandum of
understanding, to enable them to achieve the highest levels of operational capability.
The memorandum is expected to serve as a basis to enhance mutual cooperation
between MINUSMA and the Malian armed forces by means of coordinated
operations, mentoring, medical evacuation, transportation, light operational
logistical support, such as rations, tents and fuel, as well as strengthened
information sharing and the handing over of MINUSMA camps, among other
initiatives.
28. MINUSMA continued to provide assistance to the Malian police, gendarmerie,
national guard and civil protection authorities with capacity -building, operational
and infrastructure support. During the reporting period, MINUSMA provided
training on, inter alia, organized crime and terrorism to 413 Malian police officers
from Bamako, Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu, including 29 women. From 3 to 28 April,
in Bamako and Gao, MINUSMA and partners trained 28 Malian polic e officers on
community-oriented policing. MINUSMA trained 103 prison guards, including eight
women, from prisons around the country, as part of its ongoing support to the justice
system and to improve prison security.

IV. Human rights situation
29. The human rights situation remained of concern. MINUSMA documented 66
cases of human rights violations and abuses, involving 115 victims, compared with
74 cases and 204 victims in the previous reporting period. The cases included 4
instances of extrajudicial execution, 1 of enforced disappearance, 7 of ill-treatment
and 31 of unlawful detention. Members of the Malian defence and security forces
continued to be among the main alleged perpetrators, accounting for 43 violations,
while signatory armed groups were allegedly responsible for 11 cases. A total of
five members of the Operational Coordination Mechanism allegedly attempted to
rob civilians on 2 April and 2 May, resulting in the deaths of one civilian and one
member of the Mechanism. MINUSMA is engaging the Mechanism to take
appropriate action. In the Mopti and Ségou regions, MINUSMA documented five
cases of alleged human rights violations perpetrated by the Malian defence and
security forces mostly during counter-terrorism operations.
30. MINUSMA documented one confirmed and two alleged cases of conflictrelated sexual violence. On 16 April, unidentified armed men kidnapped 10 girls
and raped one of them in Alfao, Timbuktu region, before freeing them the following
day. The two allegations involved on-duty soldiers of the Malian armed forces and
two teenage girls in the Mopti region in February. The Malian authorities have not
opened an investigation.
31. Malian authorities arrested 150 individuals in relation to the conflict, including
130 on terrorism-related charges, 19 of whom were released. Among the
17-08909

7/27

S/2017/478

130 individuals arrested, 7 claimed to have been ill-treated, while 21 were detained
by the gendarmerie without an arrest warrant. As at 26 May, 350 conflict -related
detainees, including 289 held on terrorism charges and three minors, remained in
detention by State institutions. CMA and the Platform illegally detained at least
13 individuals, all of them in relation to law enforcement-related matters in areas
under their control. The total number of detainees held by signatory armed groups
was at least 22 civilians and six combatants from opposing signatory armed groups,
including those detained during previous periods.
32. MINUSMA continued to assist the Government to take steps towards
reconciliation and combating impunity. In April, the Mission shared 78 new cases of
human rights violations with the Ministry of Human Rights and State Reform for
review and follow-up. Since 3 January, when the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation
Commission began taking statements, the Commission has compiled a total of 3,447
statements from victims. MINUSMA provided capacity-building training to the
Commission’s personnel in, inter alia, the factual verification of cases. The
Commission is expected to examine the alleged human rights violations before
identifying witnesses who could testify at hearings.

V. Humanitarian situation
33. Given the limited presence of State authorities and limited development gains
in central and northern Mali, humanitarian actors continued to play an essential role
in meeting the basic needs of vulnerable people. Humanitarian access in central and
northern Mali continued to be challenging. A total of 27 security incidents involving
humanitarian actors were registered, compared with 15 cases in the previous
reporting period.
34. A total of 3.8 million people suffer from food insecurity in Mali, owing mainly
to localized floods, drought and increased insecurity. During the first semester of
2017, the United Nations provided food rations and cash -based transfers to 109,450
vulnerable people. Across Mali, the nutritional status of children and women of
reproductive age remained a major concern, with 115,000 pregnant or lactating
women requiring nutrition assistance and 620,000 children under 5 years of age
suffering from acute malnutrition. The United Nations continued to assist the
Government to ensure the availability of life-saving malnutrition treatment to
children and provided supplementary feeding to children and pregnant and lactating
women.
35. Since the previous report (S/2017/271), an additional 65 schools have been
closed, bringing the number to 501 (and up from 296 in May 2016), of a total of
4,872 schools in the Gao, Ménaka, Mopti, Ségou and Timbuktu regions, with
150,000 children out of school because of insecurity. The Mopti region has been
particularly affected, with 266 schools closed.
36. About 1.2 million people had limited access to clean water and sanitation, a
majority of whom are located in the northern and central regions. Water supply
construction and rehabilitation works are ongoing in the Gao and Mopti regions and,
in the first quarter of 2017, the United Nations provided access to safe water to
more than 24,000 people in the Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu regions.
37. Localized displacements continued to occur owing to violence in the central
regions, increasing the number of internally displaced persons from some 45,800 to
approximately 59,000. The number of Malian refugees in Burkin a Faso, Mauritania
and the Niger rose from some 141,500 to approximately 143,600.

8/27

17-08909

S/2017/478

38. Humanitarian funding continued to be inadequate to meet current needs and
provide life-saving assistance to the 1.36 million people targeted in the 2017
Humanitarian Response Plan. As at 26 May, only 14 per cent of the $293 million
required had been received.

VI. Economic development and cultural preservation
39. The finalization of the development strategy for the northern regions and the
operationalization of the sustainable development fund were still pending. The
ability of the interim authorities and regional development agencies to deliver peace
dividends to the population in the north remained constrained by the limited
presence of the State and insecurity. Of an estimated €605 million for the northern
regions pledged at the International Conference for the Economic Recovery and
Development of Mali held in October 2015, approximately half (€303 million) has
been committed through the national emergency response plan for the northern
regions for the period 2015-2017. The Government has separately invested
€26 million in the rehabilitation of public buildings. Through 14 new projects,
including quick-impact projects, the Mission supported income -generation among
women and disabled persons in Guidara, Gao region, and Kidal; rehabilitated and
equipped the community health centre in Etenber, Kidal region; improved the water
supply system in four villages in Kati, Koulikoro region; and, assisted with the
reopening of schools in various locations in the Gao region.
40. On 30 April, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization completed the restoration of the three mosques designated as world
heritage in Timbuktu, while the rehabilitation of thre e ancient manuscript libraries
was completed on 17 May.

VII. Deployment of the Mission
A.

Military
41. The force level of up to 13,289 military personnel authorized in resolution
2295 (2016) comprised 40 military observers, 486 staff officers and 12,763
contingent personnel. As at 26 May, 10,919 personnel had been deployed, or 82 per
cent of the authorized strength. Women account for 2 per cent of the military
personnel.
42. Significant gaps remained in the military capabilities of MINUSMA, hindering
the Mission’s efforts to implement its mandated tasks in one of the most hostile
environments for peacekeeping. The shortage of 88 armoured personnel carriers
remained a major obstacle to its operations, despite arduous efforts to obtain them.
On average, three armoured personnel carriers were temporarily unusable every
week owing to damages incurred in security incidents. The Mission continues to
require two helicopter units, one attack helicopter unit for Kidal and one medium
utility helicopter unit for Timbuktu; an intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
company for Kidal; airfield support units for Gao and Timbuktu; and an explosive
ordnance disposal company for Timbuktu. The long-awaited combat convoy
battalion is scheduled to begin deploying with two companies in July. The
deployment of the quick reaction force is now expected to begin in July. Insufficient
contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment capabilities of some infantry
units remained a concern. In order to mobilize support for MINUSMA, the
Secretariat convened a force generation conference on 22 and 23 May during which
a number of Member States announced pledges. A military capability study will

17-08909

9/27

S/2017/478

soon be conducted to assess requirements, possible adjustments and plan for future
deployments.
French forces
43. In accordance with resolution 2295 (2016), the French forces continued to
intervene in support of MINUSMA within the limits of their capacities and areas of
deployment.

B.

Police
44. In its resolution 2295 (2016), the Security Council established a ceiling of up
to 1,920 police personnel, which comprised 345 individual police officers and 1,575
formed police personnel. As at 26 May, 1,502 personnel had been deployed, or
78 per cent of its authorized strength, with 97 per cent of individual police officers
(including 16 per cent of women) and 74 per cent formed police unit personnel
(including 4 per cent of women). On 10 May, a formed police unit completed
deployment to Ménaka. Two additional formed police units for Douentza, Mopti
region, and Goundam, Timbuktu region, were still scheduled to deploy by the end of
May. A special intervention team to support the Mission’s crisis response, composed
of 35 personnel, is scheduled to deploy in September. MINUSMA police continue to
require 17 armoured personnel carriers, 12 armoured cars and an additional 12
individual police officers with specialized expertise, including in forensics,
investigations, riverine police capacity, security sector reform, counter -terrorism,
serious organized crime and drug trafficking.

C.

Civilian personnel
45. As at 26 May, 87 per cent of all MINUSMA civilian staff had been deployed,
including 88 per cent of international staff, 81 per cent of United Nations Volunteers
and 86 per cent of national staff. Women held 26 per cent of the international posts,
32 per cent of the United Nations Volunteer positions and 19 per cent of the national
staff posts.

D.

Camp construction and securing supply routes
46. The construction of camps for formed police units in Douentza and Goundam
were scheduled to be completed by the end of May and in Ménaka by the end of
June. The operational base in Bamako is now 95 per cent completed, the Timbuktu
integrated camp is 90 per cent completed and the Gao logistics hub is 92 per cent
completed. The upgrade of the Mopti camp to also accommodate civilian personnel
is ongoing, while its upgrade to accommodate the incoming quick reaction force is
scheduled to be completed in June.
47. The newly established Cotonou-Niamey-Gao supply route was successfully
tested with two sets of shipments between 30 March and 28 April. The Mission is
conducting a feasibility assessment for the potential establishment of a transit camp
facility in Niamey to use as a hub for troop and police rotations and new
deployments, in anticipation of the two-year-long rehabilitation of the runway in
Gao.

10/27

17-08909

S/2017/478

VIII. Safety and security of United Nations personnel
48. During the current reporting period, four security incidents involving United
Nations civilian personnel occurred. One peacekeeper was killed during an attack
on the MINUSMA camp in Timbuktu on 3 May and two others were killed in an
ambush during a foot patrol near Aguelhok, in the Kidal region. The re were
27 attacks against humanitarian actors.
49. Further to resolution 2295 (2016), MINUSMA has taken measures to enhance
its information collection and analysis capacity in the face of a rapidly evol ving
situation and persistent attacks against peacekeepers. MINUSMA also continued to
train its personnel on explosive hazards, strengthened explosives detection capacity
in United Nations airport facilities and continued its efforts to reinforce the secur ity
of its camps. The Mission’s capacity to conduct prompt medical and casualty
evacuation remained constrained by the shortage of helicopters in all sectors.

IX. Conduct and discipline
50. There have been no new allegations of sexual exploitation an d abuse since the
previous report. The two allegations received in January and June 2016 are still
pending investigation by the relevant troop-contributing countries.

X. Financial aspects
51. The budget proposal for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018 amounting to $1,077.6 million gross is currently before
the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly for review and consideration. Should
the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of MINUSMA beyond 30 J une
2017, the cost for maintaining the Mission until 30 June 2018 would be limited to
the amounts approved by the General Assembly.
52. As at 24 May 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
MINUSMA amounted to $53.3 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $1,589.7 million.
53. The reimbursement of troop/formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 31 January 2017, while the reimbursement of the costs o f contingent-owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2016, in accordance
with the quarterly payment schedule.

XI. Observations and recommendations
54. Almost two years since the signing of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, and as the interim period draws to an end in June, Mali is
once again at a turning point. I commend the Government of Mali, CMA and the
Platform for their continued efforts to advance the peace process with the support of
the international mediation team and the good offices of my Special Representative.
I take note of the significant progress in the implementation of the interim political
and security arrangements provided for in the Agreement despite divergences of
views. Notwithstanding repeated delays, the completion of the establishment of the
interim authorities in each of the five northern regions, with the last ones
inaugurated in the Taoudenni and Timbuktu regions on 20 April, is commendable. I
welcome this important development as a first step to the gradual restoration and
extension of State authority in the northern regions.
17-08909

11/27

S/2017/478

55. Nonetheless, the gains made thus far towards the peace and stability of Mali
have still not reached the stage where they are irreversible. Insecuri ty is spreading
in Mali and across its borders, while ceasefire violations continue and institutional
reforms stagnate. I therefore strongly urge all Malian stakeholders to redouble their
efforts and collaborate in good faith towards the speedy and full im plementation of
the Agreement. The future of their country and the well -being of its people deserve
nothing less. Failing to do so could seriously jeopardize the hard work and
achievements made thus far, with dire consequences for the country and the regio n.
56. The signatory parties must capitalize on the momentum generated by the
establishment of the interim authorities to now restore State authority throughout
the country, including by re-establishing the rule of law, providing security and
basic social services to the population and assisting in the recovery of the local
economy, beginning with the swift launch of the mixed patrols in the Kidal and
Timbuktu regions in the weeks ahead. I strongly urge the Government to seize this
window of opportunity to reinstate inclusive and accountable institutions, including
in the areas of justice and security, which are critical to gaining the confidence of all
local communities and signatory armed groups in State institutions.
57. At this critical juncture, I call upon the signatory parties to agree on a clear
vision for the future of the Agreement and its follow-up mechanisms, and to set a
new timeline for its implementation. The signatory parties must translate their
commitment to peace into concrete actions. Constructive dialogue, including
through the permanent consultation framework to be activated by the High
Representative of the President, is the only way to tackle differences and move
forward. I also hope that the appointment of an independent observer as set forth in
the Agreement will be expedited and will contribute to injecting a new dynamic into
the monitoring of the implementation of the Agreement.
58. I was encouraged by the holding of the conférence d’entente nationale and the
participation by many segments of Malian society in the critical discussions about
the future of their country. I take note of their important recommendations for the
charter for peace, unity and national reconciliation, which once again confirmed
their desire for peace and stability. The development of the charter is a historic
opportunity to address long-standing issues, including governance, accountability
and the inclusion of women and youth. I strongly encourage the special commission
in charge of drafting the charter to engage all Malian stakeholders in a dialogue with
a genuine commitment to restoring peace and in a manner that promotes national
reconciliation. I regret that, in spite of the substantial participation of women in the
conference and the Mission’s advocacy efforts, the new Government and the interim
authorities that were established afterwards have a limited number of women
representatives. I call upon all political actors to take into account the views of
women, including in the interim authorities. I count on the Government to sincerely
lead the implementation of the recommendations of the conference on behalf of all
Malians.
59. The interim measures referred to above must be consolidated by longer -term
institutional reforms, including the review of the Cons titution, which would clarify
the future of the Malian State. The absence of a comprehensive strategy for security
sector reform, in particular, needs to be urgently addressed to allow for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of combatants, as well as their
integration, and the redeployment of the reconstituted Malian defence and security
forces across the country. I call upon all political actors in Mali to build on the
momentum attained at the conférence d’entente nationale to advance longer -term
State reforms to build the foundations for sustainable peace and development.

12/27

17-08909

S/2017/478

60. It is my expectation and earnest hope that the revision of the Constitution will
effectively take on board the recommendations of the conférence d’entente nationale
and key provisions of the Agreement, notably those pertaining to the reorganization
of the State to enhance its institutions. I note with concern the lack of consultations
with Malian stakeholders on the revision of the Constitution before the adoption of
a bill on that subject by the Council of Ministers. I urge the Government to give due
consideration to the views expressed and achieve consensus and inclusiveness in
this process before the referendum. I trust that the revised constitution will lay out a
framework for institutional, security and justice reforms as stipulated in the
Agreement.
61. As Mali enters into a new electoral cycle, it is of critical importance that these
elections and the constitutional referendum contribute to the peace and stability of
the country. I therefore remind the Government of its primary responsibility in this
regard, and recall that the full implementation of the Agreement will facilitate
creating the conditions for peaceful, inclusive, fair and transparent elections. Given
the current security situation, I also urge the Government to do its utmost to create
the conditions conducive to the participation of all Malians in these important polls.
MINUSMA stands ready to provide the necessary support to national authorities to
achieve this goal. I therefore recommend that the Security Council mandate
MINUSMA to support the forthcoming electoral cycle and constitutional
referendum, including through the good offices of my Special Representative and
the provision of technical assistance and logistical support. I also call upon the
international community to support the electoral process, including by contributing
financially to the Support to Mali’s Electoral Process Project managed by the United
Nations Development Programme.
62. Despite the recent progress, considerable tasks remain to be accomplished to
ensure that the provisions of the Agreement secure tangible results. The Mission’s
vigorous support for the follow-up mechanisms of the Agreement will continue to
be essential, taking into account the role of the international mediation team and the
regional dimension of the crisis. To do so, the good offices role of my Special
Representative should be strongly supported to strengthen those follow -up
mechanisms and the broader peace process, including the elections, by leveraging
the Mission’s capacity to facilitate dialogue, bring all stakeholders to the table,
foster reconciliation and create space for the political process to unfold. The
collective weight of the Security Council in this regard remains essential. I also
count on the continued full support of regional partners, in particular the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African States, as well as international
development partners.
63. Time is of the essence. Progress at the political level has not yet translated into
security gains on the ground. Violent extremist and terrorist groups have increased
their area and tempo of operations over the past year in a bid to thwart the peace
process, while new armed groups have emerged. Meanwhile, the fragmentation of
the signatory armed groups fuelled by rivalries among northern communities has led
to the creation of splinter armed groups. The deteriorating security situation in the
central regions, including in the border areas with neighbouring countries, is of
particular concern. A stronger emphasis needs to be placed on the protection of
civilians, including reconciliation and preventing and mitigating violent extremism.
I urge the Government to implement the integrated strategy for the central regions
actively, taking into account the need for a multidimensional approach founded on
the redeployment of accountable and inclusive State institutions that are capable of
delivering basic social services, justice and security to the population.
64. The Mission’s continued efforts to promote local conflict mitigation and
reconciliation, as well as better community outreach in the centre and in the north
17-08909

13/27

S/2017/478

that responds to the needs of the local population, serve as a buffer ag ainst growing
radicalization, facilitate the return of displaced populations and help to respond to
the most urgent humanitarian needs. While attention must be paid to the centre of
the country, ongoing measures to address insecurity in the north remain cr itical for
the stability of the country.
65. I condemn in the strongest terms the unacceptable attacks against Malian,
French and MINUSMA forces and civilians and signatory armed groups. I express
my deepest condolences to the families of the victims, the Government of Mali and
the Governments of the countries of the United Nations peacekeepers. I reiterate
that attacks targeting United Nations peacekeepers constitute war crimes under
international law and I call upon the Government to swiftly bring the pe rpetrators to
justice. I encourage the Security Council to support me in taking the measures
necessary for the safety and security of United Nations personnel in Mali, including
using extraordinary administrative measures.
66. I note that drug trafficking and other criminal activities continue to pose
significant challenges to the implementation of the Agreement and to the positions
of armed groups. In order to address the negative impact of such criminal acts on
the peace process, it is advisable to explore ways to counter illicit activities. In the
meantime, the Security Council may wish to consider expanding the mandate of the
Group of Experts of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities to increase its focus on new violent extremist and terrorist groups’ activities
in the Sahel with connection to Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. I encourage
MINUSMA to engage regional partners actively to strengthen coordination and
increase coherence with existing development and stabilization initiatives in the
Sahel to address the situation in Mali.
67. I remain seriously concerned with continued human rights violations and
abuses committed by State actors and armed groups, among others. I strongly urge
the Government to combat impunity effectively and strengthen internal
accountability for its defence and security forces. MINU SMA remains committed to
supporting transitional justice, including by continuing to assist the Truth, Justice
and Reconciliation Commission and ensuring the establishment of the international
commission of inquiry. However, the launch of the commission ha s proved to be
challenging. I therefore recommend the Security Council to authorize MINUSMA to
support the establishment and operations of the commission.
68. The United Nations alone cannot provide the support that Mali deserves. It is a
collective effort. The United Nations therefore remains firmly committed to working
closely with Malian stakeholders, the international mediation team and other
partners to ensure the implementation of the Agreement and facilitate the broader
peace process. I encourage the international community to disburse the funds
pledged at the International Conference for the Economic Recovery and
Development of Mali held in October 2015 and to the 2017 Humanitarian Response
Plan. These resources would help to address the needs of the population in conflictaffected areas while the Malian institutions gradually assume responsibility for
stability. In order to further promote political commitment, ownership and
accountability, the United Nations will continue to engage the Government of Mali
to build on the benchmarks agreed upon in 2016 to establish a more formalized
framework in support of the peace process. An enhanced and more holistic
collaboration between regional and international partners and with the Government
would help to further prioritize and monitor the implementation of those
benchmarks. I therefore encourage MINUSMA to strengthen its cooperation with

14/27

17-08909

S/2017/478

international development partners, including international financial institutions and
the European Union within the framework of their budgetary support for Mali.
69. The growing spillover of instability in Mali into its neighbours demonstrates
the need for enhanced regional cooperation and ownership to address security
threats. I therefore welcome the adoption of the concept of operations for the joint
force of the G5 Sahel by the Peace and Security Council on 13 April, which I
conveyed to the Security Council on 15 May. I take note of the Peace and Security
Council’s request for the Security Council to adopt a resolution tha t approves the
deployment of the joint force and authorizes me to identify the modalities of
sustainable and predictable financial, logistical and technical support to be provided
to the joint force, including through MINUSMA. I recommend that the Security
Council consider this request positively. I also recommend that the provision of
liaison officers from member States of the G5 Sahel to MINUSMA envisaged in
resolution 2295 (2016) be aligned with the concept of operations of the joint force
to enhance coordination and intelligence sharing. Close coordination between
Malian, French, G5 Sahel and MINUSMA forces, as well as the formalization of
regional security cooperation, such as through a security compac t, will be critical.
70. In this context, enhanced support for the reform of the Malian defence and
security forces to enable its redeployment remains essential. To this end, I call upon
the European Union Training Mission and the European Union Common Se curity
and Defence Policy mission in Mali to continue their important contributions to the
Malian defence and security forces and to further enhance coordination with
MINUSMA. While efforts continue on the broader reform of the Malian forces, we
must also accelerate efforts aimed at enhancing their operational effectiveness as
quickly as possible to contribute to addressing current threats. I therefore
recommend that MINUSMA enhance its partnership with the Malian defence and
security forces to accelerate their operational effectiveness and redeployment
throughout the country. This could include operational and logistical support,
coordinated operations, mentoring and strengthened information sharing, medical
evacuation, transportation and planning, among other initiatives.
71. In the light of the above, the Mission’s contribution to achieving sustainable
peace and stability in Mali remains essential. I therefore recommend that the
Security Council extend the mandate of MINUSMA for a period of one year, that is
until 30 June 2018. Streamlining and sequencing the implementation of the
Mission’s mandate in the light of the evolving political and security realities on the
ground could generate greater progress. I therefore also recommend that the
Security Council prioritize and strengthen the political and security tasks of
MINUSMA, as outlined above. I further recommend that transition planning
commence in earnest with a view to handing over relevant tasks to the United
Nations country team based on comparative advantages and a mapping of
capabilities. Meanwhile, the Mission is reviewing its priorities, posture and
presence to ensure that it is best positioned to implement its mandate effectively, in
particular the protection of civilians.
72. Since its inception, MINUSMA has faced severe capability gaps despite
arduous efforts, constraining its capacity to fully implement its mandate.
MINUSMA military and police forces have yet to reach the new ceiling authorized
in resolution 2295 (2016). Of the 14 military helicopters deployed, only 11 are
usable and the Mission is short of 88 armoured personnel carriers. I would
emphasize that MINUSMA must have the resources required to implement its
mandate in an asymmetric environment where terrorist groups and transnational
criminal networks operate.

17-08909

15/27

S/2017/478

73. I addressed a force-generation conference convened by the Secretariat on 22
and 23 May to call upon troop-contributing countries to ensure that MINUSMA has
greater and more predictable capabilities in the long term to implement its mandate
and protect its personnel. I welcome the pledges made and call for their speedy
deployment. I also urge the contribution of resources to fill remaining capability
gaps, such as an attack helicopter unit, an airfield support unit and an intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance company. I encourage all contributing countries and
bilateral donors to continue their efforts to ensure that all contingents have the
equipment and pre-deployment training necessary to operate in this challenging
environment, including to ensure full compliance with my zero -tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse, and I reiterate my call for innovative measures and
partnerships. Efforts should continue to standardize and regularize pre-deployment
training for all contingents. I encourage the enhanced representation and
deployment of women. Capacities alone, however, will not suffice. I therefore call
upon contributing countries to ensure that their forces take a proactive, robust,
pre-emptive posture without any caveats, and that they adhere to the highest
standards of performance and conduct.
74. Lastly, I wish to express my sincere appreciation for the unwavering
commitment of the MINUSMA personnel, who, under the leadership of my Special
Representative, continue to work in very difficult conditions to promote peace in
Mali. I pay tribute to the troop- and police-contributing countries for their
dedication to the cause of peace and for helping to stabilize the security situation
under continued difficult conditions. I commend the members of the international
mediation team led by Algeria for their sustained support for the Malian parties. I
express my gratitude to the African Union, the Economic Community o f West
African States, the European Union, bilateral partners, United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, as well as non-governmental organizations and all other
partners, for their important contributions in support of peace and stability in Mali.

16/27

17-08909

S/2017/478

Annex I
[Original: French]

Benchmarks for monitoring the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
Objectives

1.

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

Deadline

Comments

Political and institutional matters

Significant progress in the implementation of an institutional architecture designed to guarantee the participation
and inclusion of all Malian citizens and enable the restoration of State authority throughout the country
1.1 Establish an
institutional architecture
based on the principle of
free administration and
increased representation
of communities within
national institutions

1.2 Define the authorities
of territorial communities
by specifying their
respective roles and
responsibilities, and those
of the State

17-08909

1.1.1 The interim authorities
responsible for the
administration of
municipalities (communes),
districts (cercles) and regions
in the north are operational

Ongoing

2017

The interim
authorities were
installed in the five
regions of the north
on 20 April 2017

1.1.2 The Government of Mali
has established territorial
communities, elected through
universal suffrage and with
extensive authority, by
amending Act No. 93-008 on
free administration and Act No.
2012-006 on the administrative
organization of the territory

Ongoing

2017

The texts have been
drafted but have
not yet been
approved

1.1.3 For every region the
Government has established a
Regional Assembly, elected by
direct universal suffrage, to
which authorities and resources
have been transferred

Ongoing

2017

Adoption of the
new election law;
the law on
territorial
communities is
being drafted

1.2.1 The Government has
ensured that each region is able
to establish and manage
collective infrastructure and
basic social services

Implemented

1.2.2 Every region has
developed an economic, social
and cultural development plan
and will be responsible for land
management

Implemented

1.2.3 Every region is
responsible for establishing and
implementing a tax system
suited to its economic structure
and development objectives, in
accordance with current
legislation

Not
implemented

17/27

S/2017/478

Objectives

2.

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

Deadline

Comments

Defence and security aspects

Implementation and progressive functioning of inclusive defence and security forces that are accountable to
citizens and comply with human rights and the rule of law, thereby strengthening national cohesion and
contributing to the promotion of regional security
2.1 Implement reform of
the security and defence
sectors

2.2 Implement
cantonment and
disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration programmes
for combatants, in
accordance with the
guiding principles of the
Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali
and in keeping with
international standards

18/27

2.1.1 Decrees are adopted
defining the make-up, role and
operation of the National
Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commission,
the Commission on Integration
and the National Council for
Security Sector Reform

Implemented

The decrees have
been adopted by
Cabinet

2.1.2 The National
Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commission,
the Commission on Integration
and the National Council for
Security Sector Reform are
established in an inclusive
manner and are operational

Implemented

All the
commissions are
operational

2.1.3 The National
Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commission,
the Commission on Integration
and the National Council for
Security Sector Reform have
developed a new national
vision of defence and security,
taking relevant local, national
and international factors into
account

Ongoing

Completion
expected

2.2.1 The National
Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commission
has drawn up a national
disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and
cantonment programme, with
the support of the United
Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and other partners

Implemented

The programme
was validated in
December 2016

2.2.2 The Commission on
Integration has set up a support
programme which defines the
measures necessary for the
reintegration of ex-combatants
and takes into account crosscutting issues (gender, human
rights and the protection of
civilians)

Ongoing

First half of
2017

The integration
benchmarks and
quotas are still to
be defined by the
signatories

17-08909

S/2017/478
State of
implementation

Objectives

Progress indicators

2.3 Reconstitute and
progressively redeploy
defence and security
forces throughout national
territory

2.3.1 The Technical
Commission on Security and
the Operational Coordination
Mechanism have submitted an
implementation plan for
security arrangements in the
north, with the deployment of
joint patrols to provide security
for the cantonment and
disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process

Implemented

2.3.2 Under the aegis of the
Operational Coordination
Mechanism, joint units of
combatants from signatory
parties and the defence and
security forces, including
special counter-terrorist units,
are operational and carrying
out joint patrols that contribute
to the restoration of security

Ongoing

Deadline

Comments

First half of
2017

Start of the process
in Gao

2.3.3 The gradual
redeployment throughout Mali
of reconstituted defence and
security forces is in effect and
guarantees that security and
public order are maintained
3.

Humanitarian assistance, socioeconomic and cultural development and the provision of basic social services

Establishment of structures and mechanisms designed to achieve inclusive, participatory and sustainable local
development
3.1 Create the conditions
necessary to facilitate the
return, repatriation,
resettlement and
socioeconomic
reintegration of all
displaced persons and
refugees; enable
communities to benefit
from peace dividends; and
strengthen social cohesion
and humanitarian
assistance

3.1.1 Establishment of
monitoring mechanisms for
displaced persons and refugees,
in accordance with regional
and international instruments

Ongoing

Progress made:
–Identification of
30 return zones in
20 priority
municipalities by
the Ministry of
Solidarity and
Humanitarian
Action, with the
support of the
Office of the
United Nations
High
Commissioner for
Refugees
–Supply of
provisions and
allowances to the
most vulnerable
repatriated
persons

17-08909

19/27

S/2017/478

Objectives

20/27

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

3.1.2 Neutral and impartial
humanitarian assistance is
delivered in areas impacted by
the crisis to those most
vulnerable (residents,
returnees, displaced or
repatriated persons), enhancing
their means of subsistence and
resilience

Ongoing

3.1.3 With the support of
humanitarian and development
partners under the 2015-2017
emergency humanitarian plan
and the United Nations
Development Assistance
Framework, peace dividends
are brought to communities in
order to reduce socioeconomic
disparities among regions, with
increased access to basic
services in the poorest regions

Ongoing

Deadline

Comments

Progress made:
–Launching in
February 2017 of
the Humanitarian
Response Plan,
with the
contribution of
more than 130
partners (United
Nations agencies
and national and
international
non-governmental
organizations
–As at 30 April
2017, only
12.5 per cent of
the humanitarian
response plan,
totalling $293
million, had been
financed
–Completion in
April 2017 of the
multi-risk
contingency plan
for preparation
and response to
disasters
Progress made:
–Design of a an
“integrated
approach”
between
MINUSMA, the
United Nations
Development
Programme and
the Office for the
Coordination of
Humanitarian
Affairs to support
the return of State
authority in the
region of Mopti,
more specifically
in the districts
(cercles) of
Bankass and Koro.
This approach also
includes a segment
to support incomegenerating
activities

17-08909

S/2017/478
State of
implementation

Objectives

Progress indicators

3.2 Mobilize the
resources necessary to
implement the specific
development strategy for
the northern regions of
Mali

3.2.1 Establishment of a
northern development zone
with an Interregional Advisory
Council, comprising
representatives of Regional
Assemblies, and with a specific
development strategy relevant
to the sociocultural and
geographic realities and the
climate of the region

Ongoing

The
Progress made:
development
–Validation of the
zone’s
draft text
governance
bodies will
–Starting in April
be
2017, the Ministry
established
of Economic
once the new
Affairs and
regional
Finance has set up
councils
multidisciplinary
have been
committees to
established
update and
finalize the
special
development
strategy for the
north

3.2.2 Establishment of a
sustainable development fund,
comprising the resources
pledged during the
International Conference for
the Economic Recovery and
Development of Mali, held in
October 2015, with the support
of technical and financial
partners

Ongoing

2017

3.2.3 Establishment of a
regional development agency
in each region for programme
management and monitoring
implementation of the
commitments undertaken by
the Government to benefit the
regions, under the authority of
the President of the Regional
Assembly

Ongoing

3.2.4 Programme agreements
are concluded between the
State and the regions for the
implementation of multi-year
investment programmes, with
the participation of the
territorial communities
concerned

Ongoing

17-08909

Deadline

Comments

The text is still
being drafted:
refinement of the
goals expected
from the
sustainable
development fund

The report of the
annual conference
of regional
development
agencies notes that
all regional
development
agencies are
operational
(equipped with
human, material and
financial resources
for their installation
and activities)
2016

Contract plans have
been signed
between the State
and the regions of
Timbuktu, Kidal
and Mopti. Only
the one for Gao has
yet to be signed

21/27

S/2017/478

Objectives

4.

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

Deadline

Comments

Justice and reconciliation

Prevent impunity and promote genuine national reconciliation by ensuring legal and ju dicial assistance and
access through the implementation of transitional justice mechanisms and comprehensive justice sector reform,
in accordance with international norms and standards
4.1 Organize a national
reconciliation conference
on the underlying causes
of the conflict

4.2 Establish transitional
justice mechanisms

4.1.1 An inclusive national
reconciliation conference on
the underlying causes of the
conflict is organized, with the
support of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee, to
ensure genuine national
reconciliation

Implemented

4.1.2 A charter for peace,
unity and national
reconciliation is drawn up on
the basis of consensus and
based on the outcomes of the
national reconciliation
conference

Ongoing

On 3 May, the
Chair of the
national
reconciliation
conference was
appointed Special
Chair responsible
for the drafting of
the charter for
peace, unity and
national
reconciliation and
the mapping of all
land in the
Republic of Mali

4.2.1 The Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission is
operational and has regional
offices throughout the country

Implemented

Progress made:

22/27

The national
reconciliation
conference was
held from 27 March
to 2 April 2017

–The Truth, Justice
and
Reconciliation
Commission is
operational
Ongoing

4.2.2 An international
commission of inquiry is
established and operational

March 2017

–Five regional
offices out of six
are open

Ongoing

17-08909

S/2017/478
State of
implementation

Objectives

Progress indicators

4.3 Reform the justice
system and strengthen the
rule of law in order to
enhance traditional and
informal justice
mechanisms, improve
access to justice for
perpetrators and victims,
and end impunity

4.3.1 The justice system is
strengthened to improve access
to justice for perpetrators and
victims

Ongoing

4.3.2 The perpetrators of
human rights violations are
prosecuted and convicted in
accordance with international
norms and standards

Ongoing

4.3.3 The victims of human
rights violations, including
sexual or gender-based
violence, are treated fairly by
the justice system, receive
reparations and benefit from
new judicial protection
measures

Ongoing

4.3.4 Traditional and
customary mechanisms are
integrated into the justice
system, without prejudice to
the sovereign right of the State

Ongoing

17-08909

Deadline

Comments

The Government is
continuing its
efforts to
strengthen the
presence and
effectiveness of the
justice system
throughout the
country through
such measures as
the appointment of
judges in the
northern regions of
the country,
although it is still
difficult for some
of them to take up
their positions
owing to the
security situation

The Government is
continuing its
efforts to
coordinate the work
of the different
stakeholders, in
order to clarify the
jurisdictional
powers of the cadis
and their role as
key interlocutors of
traditional justice

23/27

S/2017/478

Objectives

24/27

Progress indicators

State of
implementation

4.3.5 Institutions regulating
and protecting specific rights,
such as freedom of expression,
of the press and of
communication, are in place or
strengthened and work
effectively

Implemented

4.3.6 The Anti-Corruption and
Financial Crime Commission is
established

Implemented

Deadline

Comments

17-08909

S/2017/478

Annex II
Military and police strength of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
as at 20 May 2017
Police component
Military component
(staff officers and units)
Women

Individual police officers

Country

Men

Total

Armenia

1

1

Austria

6

6

Bangladesh

1 506

4

1 510

Belgium

18

1

19

Benin

258

258

Bhutan

3

3

Bosnia and Herzegovina

2

2

Burkina Faso

1 694

23

1 717

338

7

345

Chad

1 407

5

1 412

China

380

19

399

Côte d’Ivoire

154

3

157

1

1

Burundi
Cambodia

Men

Women

Men

Men

181

181

181

140

161

1

162

138

161

8

169

22

140

30

1

31

131

Women

Total police

Total

1

18

Czechia

Total

21

9

Cameroon

Formed police units

7

9

9

Women

Total

181

9

18

18

4

4

8

4

4

8

8

2

10

8

2

10

9

9

19

19

Denmark

3

Egypt

67

El Salvador

85

Estonia

10

10

Ethiopia

1

1

Finland

5

1

6

7

2

9

7

2

9

France

22

1

23

9

1

10

9

1

10

Gambia

3

Germany

526

12

4

16

12

4

16

Ghana

219

Guinea

849

11

9

20

11

9

20

1

1

1

1

5

5

5

5

1

1

1

1

Guinea-Bissau

7

3

9

9

67

5

5

18

14

540
219

10

1

859
1

Indonesia

7

7

Italy

1

1

Jordan

1

1

Kenya

5
3

Liberia

74

Lithuania

5

Madagascar

17-08909

14

3

Hungary

Latvia

14

92

2

7

5

79

3
5

25/27

S/2017/478
Police component
Military component
(staff officers and units)
Country

Mauritania

Men

Individual police officers

Women

Total

5

Formed police units

Men

Women

Total

148

3

151

Netherlands

248

10

258

14

2

16

Niger

853

7

860

17

14

31

Nigeria

69

12

81

1

1

Norway

15

1

16

Portugal

60

8

68

Romania

1

1

7

7

Senegal

569

576

20

20

7

Sierra Leone

6

6

Sri Lanka

7

7

Sweden

173

Togo

19

6
913

26

192

6

6

2

939

Tunisia

Men

Women

Total

14

2

16

3

118

22

140

17

14

315

119

22

141

7
267

287

9

296

9

6

3

9

2

2

10

268

21

289

56

54

2

56

8

8

Yemen

6

6

8

10 756

201 10 957

281

279

2

2

2

13

276

8

21

266

9

7

2

United States of America

26/27

Total

54

United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland

Total

Women

5

Nepal

Switzerland

Men

Total police

2
5

26

53

334

1 117

51

1 168

1 398

8
104

1 502

17-08909

S/2017/478

17-08909

27/27
