6

General Assembly-Fourth Special Session

"8. The bonds may be sold in whole or in part
from time to time until 31 December 1%3."

1205th plenary meeting,
27 June 1963.
1879 (S-IV). Establishment of a peace fund
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the purposes of the United Nations
as set out in Article 1 of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Realizing the need for prompt and effective action
to prevent any threats to or breaches of international
peace and security,
Believing that inadequate financial resources can
seriously delay or jeopardize the success of such action,
Desiring to make sufficient funds readily available
to the Secretary-General, thus enabling him to discharge, without undue delay, his responsibilities under
the Charter in cases of breaches of the peace,
Convinced that the establishment of a peace fund
through voluntary contributions from Member States
as well as organizations and individuals is worthy of
study as a means of furthering this objective,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to consult all
Member States and interested organizations on the
desirability and feasibility of establishing such a peace
fund;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its eighteenth session.
1205th plenary meeting,
27 June 1963.
1880 (S-IV). Continuation of the Working Group
on the Examination of the Administrative
and Budgetary Procedures of the United
Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1854 B (XVII) of 19 December 1%2,

Bearing in mind the principles enunciated in its resolution 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1%3, that shall serve
as guidelines for the equitable sharing of the costs of
peace-keeping operations involving heavy expenditures
that may be initiated in the future, to the extent that
these expenditures will not be otherwise covered by
agreed arrangements,
Bearing in mind further that the maintenance of
peace and security is a primary purpose of the United
Nations,
Desirous that ways and means should be found to
arrive at working arrangements so that all Member
States may feel able to share in such costs,
Noting that the tasks with which the Working
Group on the Examination of the Administrative and
Budgetary Procedures of the United Nations was
charged have not been completed,
1. Decides to continue in being the Working Group
on the Examination of the Administrative and Budgetary Procedures of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Working Group:
(a) To recommend a special method for the equitable sharing of the costs of future peace-keeping operations involving heavy expenditures to the extent not
otherwise covered by agreed arrangements ;
( b) To consider suggestions regarding other sources
of financing future peace-keeping operations;
( c) To explore ways and means for bringing about
the widest possible measure of agreement among all
Member States on the question of the financing of
future peace-keeping operations;
3. _Invite~ the W orki~g Group to ~onsult as appropnate with the Committee on Contnbutions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available
to the Working Group the necessary facilities and assistance for the accomplishment of its tasks;
5. Requests the Working Group to report on these
matters to the General Assembly as soon as possible,
but not later than at its nineteenth session.
1205th plenary meeting,
27 June 1963.
