lleaolutiom adopted oa the reporta of the Slxth Commhtee

ensure the participation of an increasing number of
jurists of developing countries;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission the records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the twentyninth session of the General Assembly;

11
1. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for its valuable work on the question
of succession of States in respect of treaties and to the
Special Rapporteurs on the topic for their contribution
to this work;
2. Invites Member States to submit to the SecretaryGeneral, not later than 1 August 1975, their written
comments and observations on the draft articles on
succession of States in respect of treaties contained in
the report of the lnternational Law Commission on the
work of its twenty-sixth session, 10 including comments
and observations on proposals referred to in paragraph 75 of that report, which the Commission was
prevented from discussing by lack of time, and on the
procedure by which and the form in which work on
the draft articles should be completed;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate, before the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, the
comments and observations submitted in accordance
with paragraph 2 above;
·
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Succession of
States in respect of treaties".
23 l 9th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3316 (XXIX). Report of the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having conside.red the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its seventh session, 1:i
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 Decem·
ber 1966, by which it established the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law and defined
the. object and terms of reference of the Commission,
Further recalling its resolutions 2421 (XXIII) of
18 December 1968, 2502 (XXIV) of 12 November
1969, 2635 (XXV) of 12 November 1970, 2766
(XXVI) of 17 November 1971, 2928 (XXVII) of
28 November 1972 and 3108 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973 concerning the reports of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its first to sixth sessions,
Reatfirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those aflecting the developing countries, would significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation among ali States on a
basis of equality and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the wellbeing of ali peoples,
13 01/icial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/9617).

145

Bearing in mind that the Trade and Development
Board of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, at its fourteenth session, took note with
appreciation 14 of the report of the United Nations
Commission on lnternational Trade Law,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on lnternational Trade
Law on the work of its seventh session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commission on
lnternational Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods;
3. Notes with satisfaction that work on uniform
rules on the Iiabtlity of ocean carriers for loss, damage
or delay with respect to cargo is nearing completion
and that a draft convention setting forth such rules
will be transmitted to Governments and interested inteinational organizations in 1975 for their comments;
4. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law should:
(a) Continue in its work to pay special attention to
the topics to which it has decided to give priority,
namely, the international sale of goods, international
payments, international commercial arbitration and
international legislation on shipping;
(b) Continue to consider the legal problems presented by different kinds of multinational enterprises
and the advisability of preparing uniform rules gbvern·
ing the liability for damage caused by products intended
for or involved in international trade, in accordance
with the decisions thereon adopted by the Commission
at its seventh session;
(e) lntensify its work on training and assistance in
the field of international trade law, taking into account
the special interests of the developing countries;
(d) Maintain a close collaboration with the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
continue to collaborate with international organizations
active in the field of international trade law;
(e) Continue to give special consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in min\:I
the special problems of land-locked countries;
(/) Keep its programme of work and working methods under review with the aim of increasing the effectiveness of its work;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly on the Commission's
report on the work of its seventh session.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3317 (XXIX). United Nations Conference on
Prescription (Limitation) in the International Sale of Goods

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2929 (XXVII) of 28 November 1972 and 3104 (XXVIII) of 12 December
1973 on the convening of a United Nations Conference on Prescription (Limitation) in the lnternational
Sale of Goods,
H /bid., Supplement No. 15 (A/9615/Rev.l), para. 539.
