A/RES/73/146

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 January 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 29

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 17 December 2018
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/73/582)]

73/146.

Trafficking in women and girls
The General Assembly,
Reiterating its strong condemnation of human trafficking, especially trafficking
in women and children, which constitutes a serious crime and a grave offence to
human dignity and physical integrity, a violation and abuse of human rights and a
challenge to sustainable development and which requires (a) the implementation of a
comprehensive approach that includes partnerships and measures to prevent such
trafficking, to prosecute and punish the traffickers, to identify, protect and support the
victims of such trafficking and to intensify international cooperation and (b) a
criminal justice response proportionate to the serious nature of the offence,
Recalling all international conventions that deal specifically with and address
issues relevant to the problem of trafficking in women and girls, such as the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 1 and the Protocols
thereto, in particular the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 2 and the Protocol against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 3 the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 4 and the Optional
Protocol thereto, 5 the Convention on the Rights of the Child 6 and the Optional
Protocol thereto on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, 7
and the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the

__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
3
Ibid., vol. 2241, No. 39574.
4
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
5
Ibid., vol. 2131, No. 20378.
6
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
7
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
1
2

18-22183 (E)

220119

*1822183*

A/RES/73/146

Trafficking in women and girls

Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others, 8 as well as relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and its functional commissions
and the Human Rights Council on the issue,
Recognizing the crucial importance of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, which provides an
internationally agreed definition of the crime of human trafficking aimed at the
prevention of human trafficking, the protection of victims and the prosecution of the
perpetrators,
Welcoming the adoption of the resolution entitled “Establishment of the
Mechanism for the Review of the Implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Crime and the Protocols thereto ” at the ninth session of the
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnat ional
Organized Crime, held in Vienna from 15 to 19 October 2018,
Welcoming also the political declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, 9 adopted by the
General Assembly at its high-level meeting during the seventy-second session, in
which Member States reiterated, in the strongest possible terms, the importance of
strengthening collective action to end human trafficking,
Reaffirming the provisions pertaining to trafficking in women and girls
contained in the outcome documents of relevant international conferences and
summits, in particular the strategic objective on the issue of human trafficking
contained in the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action adopted by the Fourth
World Conference on Women, 10
Recalling the commitment made by world leaders at the Millennium Summit,
the 2005 World Summit and the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly
on the Millennium Development Goals to devise, enforce and strengthen effective
measures to combat and eliminate all forms of human trafficking in order to counter
the demand for trafficked victims and to protect the victims and prosecute the
perpetrators,
Reaffirming the commitments made by world leaders at the United Nations
summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda, and acknowledging
that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 11 inter alia, addresses the
elimination of all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and
private spheres, including human trafficking and sexual and other types of
exploitation; the eradication of forced labour, modern slavery, human trafficking and
child labour; and the ending of abuse, exploitation, human trafficki ng, all forms of
violence against and torture of children,
Recognizing the importance of a revitalized global partnership to ensure the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda, including the implementation of the goals and
targets related to ending violence against women and girls and human trafficking, and
in this regard taking note with appreciation of Alliance 8.7 and of the Global
Partnership to End Violence Against Children,
Taking note with appreciation of the conclusion of the intergovernmental
negotiations for a global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration, which
addresses, inter alia, the issue of human trafficking in the context of international
__________________

Ibid., vol. 96, No. 1342.
Resolution 72/1.
10
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
11
Resolution 70/1.
8
9

2/13

18-22183

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/73/146

migration, and welcomes the convening of the Intergovernmental Conference to
Adopt the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, in Marrakech,
Morocco, on 10 and 11 December 2018,
Welcoming in particular the efforts of States, United Nations bodies and
agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to combat
human trafficking, especially trafficking in women and children, including the
implementation of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 64/293 of 30 July 2010,
Recognizing the urgency of combating human trafficking in all its forms,
including for the purposes of forced or compulsory labour, including of women
migrant workers, and in this regard taking note of the adoption by the Inte rnational
Labour Conference on 11 June 2014, at its 103rd session, of the Protocol to the Forced
Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), and of the Forced Labour (Supplementary
Measures) Recommendation, 2014 (No. 203), of the International Labour
Organization,
Welcoming, in the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status
of Women at its sixty-second session, 12 the commitment of Governments to
implement comprehensive anti-trafficking strategies that integrate a human rights and
sustainable development perspective, including in raising public awareness on the
issue of human trafficking, and to ensure that the rights and specific needs of women
and girls subjected to human trafficking are addressed in national and international
plans, strategies and responses,
Noting with appreciation the efforts, including of the human rights treaty bodies
and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, other relevant special procedures mandate holders of
the Council involved in human trafficking issues, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children and United Nations agencies and
other concerned intergovernmental and governmental organizations, within their
existing mandates, as well as civil society, to address the crime of human trafficking,
and encouraging them to continue doing so and to share their knowledge and best
practices as widely as possible,
Noting the relevant contributions of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in
persons, especially women and children, 13 and her work in integrating a gender- and
age-specific perspective throughout her mandate, in relation to the issue of human
trafficking,
Acknowledging the inclusion of gender-related crimes in the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, 14 which entered into force on 1 July 2002,
Bearing in mind the obligations of States to exercise due diligence to prevent
human trafficking, to investigate and punish perpetrators of human trafficking and to
protect and empower victims, and that not doing so may violate and impair or nullify
the enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the victims,
Seriously concerned that an increasing number of women and girls are being
trafficked, to both developed and developing countries, as well as within and between
regions and States, and recognizing that human trafficking disproportionately affects
__________________

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2018, Supplement No. 7 (E/2018/27),
chap. I, sect. A.
13
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53),
chap. V, sect. A, resolution 26/8.
14
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
12

18-22183

3/13

A/RES/73/146

Trafficking in women and girls

women and girls and that men and boys are also victims of human trafficking,
including for sexual exploitation and for the purpose of organ removal,
Highlighting the need to incorporate a gender- and age-sensitive approach,
taking into account the specific needs of women and girls with disabilities, into all
anti-trafficking efforts, and recognizing that women and girls are particularly
vulnerable to human trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation, forced
marriage, forced labour and other forms of exploitation,
Recognizing that pervasive gender inequality, poverty, unemployment, lack of
socioeconomic opportunities, gender-based violence, discrimination, including
multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination, marginalization and persistent
demand are among the underlying causes that make women and girls vulnerable to
human trafficking,
Recognizing also the need to adopt or strengthen legislative or other measures,
such as educational, social or cultural measures, including through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation, to discourage the demand, which fosters all forms of
exploitation of persons, especially women and children, that leads to human
trafficking,
Recognizing further the role that men and boys can play as agents of change in
addressing the harmful impact of gender stereotypes and negative social norms and
in preventing violence against women and human trafficking, and underlining the
need to educate and engage men and boys for this purpose,
Recognizing the heightened vulnerability to trafficking of women a nd girls in
humanitarian crisis situations, including in conflict and post -conflict environments,
natural disasters and other emergency environments, as well as the devastating
consequences for women and girls in such circumstances, and noting in this rega rd
the Migrants in Countries in Crisis initiative and the Agenda for the Protection of
Cross-Border Displaced Persons in the Context of Disasters and Climate Change ,
resulting from the Nansen Initiative, while recognizing that not all States are
participating in them,
Recognizing also that in armed conflict, human trafficking for the purpose of
sexual exploitation, forced marriage and labour exploitation can be prevalent, and
expressing deep concern over its negative impacts on victims of human traffickin g,
Recognizing further the need to reinforce efforts regarding the provision of
relevant documents, such as birth registration documents, in order to lower the risk
of women and girls of being subjected to human trafficking and to help to identify
victims of human trafficking,
Recognizing that, despite the progress made, challenges to preventing and
combating trafficking in women and girls and to protecting and assisting the victims
of human trafficking remain and that further efforts should be made to a dopt and
implement adequate legislation and other measures and to continue improving the
collection of reliable data disaggregated by sex, age, nationality, disability,
geographic location and other characteristics relevant in national contexts and other
relevant factors and of statistics that would allow proper analysis of the nature, extent
and risk factors of trafficking in women and girls,
Recognizing also that further work is required both to better understand the link
between migration and human trafficking and to develop more effective responses to
eliminate the risk of human trafficking in the migration process in order to, inter alia,
further efforts to protect women migrant workers from violence, discrimination,
exploitation and abuse,

4/13

18-22183

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/73/146

Concerned about the use of information and communications technologies,
including the Internet, for the purpose of recruiting for the exploitation of the
prostitution of others, including for exploiting women and children and for child
pornography, including sexual abuse material, paedophilia and any other forms of
sexual exploitation and abuse of children, as well as for forced marriage and forced
labour, while acknowledging the role that information and communications
technologies can play in reducing the risk of sexual abuse and exploitation, including
by empowering women and children to report such abuses,
Recognizing the potential of information and communications technologies,
including the Internet, to prevent and combat human trafficking, in particular
trafficking in women and children, and to assist victims,
Concerned about the increasing activities of transnational criminal
organizations and others that profit from human trafficking, especially trafficking in
women and children, without regard to dangerous and inhuman conditions and in
flagrant violation of national laws and international standards,
Noting with concern that women and girls are also vulnerable to the risk of
human trafficking for the purpose of organ removal, and in this regard taking note of
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution 2 5/1 of 27 May
2016, entitled “Preventing and combating trafficking in human organs and trafficking
in persons for the purpose of organ removal”, adopted by the Commission at its
twenty-fifth session, 15
Recognizing that victims of human trafficking are particularly exposed to
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and that women and
girl victims are often subject to multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination and
violence, including on the grounds of their gender, age, ethnicity, disability, culture
and religion, as well as their origin, and that those forms of discrimination themselves
may fuel human trafficking,
Noting with concern that some of the demand fostering sexual exploitation,
labour exploitation and the illegal removal of organs is met by human trafficking, an d
recognizing that human trafficking is fuelled by high profits for traffickers and
demand that fosters all forms of exploitation,
Acknowledging that women and girl victims of human trafficking, owing to
pervasive and persistent gender inequality, are further disadvantaged and
marginalized by a general lack of information on or awareness and recognition of
their human rights and by the stigmatization often associated with human trafficking,
as well as by the obstacles they meet in gaining access to accurat e information and
recourse mechanisms in cases of the violations and abuses of their rights, and that
special measures are required for their protection and to increase their awareness,
Taking note of the Doha Declaration on Integrating Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice into the Wider United Nations Agenda to Address Social and
Economic Challenges and to Promote the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels, and Public Participation, adopted in April 2015, 16 which
expresses the importance of implementing a victim-oriented approach to prevent and
counter all forms of human trafficking for the purpose of exploitation, including the
exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced
labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of
organs, where appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Protocol to
__________________

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2016, Supplement No. 10 (E/2016/30),
chap. I, sect. D.
16
Resolution 70/174, annex.
15

18-22183

5/13

A/RES/73/146

Trafficking in women and girls

Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children,
Reaffirming the importance of bilateral, subregional, regional and international
cooperation mechanisms and initiatives, including information exchanges on best
practices, of Governments, intergovernmental and civil society organizations, the
private sector and other relevant stakeholders, to address the problem of human
trafficking, especially trafficking in women and children,
Reaffirming also that global efforts, including international cooperation and
technical assistance programmes, to eradicate human trafficking, especially
trafficking in women and children, demand the strong political commitment,
coordinated and coherent efforts and active cooperation of all Governments of
countries of origin, transit and destination,
Recognizing that policies and programmes for prevention, protection,
rehabilitation, recovery, repatriation and reintegration should be developed through a
gender- and age-sensitive, comprehensive and multidisciplinary approach, with
concern for the security and privacy of the victims and respect for the full enjoyment
of their human rights and with the involvement of all relevant actors in countries of
origin, transit and destination,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General, 17
which provides information on measures by States and activities within the United
Nations system to tackle trafficking in women and girls;
2.
Also takes note with appreciation of the information submitted by Member
States and United Nations entities on measures and activities undertaken to combat
trafficking in women and girls, and urges Member States and United Nations entities
that have not done so to submit the requested information for inclusion in the report
of the Secretary-General;
3.
Takes note of the reports of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on trafficking in persons, especially women and children; 18
4.
Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or
acceding to, as a matter of priority, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime 1 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 2 taking into
consideration the central role of those instruments in the fight against human
trafficking, and urges States parties to those instruments to implement them fully and
effectively;
5.
Urges Member States to consider signing and ratifying, and States parties
to implement, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women 4 and the Optional Protocol thereto, 5 the Convention on the Rights of
the Child 6 and the Optional Protocols thereto 19 and the International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, 20
as well as the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29) 21 and the Protocol thereto,
the Labour Inspection Convention, 1947 (No. 81), 22 the Migration for Employment
__________________

A/73/263.
A/73/171 and A/HRC/38/45.
19
United Nations, Treaty Series, vols. 2171 and 2173, No. 27531; and resolution 66/138, annex.
20
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2220, No. 39481.
21
Ibid., vol. 39, No. 612.
22
Ibid., vol. 54, No. 792.
17
18

6/13

18-22183

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/73/146

Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97), 23 the Discrimination (Employment and
Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111), 24 the Minimum Age Convention, 1973
(No. 138), 25 the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975
(No. 143), 26 the Private Employment Agencies Convention, 1997 (No. 181), 27 the
Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182), 28 and the Domestic
Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189), of the International Labour Organization;
6.
Urges Member States, the United Nations and other international, regional
and subregional organizations, as well as civil society, including non -governmental
organizations, the private sector and the media, to fully and effectively implement the
relevant provisions of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons 29 and the activities outlined therein;
7.
Welcomes the efforts of Governments, United Nations bodies and agencies
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to prevent and address
the particular problem of trafficking in women and girls and encourages them to
further enhance their efforts and cooperation, including by sharing their knowledge,
technical expertise and best practices as widely as possible, and encourages Member
States to strengthen cooperation among all relevant actors to identify and disrupt
illicit financial flows stemming from trafficking in women and girls;
8.
Takes note with appreciation of the outcome document of the Regional
Ministerial Conference on Human Trafficking and Smuggling in the Horn of Africa,
known as the Khartoum Declaration, and calls for its effective implementation,
including through technical cooperation and capacity-building, by the United Nations
and the international community;
9.
Encourages the Commission on the Status of Women to consider
addressing the needs of, inter alia, women and girls subjected to human trafficking at
its sixty-third and sixty-fourth sessions, within the framework of the priority themes;
10. Encourages Member States, the United Nations system and other
stakeholders to observe the World Day against Trafficking in Persons, in the context
of the need to raise awareness of the situation of victims of hum an trafficking and for
the promotion and protection of their rights;
11. Encourages the United Nations system to mainstream, as appropriate, the
issue of human trafficking, especially trafficking in women and girls, into its broader
policies and programmes aimed at addressing economic and social development,
human rights, the rule of law, good governance, education, health and natural disaster
and post-conflict reconstruction;
12. Welcomes the continued focus given by the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to ending violence
against women and girls and to increasing women’s access to economic opportunities,
as well as its work on building effective partnerships for the empowerment of women
and girls, which will contribute to the efforts to combat human trafficking;
13. Calls upon Governments to intensify their efforts to prevent and address,
with a view to eliminating, the demand that fosters the trafficking of women and girls
for all forms of exploitation and in this regard to put in place or to enhance preventive
__________________

Ibid., vol. 120, No. 1616.
Ibid., vol. 362, No. 5181.
25
Ibid., vol. 1015, No. 14862.
26
Ibid., vol. 1120, No. 17426.
27
Ibid., vol. 2115, No. 36794.
28
Ibid., vol. 2133, No. 37245.
29
Resolution 64/293.
23
24

18-22183

7/13

A/RES/73/146

Trafficking in women and girls

measures, including legislative and punitive measures to deter exploiters of trafficked
persons, as well as ensure their accountability;
14. Takes note of the basic principles on the right to an effective remedy for
victims of trafficking in persons; 30
15. Calls upon Governments to strengthen measures aimed at achieving
gender equality and empowering women and girls by, inter alia, enhancing their
participation and leadership in society, including through education, economic
empowerment and promoting an increase in the number of women assuming decision making roles in both the public and private sectors, to take further appropriate
measures to address the increasing rate of homelessness of and in adequate housing
for women in order to reduce their vulnerability to being trafficked and, in that regard,
to improve the collection and use of data disaggregated by sex, age and disability to
inform such measures;
16. Also calls upon Governments to take appropriate preventive measures to
address the underlying causes as well as risk factors that increase vulnerability to
human trafficking, including poverty, gender inequality, gender stereotypes and
negative social norms, including discrimination and violence against women and
girls, including impunity for such violence, and the persistent demand that fosters all
forms of trafficking and the goods and services produced as a result of human
trafficking, as well as other factors that encourage the particular problem of
trafficking in women and girls for exploitation, including in prostitution and other
forms of commercialized sex, forced marriage, forced labour and organ removal, in
order to prevent and eliminate such trafficking, including by strengthening e xisting
legislation, with a view to providing better protection of the rights of women and girls
and punishing perpetrators, including public officials engaging in or facilitating
human trafficking, through, as appropriate, criminal and civil measures;
17. Calls upon Governments, the international community and all other
organizations and entities that deal with conflict, post-conflict, disaster and other
emergency situations to address the heightened vulnerability of women and girls to
human trafficking and exploitation and associated gender-based violence, inter alia,
that perpetuated by traffickers in digital spaces, and to prevent the trafficking of
affected women and girls through all such national, regional and international
initiatives;
18. Urges Governments to devise, enforce and strengthen effective genderand age-sensitive measures to combat and eliminate all forms of trafficking in women
and girls, including for sexual and economic exploitation, as part of a comprehensive
anti-trafficking strategy that integrates a human rights perspective, and to draw up, as
appropriate, national action plans in this regard;
19. Also urges Governments to ensure that the prevention of and responses to
human trafficking continue to take into account the specific needs of women and girls
and their participation in and contribution to all phases of preventing and responding
to human trafficking, especially in addressing specific forms of exploitation, such as
sexual exploitation;
20. Further urges Governments, in cooperation with intergovernmental,
non-governmental and private sector organizations, to support and allocate resources
to strengthen preventive action, in particular education for women and men, as well
as for girls and boys, on human rights, gender equality, self-respect and mutual
respect, and campaigns carried out in collaboration with civil society and the private
sector to increase public awareness of the issue at the national and grass -roots levels,
__________________
30

8/13

A/69/269, annex.
18-22183

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/73/146

including awareness-raising campaigns against human trafficking and slavery,
including modern slavery, targeted at groups that are at increased risk of becoming
victims of human trafficking, as well as at those who may fuel the demand that
contributes to human trafficking;
21. Reiterates the importance of continued coordination among, inter alia, the
Special Rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, on the sale and sexual exploitation of children,
including child prostitution, child pornography and other child sexual abuse material,
and on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences, in
order to avoid unnecessary duplication in their activities in the fulfilment of their
mandates;
22. Urges Governments to strengthen measures to eliminate sex tourism
demand, especially for children, through all possible preventive actions, including
legislative measures and other relevant policies and programmes, and to develop age appropriate educational and training programmes and policies aimed at preventing
sex tourism and human trafficking, giving special emphasis to the protection of young
women and children;
23. Encourages the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the World
Tourism Organization and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to promote their global campaign urging travellers to support the fight
against human trafficking, especially trafficking in women and girls;
24. Calls upon Member States to take into consideration the challenges
presented by new methods of recruiting victims of human trafficking, such as the
misuse of the Internet by human traffickers, in particular for recruiting children, to
take measures to develop targeted awareness-raising campaigns, including for law
enforcement, front-line service providers and at-risk industries, to identify the signs
of human trafficking, and to develop specialized training for law enforcement and
criminal justice practitioners;
25. Encourages Member States to establish or strengthen national
programmes and to engage in bilateral, subregional, regional and international
cooperation, including by forging regional initiatives or plans of action, 31 to address
the problem of human trafficking through, inter alia, the enhancement of informationsharing, data disaggregated by sex and age, specific data collection and other
technical capacities and mutual legal assistance, as well as the combating of
corruption and laundering of proceeds derived from human trafficking, including for
the purpose of commercial sexual exploitation, and to ensure, as appropriate, that

__________________
31

18-22183

Such as the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational
Crime, the Coordinated Mekong Ministerial Initiative against Trafficking, the Action Plan for the
Asia-Pacific region of the Asian Regional Initiative agai nst Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children (see A/C.3/55/3, annex), the initiatives of the European Union on a
comprehensive European policy and programmes on trafficking in human beings, as expr essed
most recently in the European Union plan on best practices, standards and procedures for
combating and preventing trafficking in human beings, adopted in December 2005, the activities
of the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Coo peration in Europe, the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Convention on Preventing and Combating
Trafficking in Women and Children for Prostitution, the Organization of American States
Meeting of National Authorities on Trafficking in Persons, the Agreement on the Cooperation of
the Commonwealth of Independent States in Combating Trafficking in Persons, Human Organs
and Tissues, the Inter-American Programme for the Prevention and Eradication of Commercial
Sexual Exploitation and Smuggling of and Trafficking in Children, and the activities of the
International Labour Organization and the International Organization for Migration in this field.
9/13

A/RES/73/146

Trafficking in women and girls

such agreements and initiatives are particularly responsive to the problem of human
trafficking as it affects women and girls;
26. Calls upon all Governments to criminalize all forms of human trafficking,
recognizing its increasing occurrence for the purpose of sexual exploitation,
commercial sexual exploitation and abuse, sex tourism and forced labour, and to bring
to justice and punish the offenders and inter mediaries involved, including public
officials involved with human trafficking, whether local or foreign, through the
competent national authorities, either in the country of origin of the offender or in the
country in which the abuse occurs, in accordance with the due process of law, as well
as to penalize persons in authority found guilty of sexually assaulting victims of
human trafficking in their custody;
27. Urges Governments, in accordance with their respective legal systems, to
take all appropriate measures, including through policies and legislation, to ensure
that victims of human trafficking are protected from prosecution or punishment for
acts those victims have been compelled to commit as a direct consequence of having
been subjected to human trafficking and that the victims do not suffer from
revictimization as a result of actions taken by Government authorities, and encourages
Governments to prevent, within their legal framework and in accordance with
national policies, victims of human trafficking from being prosecuted or punished as
a direct consequence of their illegal entry or residence;
28. Invites Governments to consider establishing or strengthening a national
mechanism, with the participation of civil society, as appropriate, includin g
non-governmental organizations, such as women’s organizations, and survivors of
human trafficking, to ensure a holistic and coordinated approach to anti-trafficking
policies and measures, to encourage the exchange of information and to report on
data, underlying causes, factors and trends in human trafficking, especially trafficking
in women and girls, and to include data on victims of human trafficking disaggregated
by sex, age and other relevant factors;
29. Invites the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women
and children, to continue to cooperate with international, regional and national
mechanisms to combat human trafficking, in consultation with Governments, relevant
treaty bodies, special procedures, the specialized agencies, intergovernmental
organizations, civil society, including non-governmental organizations, national
human rights institutions and other sources, including victims of human trafficking
or their representatives, as appropriate;
30. Encourages Governments and relevant United Nations bodies, from within
existing resources, to take appropriate measures to raise public awareness of the issue
of human trafficking, particularly trafficking in women and girls, including the factors
that make women and girls vulnerable to human trafficking, to discourage, with a
view to eliminating, the demand that fosters all forms of exploitation, including
sexual exploitation and forced labour, to publicize the laws, regulations and penalties
relating to this issue and to emphasize that human trafficking is a serious crime;
31. Calls upon concerned Governments to allocate resources, as appropriate,
to provide access to appropriate programmes for the physical, psychological and
social recovery of victims of human trafficking, including sexual and reproductive
health-care services that include affordable treatment, care and support services for
HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections, free of stigma and discrimination, as
well as comprehensive information and voluntary counselling, and to take measures
to cooperate with intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide
for the social, medical and psychological care of the victims in ways that protect their
privacy and identity;

10/13

18-22183

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/73/146

32. Calls upon Governments to promote the empowerment of women and
girls, including survivors of human trafficking, in all stages of humanitarian response
and to consider providing adequate access to redress;
33. Encourages Governments, in line with their obligations under
international law, to prevent, combat and eradicate human trafficking in the context
of international migration, including by identifying and supporting victims of human
trafficking, and to cooperate with relevant stakeholders to undertake or strength en
campaigns to inform migrants, including migrant women, of the risks associated with
human trafficking;
34. Strongly urges Governments to ensure coherence between the laws on and
measures responding to migration, labour and human trafficking to protect the human
rights of migrant women and girls throughout the migration and employment process
as well as the repatriation process, when applicable, and to provide effective
protection against human trafficking;
35. Invites States, together with relevant United Nations entities, to undertake
further research into the links between migration and human trafficking to guide the
development of age- and gender-sensitive policies and programmes that address the
vulnerability of women and girl migrants;
36. Encourages Governments to review and strengthen, as appropriate, the
enforcement of relevant labour and other laws within their territories or jurisdictions
that are aimed at, or have the effect of, requiring business enterprises, including
recruitment agencies, to prevent and combat human trafficking in supply chains, and
to periodically assess the adequacy of such laws and address any gaps;
37. Invites the business sector to consider the adoption of ethical codes of
conduct to ensure decent work and to prevent any form of exploitative practices that
foster human trafficking;
38. Encourages Governments to intensify collaboration with non-governmental
organizations, including women’s organizations, to develop and implement gender- and
age-sensitive programmes for effective counselling, training and reintegration into
society of victims of human trafficking and programmes that provide shelter and
helplines to victims or potential victims in ways that protect their privacy and identity ;
39. Urges Governments to provide or strengthen training for, and to raise
awareness among, law enforcement, judicial, immigration and other relevant officials
on the prevention and combating of human trafficking, including the sexual
exploitation of women and girls, and in this regard calls upon Governments to ensure
that the treatment of victims of human trafficking, especially by law enforcement
officials, immigration officers, consular officials, social workers, health service
providers and other first response officials, is co nducted with full respect for the
human rights of those victims and with gender and age sensitivity and observes the
principles of non-discrimination, including the prohibition of racial discrimination;
40. Invites Member States to provide training for law enforcement and border
control officials, as well as medical personnel, in identifying potential cases of human
trafficking for the purpose of organ removal;
41. Invites Governments to take steps to ensure that criminal justice
procedures and witness protection programmes are sensitive to the particular situation
of women and girls subjected to human trafficking and that they are supported and
assisted, as appropriate, in making complaints to the police or other authorities,
without fear and with due regard for the protection of their privacy and their identity,
and are available, when required, to the criminal justice system, and to ensure that
during this time they have access to gender- and age-sensitive protection and, as
18-22183

11/13

A/RES/73/146

Trafficking in women and girls

appropriate, social, medical, financial and legal assistance, including the possibility
of obtaining compensation for damages suffered;
42. Also invites Governments to intensify efforts aimed at the speedy
disposition of cases of human trafficking and, in cooperation with, inter a lia,
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to devise, enforce and
strengthen systems and mechanisms for combating human trafficking;
43. Further invites Governments to encourage media providers, including
Internet service providers, to adopt or strengthen self-regulatory measures to promote
the responsible use of media, particularly the Internet, with a view to eliminating the
exploitation of women and children, in particular girls, which could foster human
trafficking;
44. Encourages Governments to develop and implement strategies that
promote safe access to media and to information and communications technologies
in order to prevent and eradicate trafficking in women and girls, including increasing
women’s and girls’ digital literacy and access to information;
45. Invites the business sector, in particular the tourism, travel and
telecommunications industries, relevant recruitment agencies and mass media
organizations, to cooperate with Governments in eliminating trafficking in women
and children, in particular girls, including through the dissemination by the media of
information regarding the dangers of human trafficking, the means used by
traffickers, the rights of persons subjected to human trafficking and the services
available to them;
46. Stresses the need for the systematic collection of data disaggregated by
sex, age and other relevant factors and comprehensive studies at both the national and
the international levels, and in this regard takes note of the publication of the Global
Report on Trafficking in Persons, prepared by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, and the development of common methodologies and internationally
defined indicators to make it possible to develop relevant and comparable figures,
and encourages Governments to enhance information-sharing and data-collection
capacity as a way of promoting cooperation to combat human trafficking;
47. Invites Governments, United Nations bodies, agencies and special
mechanisms, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the private
sector to continue collaborative and joint research and studies on trafficking in women
and girls that can serve as a basis for policy formulation or change;
48. Invites Governments, with the support of the United Nations, when
necessary, and other intergovernmental organizations, taking into account best
practices, to formulate training manuals and other informational materials and to
provide training for law enforcement, judicial and other relevant officials and medical
and support personnel, with a view to sensitizing them to the special needs of women
and girl victims of human trafficking;
49. Calls upon Governments, and encourages relevant intergovernmental
bodies and international organizations, to ensure that milit ary, peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel deployed in conflict, post-conflict and other emergency
situations are provided with training on conduct that does not promote, facilitate or
exploit trafficking in women and girls, including for sexual exploita tion, and to raise
the awareness of such personnel about the potential risks that victims of conflict and
other emergency situations, including natural disasters, face of being subjected to
human trafficking;
50. Invites States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
12/13

18-22183

Trafficking in women and girls

A/RES/73/146

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 32 the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 32 and the International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families 20 to
include information and disaggregated statistics on trafficki ng in women and girls as
part of their national reports to the respective committees, as applicable;
51. Invites States to continue to contribute to the United Nations voluntary
trust fund on contemporary forms of slavery and to the United Nations voluntary trust
fund for victims of trafficking in persons, especially women and children;
52. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session a report that compiles information on successful interventions
and strategies, as well as the gaps, in addressing the gender dimensions of the problem
of human trafficking and provides recommendations on the strengthening of human
rights-based, victim-centred and gender- and age-sensitive approaches within
comprehensive and balanced efforts to address human trafficking, including in the
prosecution of traffickers and protection of victims.
55th plenary meeting
17 December 2018

__________________
32

18-22183

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
13/13
