United Nations

S/PV.6542

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6542nd meeting
Tuesday, 31 May 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan (S/2011/314*)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-35810 (E)

*1135810*

S/PV.6542

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
(S/2011 314*)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
should like to invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Alain le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, to
participate in this meeting. In accordance with the
same rule, I invite Mr. Haile Menkerios, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
to participate in this meeting. Also in accordance with
that same rule, I invite Mr. Ezekiel Lol Gatkuoth to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I would like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2011/314*, which contains the
special report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Le Roy.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): The interim
period covered by the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) will come to a close, as we all know,
on 9 July 2011. Much has been accomplished since the
Government of the Sudan and the Government of
South Sudan signed the CPA on 9 January 2005,
including the holding of national elections and the
referendum on South Sudan’s self-determination.
Moreover, the security mechanisms agreed to by the
parties under the CPA and implemented with the
assistance of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) allowed them to deal with many security
concerns in a peaceful manner, thereby avoiding, in
very many instances, resort to armed hostilities during
this interim period.
However, while much has been achieved, a
number of key CPA issues remain outstanding, as we
all know. These include in particular the status of
Abyei, the conclusion of the popular consultations in

2

the Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States and the
demarcation of the border. An agreement on issues
linked to the period following the succession of South
Sudan, including wealth-sharing and citizenship, is yet
to be achieved. The parties are negotiating the
remaining CPA issues as a comprehensive package. Of
all these issues, the questions of Abyei and sharing of
oil resources are of course the two most critical
political and economic issues.
(spoke in English)
In a positive development, on 30 May the parties
signed a joint position paper on border security that
they had finalized on 4 April. The parties agreed on the
establishment of a common border zone and the
architecture required to jointly manage this zone.
However, an agreement on a third-party mechanism to
assist the parties in implementing the agreement
remains outstanding.
In this context, and as members of the Council
are aware, the security situation in Abyei has been a
concern for some months. Following clashes in early
January 2011, the parties signed the Kadugli
agreements on 13 and 17 January. These agreements
included provisions to address security and migration
concerns. On 4 March, the parties further agreed to
withdraw all armed elements from the Abyei area
except the Joint Integrated Units and the Joint
Integrated Police Units.
While containing the security situation over some
months, the Government of the Sudan did not withdraw
its oil police, the Popular Defence Forces (PDF) and
Misseriya militias. For its part, the Government of
Southern Sudan did not withdraw the police elements
unilaterally deployed from Juba since August 2010 and
those locally recruited in the Abyei area.
In the meantime, UNMIS observed a build-up of
armed elements from both sides. Since 3 May,
Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and Misseriya militia
have blocked key roads linking the North and South
Sudan, inflicting hardship on the civilian population
along the southern side of the border. A number of
incidents were also reported, including a Southern
Sudan Police Service (SSPS) attack on an SAF Joint
Integrated Unit convoy on 1 May at Todach, killing 11
SAF soldiers. On 10 May armed Misseriya attacked an
UNMIS patrol near Diffra, injuring four peacekeepers.
On 19 May, a SAF convoy, escorted by UNMIS, was
attacked in an area controlled by the SSPS.

11-35810

S/PV.6542

As the Council is aware, the SAF launched an
offensive and captured Abyei town on 21 May. By
22 May, the SAF had taken control of the area up to the
Kiir/Bahr el-Arab River. The civilian population of
Abyei town fled the area before the attack. It is
estimated that more than 40,000 people were displaced
by the fighting in and around Abyei town. On 21 May,
President Al-Bashir issued two decrees disbanding the
Abyei area institutions and relieving its officials from
their positions.
The attack on Abyei was accompanied by largescale looting and burning of property, including the
World Food Programme warehouse in Abyei, by
Misseriya and PDF elements. While the SAF in Abyei
assured UNMIS that it would take measures to prevent
such incidents, intermittent looting and arson continue
despite increased patrolling by UNMIS in the area.
Humanitarian organizations are addressing the
needs of displaced persons. Food and emergency items
are being distributed, and medical and nutritional
screening is taking place in 11 health posts and 7
nutrition centres in Warrab State. Recent assessments
indicate that the most urgent needs are food, water,
shelter and non-food items. The World Food
Programme is currently feeding 35,000 internally
displaced persons, and humanitarian organizations
have reported a return movement into the affected area.
The Government of the Sudan has indicated its
willingness to withdraw its troops from the Abyei area
only when new security arrangements are agreed by
both parties and are in place.
As Council members are aware, on 23 May the
Joint Defence Board informed the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army (SPLA) of its decision that the
mandate of the Joint Integrated Units in the Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile States should be disbanded
and requested SPLA cooperation in withdrawing and
redeploying SPLA forces in these areas south of the
1-1-56 border by 1 June. There are approximately
40,000 SPLA troops emanating from Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile.
On 26 May, the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement informed UNMIS that the security situation
in the Blue Nile State had become increasingly tense
following events in Abyei. UNMIS has received
reports that both SAF and SPLA are building up troops
in Southern Kordofan. We will continue to monitor

11-35810

these areas closely and keep the Council informed of
any developments.
As the Secretary-General stressed in his report of
l7 May (S/2011/314*), which is currently under
consideration by the Council, the overarching
condition for peace and stability in Sudan and the
region remains the establishment of good-neighbourly
relations between the North and South. There is an
urgent need for the parties to address the outstanding
CPA and post-secession issues as soon as possible. As
noted by the Secretary-General, in the absence of an
agreement, the only forums available to the parties to
resolve security issues are the mechanisms established
under the CPA and supported by UNMIS.
It was in this context that the Secretary-General
had urged the parties and the Security Council to
consider a technical rollover of UNMIS that would
have provided a transition period until the parties were
able to reach a settlement on these issues and set up the
requisite implementation mechanisms. While the
Government of Southern Sudan has expressed its
willingness to discuss a technical rollover of UNMIS,
in a meeting with the Secretary-General this morning,
the Permanent Representative of the Government of the
Sudan handed to the Secretary-General a letter from his
Foreign Minister indicating the Government’s
appreciation for the work of UNMIS and its decision
that with the end of the interim period, the Government
of the Sudan had decided that the Mission’s mandate
should not be continued beyond 9 July 2011.
In light of the Government of the Sudan’s
decision not to consent to a technical rollover of
UNMIS, the United Nations stands ready to deploy a
mission in South Sudan as outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. In the meantime, it is imperative that
both parties respect the terms of the Kadugli
agreements, refrain from taking offensive military
action, and work in an open and flexible manner with
the African Union High-Level Panel towards finding a
lasting solution for Abyei and all other pending issues.
The United Nations stands ready, as always, to assist
them to do so.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Le
Roy for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Menkerios.
Mr. Menkerios: As highlighted by UnderSecretary-General Le Roy, the prospects for peace

3

S/PV.6542

consolidation between northern Sudan and southern
Sudan, soon to be two separate countries, will remain
contingent upon the quality of relationship they
establish between them, and such a relationship will
largely be shaped by the agreements they reach on
residual Comprehensive Peace Agreement issues and
post-referendum arrangements.
I therefore cannot stress enough the critical
nature of the ongoing negotiations on these issues and
the responsibility that rests on the leaders of the two
sides to reach agreements that will provide the
foundation for peace and security in the Sudan, South
Sudan and the region as a whole. It is essential that the
leaders of both sides demonstrate the political will
necessary to find solutions to these issues and agree on
mechanisms for their implementation, with particular
focus on a border management mechanism and on a
lasting solution for Abyei. There is no time to lose.
So far, although some progress has been made in
the negotiations regarding some of these issues,
lingering disagreements on others — and in fact the
worsening of the situation in Abyei, for instance —
threaten a further deterioration of relations that could
hamper the establishment of two viable States at peace
within and between them. That would also negatively
affect the entire region, thus constituting a continuing
threat to international peace and security which the
international community has invested so much so far to
avoid.
I would like to express here, however, that with
the concerted efforts of the international community
and the countries of the region to urge, encourage and
assist the two parties to do what is right for their
future, it will be possible for them to avoid an
acrimonious divorce with lasting consequences.
As Mr. Le Roy’s statement fully covered the
realities as they are, I do not have much to add here,
but I stand ready to answer any questions in this
regard, here or in the closed consultations of the
Council.

congratulate your country, France, on its judicious
management of the Council’s work this month.
This meeting is being held following the return of
the Security Council mission to several countries of
Africa, including my own, the Sudan, as we approach
the end of the transitional period on 9 July,
representing the final chapter of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). Just as
that historic Agreement has been extremely important
to the Government of the Sudan, so has been our
bearing of the responsibility to implement it as a
strategic objective. In practical terms, we have proven
to be the wiser and more restrained party to the
Agreement, in spite of the excesses of our partner and
all the obstacles to the CPA’s implementation. Our
commendable record of acceptance of various
proposals and suggestions is ample testimony to that
effect. Thanks to all these efforts, we are now on the
threshold of the end of the transitional period, although
several issues remain pending that we had hoped to
settle definitively had our partner embraced a spirit of
commitment commensurate with ours.
As we discuss the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/314*) — which, inter alia, recommends the
establishment of a United Nations mission in South
Sudan following the drawdown of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) — we must take into
account the main point of reference represented by the
establishment of that mission. In that regard, we recall
the letter we sent to the President of the Security
Council on 25 May 2004 (S/2004/425), in the light of
which the Security Council adopted presidential
statement S/PRST/2004/18 and resolution 1547 (2004),
mandating a political mission to assess the anticipated
role of the United Nations at that time in monitoring
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

With respect to resolution 1590 (2005),
mandating the establishment of UNMIS following the
signing of the CPA under Article VI of the Charter, we
reiterate our gratitude to the United Nations and its
vital role in the implementation of the CPA and in
assisting the two parties to the Agreement over the past
five years. We also appreciate the important role it has
played in monitoring various aspects of the CPA.

Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on your last day as
President of the Security Council and to thank you for
having convened this important meeting. We also

As we have repeatedly stressed, 9 July is a
landmark date that must be respected. We reiterate here
that the end of the transitional period on that day, in
accordance with the CPA and including the drawdown

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Menkerios for his statement.

4

11-35810

S/PV.6542

of UNMIS in northern Sudan, is of great importance to
us, pursuant as it is not only to the CPA but also to the
Constitution of the Sudan and the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, starting with resolution 1590
(2005) and ending with resolution 1978 (2011)
extending the UNMIS mandate until the end of the
transitional period on 9 July.
The Government of the Sudan has addressed a
letter to the Secretary-General to that effect, in light of
the contents of paragraph 80 of his report, in which he
urges the two parties to consider a three-month
technical rollover of the Mission. In the letter, the
Government of the Sudan stresses the importance of
ending the Mission on 9 July, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions.
Any attempt to use pending issues to justify the
continuation of the Mission is indefensible. The
so-called pending issues will be settled at the
negotiating table in the course of serious negotiations
between the two parties. There have been efforts at
mediation, such as those of President Mbeki, who is
working strenuously to assist the two parties in settling
pending issues. Council members will recall our
numerous appeals to the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, to assist the two
parties to settle the pending issues, including the matter
of Abyei. In our statements, we have spoken repeatedly
and at length on this matter, to the extent that some
have found us to be unnecessarily repetitive.
Current developments in Abyei have made clear
to all the need for the assistance we have sought. Those
developments are not surprising, given the earlier
violations by the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
(SPLM) in April, when it killed many Sudanese Armed
Forces soldiers. At that time, we exercised wisdom and
restraint, making possible the two Kadugli agreements
of 13 and 17 January, which stipulate the withdrawal of
all forces from the Abyei area, to be replaced by joint
forces of the two parties. However, the other party did
not commit to those agreements and left its forces in
the area, including 20,000 soldiers masquerading as
police officers.
Provocative attacks by such groups followed,
including the kidnapping of six members of the
Sudanese Armed Forces. In that instance, too, we
showed wisdom and restraint. The abducted six had
been deployed as members of joint integrated units
when they were kidnapped by the SPLM. On

11-35810

12 February, 12 northern merchants were killed and
their goods destroyed. At the time, the Political
Committee considered ways to contain the situation
and reasserted the importance of commitment to the
Kadugli agreements. However, members of the
Committee were pelted after the meeting.
The Joint Defence Board also held a meeting
about the situation, but was unable to contain it in the
face of continued provocations and attacks. SPLM
forces set a trap for the joint integrated units in which
14 soldiers were killed and 11 wounded. The
aggression did not stop there. SPLM forces continued
in cold blood to attack joint integrated units that
included members of our armed forces. No violations
could be more glaring. United Nations elements were
also part of the units that were targeted in the attacks of
19 May, which killed 22 people, injured dozens more
and resulted in dozens of missing persons.
The time came to put a stop to the killing. As I
mentioned, we have always exercised restraint and
acted wisely. I chose to come personally to present all
this information to the Council, the Secretary-General
and the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and I have done so over the past days and
weeks. Regrettably, the violations have continued and
strong messages were not sent to put an end to the
attacks. Patience has its limits. Our armed forces could
not continue to be openly fired on without defending
themselves. Moreover, given all the violations, it was
necessary to restore security and the rule of law in the
Abyei area. That is what our armed forces have been
doing there. I would like to stress that our presence in
the Abyei area, as noted by the UnderSecretary-General, is not permanent and will continue
only until a political and security agreement is signed
that guarantees an end to such provocations and attacks
by the SPLM.
I trust in the wisdom of the Council, because I
know for a fact that it always addresses the root causes
of any crisis and not just the symptoms. The armed
forces currently present in the Abyei area are 14 miles
to the north of the border of 1 January 1956. That is a
reflection of our full commitment to the provisions of
the CPA.
Meanwhile, the forces of the SPLM are deployed
to the south of Bahr el-Arab, in flagrant violation of
the provisions of the CPA. Therefore, keeping the
status quo — that is, the Sudanese Armed Forces to the

5

S/PV.6542

north of Bahr el-Arab and the southern forces to the
south of Bahr el-Arab — would facilitate reaching a
new security and political agreement that would lead to
the redeployment of joint integrated units in the area.
Otherwise, a more effective mechanism could be found
to replace both the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA), taking into
account the proposal made by President Mbeki, head of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, to
deploy a joint African police force in the area that
would enable both parties to withdraw their forces. His
proposal also included the establishment of an
international mechanism in the area to monitor the
boundaries between the two parties. The proposal is
currently under consideration and proved its viability
before the signing of the CPA, when it was made by
Mr. Danforth. There are many precedents and lessons
learned that we can take into account in that regard.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate the fact
that the presence of our armed forces in the Abyei area
has been made necessary by the successive violations
by the other party. Moreover, as we have mentioned, it
is not a permanent presence. It will continue only until
mutual agreement is reached about a mechanism for
stability and security in the area. I would like to
confirm that our presence cannot by any stretch be
called an occupation. We are a sovereign country, and
movement of our troops from one area to another
within our country is simply movement; it is not an
occupation in any way.
At the same time, we would like to assure the
Council of our continued efforts to reach a peaceful
settlement of the pending issues, including the
boundaries and the mechanism for monitoring them,
assets and debts, citizenship, international agreements,
and so forth. No matter how many violations may be
committed by the other side, we will not deviate from
our main goal: to reach agreed settlements on those
issues in a way that allows for the establishment of a
secure and stable State in Southern Sudan enjoying ties
of cooperation with the North.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Gatkuoth.
Mr. Gatkuoth: I am grateful for the opportunity
to address the Security Council and to present the
views of the Government of Southern Sudan. I wish to
convey to the Council the greetings of the Minister for
Regional Cooperation, His Excellency Deng Alor

6

Kuol, and to pass on his regret at being unable to make
the journey to New York to attend this meeting, given
recent events on the ground.
On behalf of the Government and people of
Southern Sudan, I wish to express to the Council my
appreciation for its focus on and attention to events in
the Sudan, and for its efforts to support full and final
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). In that connection, we greatly
appreciate the Council’s visit to the Sudan and
Southern Sudan in the past week. We would also like to
express our sincere appreciation for the work of His
Excellency the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
and his Special Representative, Mr. Haile Menkerios,
in support of the CPA process. And we are grateful for
the continued support of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel under the able leadership of
President Thabo Mbeki.
The Government of Southern Sudan welcomes
the Security Council’s recent extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS).
My Government confirms its request for a continued
United Nations presence in Southern Sudan following
our declaration of independence on 9 July 2011. In that
regard, we welcome the recent special report of the
Secretary-General on Sudan (S/2011/314*), as well as
the work that has so far been done by the United
Nations to plan for the establishment of a new mission
to succeed UNMIS in Southern Sudan.
It is impossible to consider the question of the
structure of the United Nations presence in Southern
Sudan after independence without looking at the
context in which the new State will be born, including
regional dynamics. The internal issues in Southern
Sudan referred to by the Secretary-General cannot be
analysed or addressed separately from the state of
North-South relations. As the Secretary-General noted,
that relationship remains the overarching factor
impacting peace and stability on both sides of the
border.
My
Government
concurs
with
the
Secretary-General that many of the security issues that
affect South Sudan are directly related to the bilateral
security issues between North and South. Our goal is to
see peaceful coexistence between the two neighbouring
States of South Sudan and the Sudan. Recent events
have demonstrated how great a challenge this will be,

11-35810

S/PV.6542

and that continued third-party support will be critical if
it is to be achieved.
With that in mind, the overriding priority for the
Government of Southern Sudan is to ensure ongoing
support by the United Nations for North-South security
arrangements, especially at the border. We welcome the
progress made by the parties in Addis Ababa yesterday,
establishing an agreed security framework governing
the North-South relationship after 9 July.
Yet as the Secretary-General himself noted in his
report, implementation of the security agreements
during the interim period has proved challenging, and
any future agreements will thus require external
support. We believe that the United Nations is best
placed to provide such support and that the United
Nations must have freedom of movement and the
ability to monitor both sides of the border. This is a
requirement of the CPA and is also in the interests of
both parties.
In that context, we note and welcome the offer
made to the parties by the Government of Ethiopia.
The Government of Southern Sudan has accepted the
offer, and we encourage the Government of the Sudan
to do the same.
We suggest that the main objective of the United
Nations should be to avoid a security vacuum after
9 July. Should UNMIS have to be drawn down on that
date without an agreed mechanism mandated to
monitor and observe the situation at the border, the
international community would be left unable to
respond effectively to threats to international peace and
security in those border areas. The United Nations may
need to plan for the possibility that peacekeepers might
have to be deployed only on the southern side of the
future border.
The Secretary-General’s current proposal for a
mandate for a military force in South Sudan after
9 July would only address issues within the borders of
the new State, with a focus on helping the Government
to extend the rule of law and protect civilians.
Monitoring the border would require more troops than
the 7,000 recommended by the Secretary-General and
would have a different focus from that suggested in the
report. The United Nations must do what is necessary
to promote the security of both States, and the United
Nations mission, or another agreed mechanism, will
require appropriate military resources.

11-35810

The role of the United Nations in border security
is paramount, given the situation in Abyei, about which
the Government of Southern Sudan is extremely
concerned. The recent occupation of Abyei by the
Sudanese Armed Forces is a serious violation of the
CPA. Khartoum’s actions over the past week represent
a grave escalation that risks provoking a resumption of
armed conflict between the two parties. The Security
Council must intervene swiftly and decisively. We call
on the Security Council once again to condemn
unreservedly this move by Khartoum to take Abyei by
force, and to demand that the Sudanese Armed Forces
withdraw from Abyei immediately and unconditionally.
UNMIS and the humanitarian agencies must be
allowed full access to the area, consistent with
Khartoum’s international obligations.
The Government of Southern Sudan regrets the
shooting incident that led to an exchange of fire
between the two sides on 19 May, threatening a United
Nations convoy in the Abyei area, and deplores the loss
of life that resulted. We support the call by UNMIS for
a joint investigation into those events, and we will
cooperate fully in the process. Those responsible must
be brought to justice, including by criminal
prosecution. But that unfortunate event is not
connected with, nor does it in any way justify, the
excessive use of force by Khartoum in seeking to
occupy Abyei and to prejudice full and final
implementation of the CPA. Khartoum’s irresponsible
actions have put all progress under the CPA in serious
jeopardy, and they threaten to unravel six years of hard
work at the most decisive moment.
This invasion has also had serious humanitarian
consequences. The full impact of the violence in
Abyei — including civilian casualties and the number
and whereabouts of persons displaced — is not yet
known. We regret that the United Nations
peacekeeping forces, which have a robust mandate to
protect civilians in imminent danger, reportedly
remained inside their compound during the military
attacks by the Sudanese Armed Forces. The Sudanese
Armed Forces and their proxies have now torched
Abyei town and have facilitated the influx of nomadic
Arab Misseriya people into the area.
Thousands of civilians have fled the area. This
attempt to alter Abyei’s demography by force should be
condemned by the Council in the strongest terms. By
burning Abyei and forcing the civilian population out,
the National Congress Party (NCP) has in effect sought

7

S/PV.6542

to repudiate its obligations under the Abyei Protocol of
the CPA and has made it very difficult to hold the
required referendum in the short term. We call on the
NCP to reopen the border so that the people who have
been displaced from their homes can return, and to
allow humanitarian organizations to deliver the
assistance required.
We also reject and condemn in the strongest
terms the issuing of decrees by President Al-Bashir
attempting to dissolve the Abyei Administrative
Council and dismiss the Council’s staff. The Abyei
administration must be reinstated immediately and the
special administrative arrangements for Abyei must
remain in place until a mutually acceptable solution is
found.
Until such a solution is found, Abyei belongs
neither wholly to the North nor to the South. We
therefore reject the National Congress Party (NCP)
claims that Abyei is part of the North. The parties’
obligations with respect to Abyei were very clearly
spelled out in the CPA, including in the Abyei
Protocol. This required the holding of a referendum to
determine whether Abyei should remain in the North or
return to the South, from where it was transferred for
administrative reasons in 1905. We believe in the
internationally accepted principle that the transfer of
administration does not entail the transfer of territory.
The implementation of the terms of the Abyei
Protocol and the holding of the referendum were
delayed by Khartoum, which has been allowed over
time to shirk its legal obligations with respect to Abyei.
In an attempt to find a peaceful solution, the
Government of Southern Sudan accepted referral to
binding arbitration. The 2009 award of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration (PCA), setting out the boundaries
of Abyei, is binding upon the parties and must be
implemented.
The Government of Southern Sudan remains
committed to the negotiation process led by the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel and to
reaching a political agreement that is consistent with
the terms of the PCA award, as the Security Council
itself has recently called for. This means that the
integrity of Abyei’s borders as defined by the PCA
must be respected as the foundation of any solution.
The negotiation process must be supported and
accelerated. The Council must understand and
acknowledge, however, that Khartoum has a history of

8

making agreements over Abyei and then later failing to
honour them. We appeal to Council members to use
their good offices to urge the NCP to reach a definitive
and binding agreement, and to work with the
Government of Southern Sudan to finalize the
implementation of the CPA.
We also reject unequivocally any suggestion by
Khartoum that the CPA has been fully implemented.
The CPA is a legal agreement binding on the parties,
and crucial obligations remain to be fulfilled, for
example relating to Abyei, Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile. The North cannot unilaterally withdraw
from these outstanding obligations. Further, the parties
agreed in the CPA to a United Nations mission to
monitor the Agreement’s implementation, and the
North cannot withdraw its consent for this United
Nations mission before the CPA obligations are
fulfilled and no longer relevant.
We note that, in accordance with the provisions
of the CPA, an independent State in Southern Sudan
will become a reality on 9 July. The Government of
Southern Sudan welcomes the Secretary-General’s
proposals for United Nations support to the new State
to meet political, security and protection challenges in
a way that will build its authority and create an
enabling environment for State-building and socioeconomic development. We believe that the United
Nations should move forward with the establishment of
a peace consolidation mission in South Sudan as of
9 July. If there is no agreement between the CPA
parties on a continued international presence in the
border areas, the mandate of that mission may need to
include a border-monitoring component in the South.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s intention to
establish an advance team composed of a senior
management group with the required specialized
expertise to set up the core capabilities of the new
mission, and encourage the advance team to start its
work immediately. The Government of Southern Sudan
looks forward to consultations with the United Nations
on the appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and of other senior United Nations
officials to the new mission.
We note that the protection of civilians is first
and foremost the sovereign responsibility of the
Government, as the Secretary-General notes in his
report. The Government of Southern Sudan accepts
fully its responsibility for the protection of civilians in

11-35810

S/PV.6542

South Sudan. We also agree with the recommendation
that external support to the Government to build its
capacity to protect civilians should be primarily a
civilian activity. The Government of Southern Sudan
welcomes the Secretary-General’s recommendation of
a mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter to provide,
within capabilities, physical protection to civilians
under imminent threat of physical danger, including
through the use of force as a last resort.
The Government of Southern Sudan welcomes
the Secretary-General’s recommendation that the
Government and local stakeholders be assisted in
preventing
conflict,
consolidating
the
peace,
strengthening the multi-party system and addressing
issues related to peace, governance and reconciliation.
In this context, we would like to reaffirm the
importance of national ownership and to express our
desire to work in partnership with the United Nations
system. We note that a drawdown of the mission would
be based on benchmarks agreed together by the
Government of Southern Sudan and the Security
Council, and would welcome early consideration of
such benchmarks.

Obviously many details regarding the structure of
the United Nations presence remain to be worked out.
We would welcome frequent and detailed dialogue
with the Council and the Secretariat over the coming
weeks.
I would like to close by repeating the words
spoken by His Excellency President Salva Kiir in Juba
last week. We remain committed to peace, but this
should not be interpreted as cowardice. We will not go
back to war because we have fought enough. We refuse
to be provoked. Southern Sudan will become
independent on 9 July, and we look forward to the
Council quickly recognizing this in the days thereafter.
But we must also ensure that the new State is stable,
secure and at peace with its neighbours. This is our
common challenge and our common responsibility.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Gatkuoth for his statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

Lastly, we welcome the suggestion that the
mission play a coordination role in bringing together
international actors to speak with one voice in helping
the new Government to address the challenges of peace
consolidation.

11-35810

9
