United Nations

A/RES/58/282

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 April 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 41

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 February 2004
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/58/L.58)]

58/282. Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on children
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration and the Plan of Action contained in the final
document of the special session of the General Assembly on children, entitled “A
world fit for children”, 1 and recognizing that their implementation is a major
contribution to protecting the rights and promoting the well-being of children,
Recalling the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 2 the most universally
embraced human rights treaty in history, and the Optional Protocols thereto, 3
Recalling also its resolutions on the special session on children, including
resolution 57/190 of 18 December 2002, in which, inter alia, it decided to include in
the agenda of its fifty-eighth session the item entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of
the special session on children”, and allocated its consideration to the plenary,
Recalling further its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 on the integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields,
Bearing in mind that, by 2007, several of the time-bound and quantified
commitments set out in the Declaration and the Plan of Action should have been
met, and that other targets are to be met by 2010 and 2015,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General; 4

2.
Takes note of the initial progress made in the implementation of the
Declaration and the Plan of Action1 by Governments, as well as by
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations, and the
support provided to them by relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes;
Calls upon Member States that have not yet done so to prepare or
3.
strengthen national action plans and, where appropriate, regional action plans, with
_______________
1

Resolution S-27/2, annex.
Resolution 44/25, annex.
3
Resolution 54/263, annexes I and II.
4
A/58/333.
2

03 51144

A/RES/58/282

a set of specific time-bound and measurable goals and targets, and in this context
encourages cooperation with civil society actors, including non-governmental
organizations working for and with children, as well as children themselves, in order
to implement the commitments made at the special session on children and at other
relevant major United Nations conferences and summits, in particular the
Millennium Summit;
Urges all relevant specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the
4.
United Nations system, and invites intergovernmental organizations, nongovernmental organizations and civil society, to lend their full support to
implementing the commitments made in the final document of the twenty-seventh
special session, entitled “A world fit for children”, and to keep the SecretaryGeneral informed of their actions;
Requests the United Nations Children’s Fund to continue to prepare and
5.
disseminate, in close collaboration with Governments, relevant specialized agencies,
funds and programmes of the United Nation system and all other relevant actors, as
appropriate, information on the progress made in the implementation of the Plan of
Action;
Requests the governing bodies of the relevant specialized agencies to
6.
ensure that, within their mandates, the agencies give their fullest possible support
for the achievement of the goals outlined in the Plan of Action and to keep the
General Assembly fully informed, through the Economic and Social Council, of
progress and additional action required using existing reporting frameworks and
procedures;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report regularly to the
7.
General Assembly on the progress made in implementing the Declaration and the
Plan of Action;
Decides to convene a commemorative plenary meeting in 2007, on a date
8.
to be decided at its sixtieth session, devoted to the follow-up to the outcome of its
twenty-seventh special session and the progress made in implementing the
Declaration and the Plan of Action, based on a report to be prepared by the
Secretary-General, and invites the President of the General Assembly to finalize
organizational matters in consultation with Member States;
Decides also to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-ninth
9.
session the item entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on
children”.
80th plenary meeting
9 February 2004

2
