UNITEDNATIONS

TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 13 AUGUST 1969

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1498/Rev. 1)

..... ...,,...............

1

. .......,. ,.. ........ ,,...............

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9385) . . . . + . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9387) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
jigures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of #he Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND NINETY-EIGHTH

on Wednesday,

President: Mr. .I. DE PINIES (Spain).

MEETING

13 August 1969, at 5 p.m.

instructions of his Government in connexion with an
aggressive
attack on Lebanonby Israel.That is the question
the Security Councilhasbefore it for its consideration.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

5. The attempt by the representativeof Israel to manufacture an antedated, contrived complaint and an unjustified accusation against the victim of aggressioncan
deceive no one. That is the usual device, the usual
manoeuvreto which aggressors
habitually resort to conceal
their aggressive
acts. And this, evidently, is clear to all the
membersof the Security Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l498/Rev.l)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9385).

6. That is why I considerit necessary,on behalf of the
delegation of the Soviet Union, to stressthat Israel’s
attempts to put its own illegal acts againstLebanonon the
samefooting asthe complaint of a country sufferingfrom
Israeliaggression
areunjustified.

3. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent
Representativeof Israel addressedto the Presidentof
the Security Council(s/5)387).

7. The Soviet delegationrejectssuchan approach.In our
opinion the Security Council, acting precisely on this
understandingand without losing time on a procedural
discussion,shouldproceedto considerthe substance
of the
matter, which is: Lebanon’s complaint of an act of
aggression
committedagainstit by Israel.

Adoption of the agenda
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The provisional agendafor this meeting of the Security Council
appearsin document S/Agenda/l498/Rev.l. If I hear no
objections, I shall consider that the agendahas been
adopted.

8. In view of the urgency of this question, the Soviet
delegationhas found it possiblenot to object to adoption
of the agendain the form in which you, Mr. President,read
it out.

2. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Since both
letters now before the Council refer to the samesubject,
that is, the situation in the Middle East, my delegation
would have preferred that we list the two letters under that
single item as has usually been the practice in the past.
However, since on somerecent occasionsthere hasbeen a
variation of that practice along the lines of the provisional
agenda before us, I should be prepared to accept the
provisional agendaon the understanding,which is alsoin
accord with our most recent practice, that membersof the
Council and those participating in our proceedingswill be
free to deal with the agendaas a whole or with any part of
it in their remarks.1

9. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish): If I hear
no further objection on the part of the membersof the
Security Council, andif they therefore agree,I shalldeclare
the provisional agendaadopted as it appearsin document
S/Agenda/l498/Rev. 1.
The agendawasadopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charged’Affaires
a.i. of Lebanonaddressed
to the Presidentof the Security
Council (S/9385)

3. Mr. ZAKI-IAROV (Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics)
(translatedfiorn Rtusianj: Mr. President,in connexion with
the adoption of the agendafor today’s meeting,I should
like to makethe following comment.

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the PermanentRepresentative of Israel addressedto the Presidentof the
Security Council(S/9387)

4. All the membersof the Security Council know that the
Council has been convened in an urgent meetingtoday at
the request of the representative of Lebanon, on the

10. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In
accordance with rule 37 of the provisional rules of

1 See 1466th meeting, paras. 23-24.

1

escortedby six jet fighters, raided the following villagesin
southern Lebanon: Rachaya Al-Fakhar, Kfarchoubeh,
Kafar Hamam, Khabbariyeh, Ain Keny, Chabbaa,and
Choya. Four people were killed and three seriously
wounded among the civilian population. Machine-guns,
rockets and napalmbombs were used. Among those who
were killed, there was a woman who suffered burns
inflicted by napalm.Newspaperdespatches
have referredto
Israeli army sourcesadmitting that napaIm bombs were
amonga variety of bombsusedduring the air strike,

procedure of the Security Council and past practice, I
propose to invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel
to participate in this debate, without,the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra, (Lebanon) and Mr. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the Council
table.
11. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
question on the agenda. I call on the first speaker, the
representative of Lebanon.

18. The Israeli Prime Minister and spokesmenhavealleged
that the strike was in retaliation for attacks launched
againstIsraelfrom Lebaneseterritory. TheseaIlegationswill
undoubtedly be expoundedto the Council by Mr. Tekoah
before the day is over. The Council is accustomedto these
allegationsand flimsy pretexts. Similar ones were usedto
justify the attack on the International Airport of Beirut last
28 December.

12. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Mr. President, my delegation is most grateful to you for having convened this urgent
meeting of the Security Council. You and the other
members of the Council have been hard pressed during the
last two weeks in dealing with problems of peace and
security in different parts of the world. It was not our
intention to add to your ordeal, but a sudden, unprovoked
attack on Lebanese territory by Israel has made it imperative to bring this development before the Council for its
urgent consideration.

19. It is already an establishedfact that those responsible’
for the Athens incident then had merely transited through
the Beirut airport. Israel exploited this fact asanexcuseto
destroy twelve innocent and defenceless
civilian airlinerson
the airfield.

13. My delegation, Mr. President, is happy to see you
presiding for this month over the deliberations of the
Council. We have always held you in the highest esteem for
the knowledge, integrity and impartiality which you have
applied to your many activities in this Organization. To us,
you nobly represent the great Spanish people, for whom we
have the highest consideration and affection.

20. Now the allegations are that the Palestinian commandos have launched attacks on Israel from Lebanese
territory. Theseallegationsare asflimsy asthe earlierones,
No neutral and unbiasedevidencecan be established.The
Council will be requestedto accept the word of Israel;and
the word of Israel, aswe already know, doesnot represent
the truth. Those unsubstantiatedwords have beenuttered
many times before and the Council hasnot only dismissed
them, but on many occasionshasfound enoughevidenceto
the contrary to condemnIsrael over and over againfor its
acts of aggression.We are therefore confident that in this
new casethe allegationsof Israelwill be once morerejected
asunfounded.

14. My delegation, in a spirit of co-operation with the
members of the Council, has not resorted to obstructive
tactics against the adoption of the agenda; naturally, the
adoption of the agenda falls within the jurisdiction of the
Council itself. However, we have strong misgivings about
the manner in which our complaint has.been pIaced on the
same level as the complaint belatedly presented by Israel.
We are already familiar with Israeli tactics. No sooner has
an Arab complaint been lodged with the Council than the
Israeli representative comes forward with his own complaint. If Israel had any valid complaint, it should have
brought it to the attention of the Council sooner. Israel
takes the law inta its own hands, and when a State which
has been subjected to Israeli aggression brings its case
before the Council, the Israeli representative rushes in to
recite to the Council his worn-out arguments about the
so-called violent Arab attacks against the innocent women
and children of Israel.

21. If Israel had seriousand plausiblereasonsfor complaint, it could have resorted to the United Nations
machinery established under the Armistice Agreement
between Lebanon and Israel, That Agreement is, in our
view and in law, still valid and in force; Israel cannot
unilaterally abrogateit. Lebanon has respected,and continues to respect,its obligationstinder that Agreementand
under the cease-fire. The Lebanon civil and military
authorities have done everything in their power to abide
scrupulously by both and to maintain and promote
peacefulconditionson our southernborder,

15. In his letter of 12 August 1969 [S/9387/ the Israeli
representative complains that, during the month of July,
twenty-one attacks by shelling, mining and firing were
carried out againstinhabited localities in Israel. He alleges
that these attacks were launched against Israel from
Lebaneseterritory. Why did Israel wait until today to
inform the Councilof these attacks?
16. Let us now look at the facts that have brought us
before the Counciltoday.

22. Israel refusesto resort to the Mixed Armistice Commissionestablishedunder the Armistice Agreementor to
allow any investigation on its territory to establishthe
truthfulness of its allegations.Israel resortsto the Council
when it deemsthat it servesits purposesto heapinsultson
the Arab States. It usesthe platform of the UnitedNations
for propagandapurposes,to let its voice be heardby those
who emotionally support Israel and to provoke amongst
them morehatred and animosity againstthe Arabs.

17. On Monday, 11 August 1969, between the hoursof
1.30p.m. and 1.55p.m., ten Israeli fighter.bombers,

23. But membersof the Council are sufficiently awareof
the contempt in which Israel holds the Council, the United
2

Nations and international law and morality, After the
adoption by the Council on 31 December 1968 of
resolution 262 (I 968), which strongly condemned Israel
because of its attack against the International Airport of
Beirut, right here we heard the representative of Israel,
Mr. Tekoah himself, state (1462nd meeting] arrogantly and
defiantly, and in the faces of the members seated around
this table, that the Security Council is legally, politically,
and morally bankrupt.

tremendouseconomicresources
andapply their capabilities
to raisethe standardof living of their peoples.But Israeli
actions are forcing upon them a coursebound to waste
their resources
anddestroytheir economies.

24. Israeli leaders have on many occasions voiced such an
opinion. Even the Foreign Minister, Mr Abba Eban,
entrusted with the promotion of Israel’s international
relations with the world, stated on one occasion:“If the
General Assembly were to vote by 121 to onein favour of
Israel returning to the armistice lines, tomorrow, Israel
would refuse to comply with that decision.This hasbeen
madeclear to the major Powers.”
25. From 1948 to the present time, the variousbodiesof
the United Nations have adopted scores of resolutions
deploring and condemning the acts of aggression
by Israel
against the Arab States, calling upon Israel to solve the
problem of the, Arab Palestinian refugeeson the basisof
repatriation or compensation; requestingIsrael to refrain
from inhuman practices againstthe Arab populationsin the
occupied territories and againsttheir human rights; calling
upon Israel to facilitate the missionsof the SecretaryGeneral’s personalrepresentativeand of the United Nations
commissionsentrusted with the responsibility of investigating these practices; calling upon Israel-after we had heard
during the last General Assembly, in the SpecialPolitical
Committee, vibrant, eloquent andhumaneappealsfrom the
representativesof the United Kingdom, France, the USSR,
the United States,and others-to facilitate the return of the
Arab displaced personsfrom the JudeanHills, wherethey
were exposed to the most inhuman and appalling conditions of life, and to have them returned to their old
homes and towns in Palestineor to their refugeecampsand
squatter settlements in the occupied territories; calling
upon Israel to withdraw from the occupiedterritories and
to promote conditions where a Ipeaceful solution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict could be reached;and other resolutions
calling upon Israelto do many other things.
26. But Israelhas set itself to be the supreme,omnipotent
and power-drunk ruler of international law and behaviour
in the area, nullifying all attempts by the international
community to promote the prevalenceof internationallaw
and morality.

29. It is the hope of Israelto rule economicallyin the
future of the Middle East;thus it can allegeto the world
that it is the only modernand progressivesociety in the
area.But in doingsoit is not squandering
its own resources.
The fat COW of world Zionismis providing it with all the
resources
it needsto achieveits objective.The Israelismilk
that COW with relish, and the $300-400 million drained
from it everyyear arepumpedinto the Israeliwar machine.
By doing SO, international Zionism is exploiting the
religious and emotional feelings of all Jewry in such a
sadisticway asto coin the slogan,“Give a dollar to kill an
Arab”. And how many timeshavemembersof this Council
and other Membersof the UnitedNationsheardsucha call
on the comersof NewYork streets.
30. Lebanoncannotbe held responsible
for the actionsof
the Palestiniancommandos.Thesefreedom fighters have
sprung from the midst of the million-and-a-halfArab
refugeeswho were expelled from their homeland-their
country, their cities, their belongings,their hope for a
better life having been usurpedby the Zionistsinvaders
who descendedupon Palestinefrom Europe. For twenty
yearstheserefugeeshavebeenwaitingfor a fair solutiontb
their plight. They have had enoughof the poverty and the
misery of camplife and of the meagrehand-outsof the
UnitedNations.
31. The Palestinian
Arabs,peoplewith a long-standingand
flourishing civilization and with a deepand strong attachment to their Christianand MoslemJerusalemand Holy
Land,have beenliving in the hopeof havingtheir legitimate
rights restoredto them. Resolutionsof the United Nations
to administerjustice to them remain dead letters. They
have reacheda point of despairwith regard to United
Nationsresolutions,As freedomfightersandpeopleseeking
self-determination,a sacred principle enshrined in the
Charter of this Organization,they arenot fighting for the
love of fighting. The fight hasbeenforced upon them. In
self-defence,to regain their sacredand legitimate rights,
they have takenup armsagainstthe aggressor
and occupier.
32. Lebanonhasnot beena party to the makingof sucha
situation. For twenty years it has shelteredmore than
150,000 of the Arab Palestinianrefugees.They ark now,
and will remainas long as peacehasnot been established
and aslong asthe occupationhasnot beenterminatedand
their legitimaterightshavenot beenrestored,potential and
active commandos.

27. The Israelisseemto be bent on actsof violence.They
have shot their way through the Middle East; they have
generated a chain-reaction of wars and violence. Their
military feats have given them temporary advantages;they
are still intoxicated with their military murders.They are
like a character in a trigger-happy Wes’tern,shootingin all
directions: sometimesin the south, sometimesin the east,
at other times in the north, Once they tried their military
prowess in the west; they tried to spendtheir military zest
in the direction of the Mediterranean and, asa result, they
hit a United Statesliberty ship, causingmany fatalities.

33. The Lebanese
people,from the Presidentdownto the
rank and file, have always stood, and firmly stand at
present,on the sideof our brethren,the Palestinianpeople.
Their causeis assacredto the Lebanese
peopleasit is to
them. PresidentHelounot long agoassertedthat truth. He
declaredthat Lebanonis fully preparedtoday ,andtomorrow to sharein any action to erasethe consequences
of
Israeli aggression
and to enablethe Palestinianpeople to
regaintheir rightsin their sacredland.

28. The Arab countries and peoples have sought, and
sincerely seek, peace; for in peace they can use their
3

38. In conclusion I should like to point out that the
Security Council in its resolution 262 (1968) of 31 Decem.
ber 1968 stated in paragraphs 2 and 3 that it:

34. A flagrant, unprovoked and massive air aggression has
been committed against Lebanon. We have stated many
times before that Lebanon’s reliance is on the rule of law,
on the action to be taken by the Security Council in
accordance with the principles and provisions of the United
Nations Charter. A small, defenceless country like ours
could hope to have its peace and security protected only by
this Organization. Should this Organization fail to provide
us and scores of other small Member nations like US with
such protection, the clock of history will be set back. In
that case there will be a return to the law of the jungle.
There was a time when the international scene was a free
arena for all, but the advent of the United Nations in
principle terminated such an era and ushered in a new era
of peace and security, freedom and self-determination for
all nations, big and small.

“Considers that such premeditated acts of violence
endanger the maintenance of the peace;
“‘Issues a solemn warning to Israel that if such acts were
to be repeated, the Council would have to consider
further steps to give effect to its decisions;“.
39. We come to the Security Council today with a request
that the Council give effect to those two paragraphs,
because Israeli aggression against Lebanon has been
repeated. Accordingly, Lebanon is entitled to be given
satisfaction, We expect that the members of the Council
will see to it in their wisdom that such satisfaction is given
to Lebanon. Furthermore, we request a strong condem.
nation of Israel for its latest aggression against Lebanon. We
also request that Israel be held responsible for all the
damages inflicted by that act of aggression against civilian
life and property.

35. It may be argued, in the so-called spirit of realism, that
the Council will have to reach a consensus or a watereddown resolution. In our view, realism means to look at the
Middle East problem squarely in the face. There is a State,
Israel, that has committed aggression after aggression
against the Arab States, It is sitting on Arab land that it has
occupied. The United Nations stands against conquest by
acts of war. These Israeli acts of aggression must be firmly
and sternly punished by this Organization. Merely deploring
or condemning these acts has proved to be useless, The
warnings to Israel against repetition of its acts are of no
avail. We, therefore, are here requesting action from the
’ Council against the murderous, unprovoked aggressive acts
against Lebanon, and this action must be effective and
prompt, to forestall any similar acts in the future and to
prevent the deterioration of the general situation in the
Middle East. Sanctions must be applied, They are provided
for in the Charter. They are there to be used. They were
not meant to be part of a legal decorum. They must be
applied when their application is essential, and their
application is now imperative. If the Security Council fails
to adopt effective measures to curb Israel’s aggressive
inclinations, Israel’s appetite for more aggressions, conquests and expansions will never be satisfied.

40. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish to
thank the representative of Lebanon for the kind words he
has addressed to my country and to myself.
41. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Israel, on whom I now call.
42. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Allow me, Mr. President, to
extend to you my delegation’s highest respects and to
express the hope that the period of your Presidency will see
the cause of peace advanced in the Middle East.
43. I should also like to pay a tribute to your distinguished predecessor, Ambassador Boye of Senegal.
44. For several months now the world has watched the
Arab Governments turn their efforts towards the intensification of warfare against Israel. Almost daily the Arab
capitals resound with battle cries, Some Arab leaders no
longer conceal their intentions, No longer are attempts
being made by them even to pretend that their objective is
the final termination of the conflict and the establishment
of true peace with Israel. In statement after statement they
speak of the pursuance of war, of the use of force as the
only means to be applied in relation to Israel, of a “war of
attrition” that would bring Israel to its knees. In all these
months not a word of peace has come from the Arab
capitals, All thought, all action seem to be devoted to
increasing violence and tension.

36. We are not dealing with illusory fears, We have strong
facts which speak loudly. Only a few days ago the Israeli
ruling party adopted a policy plank on the basis of which it
wilI run for re-election next November. That plank calls for
the integration into Israel of the Gaza Strip, a large part of
the Sinai Desert, the Golan Heights-not to speak of Arab
Jerusalem-and other sections of the West Bank, In the face
of these dangers, the Arabs are requested to sit back and to
accept conquest, humiliation and the destruction of their
lives.
37. The policy of intimidating the Arabs has proved to be
fruitless. Israel may receive Phantom aircraft and may seek
more Phantoms, but the phantom of the injustice it has
committed against the Arab world and now against Lebanon will haunt it. All the aircraft of the world will not help
it. One thing may help the Jewish people of Palestine-to
resolve within themselves sincerely and whole-heartedly to
live in peace with their neighbours-and then not a single
aircraft will be needed. They should refrain from acting and
speaking from positions of strength towards the Arabs. The
Arabs have enough pride to refuse to be spoken to from
such positions,

45. Despite the fact that the cease-fire established in June
1967 provides for the cessation of all military activities,
terror operations continue unabated and the regular armies
of the Arab States have enhanced their attacks against
Israel. The more militant of the Arab States exert growing
pressure on others to expand the armed assaults on Israel.
46. It is thus that Lebanese territory
for terror warfare.

has become a base

47. In addition to the centres of terror organizations
known to exist in Beirut, saboteur squads trained and
4

equipped primarily in Syria have crossed the border and
have established themselves on Lebanese soil. They have
concentrated in particular on the slopes of Mount Hennon
near the Syrian-Lebanese border. The Government Iof
Lebanon has been fully aware of this development, Indeed,
the presence of the terror bases seems to have had some
repercussion on the internal political situation in Lebanon.
Yet the bases remained and attacks against Israel continued
from them with growing intensity, During the last month
alone there weretwenty-one such attacks.

62. On 6 August several mines planted by saboteurs from
Lebanon south of Ramim were discovered and dismantled.
Explosives were also found west of Majdal Shams.
63. On 7 August it wasfound that two explosive charges
and two mines had been planted by attackers from
Lebanon near the warer fower of Metulla. That day a terror
unit from Lebanon exploded a charge under the bridge
between the villages of Shetula and Netu’a.
64. On 11 August a military vehicle was blown up by a
mine in the Fashkul area. An Israeli soldier was wounded.

48. On 11 July 1969 a saboteur squad penetrated into
Israel from Lebanon and was intercepted by the Israel
Defence Forces west of Nahal Senir. In the ensuing clash
three of the saboteurs were killed.

65. Tonight at 0145 hours the Qiryat Shemona area was
again shelled by Katyusha tire from Lebanese territory.
Some shells were fired on Kefar Yuval.

49. On 12 July the restaurant at the Banyas springs was
attacked by bazooka fire from Lebanese territory. Three
civilians were wounded. On the same day, small arms fire
wasopened on an Israeli patrol near Fashkul.

66. The shelling and mining raids from Lebanese territory
had been going on day after day in utter disregard of the
cease-fire, endangering the lives of innocent civilians,
bringing bloodshed and destruction to towns and villages.

SO. On 14 July bazooka shells were fired from acrossthe
Lebanese border on Israeli positions in the Abbasiya area.

67. The Lebanese authorities seemed unable or unwilling
to curtail those attacks. Israel had no alternative but to
resort to self-defence.

5 1. Again on 14 July the village of Margaliyyot was
attacked with small arms fire from Lebanon.

68. On 11 August Israel acted to disable the terror bases
situated on Mount Hermon. From these came the attackers
of Israeli villages and the assassinsof Israeli citizens.

52. On 16 July an attack with Katyusha rockets was
carried out from Lebanese territory on the village of Nahal
Senir.

69. A communique of the terror organizations’ command
broadcast by Radio Damascus on 11 August at 2215 hours
local time confirmed that the Israel air action wasdirected
against the encampments of the terror organizations. The
communique stated:

53. Also on 16 July mines were planted by saboteurs from
Lebanon south of Metulla near the Lebanese border.
54. On 27 July a mine wasplanted west of the village of
Abbasiya.

“At 1335 hours the Zionist enemy carried out an attack
on our fortified positions in Upper Galilee south of
Mount Hermon. . . The bombardment continued half an
hour but our fighters put into action anti-aircraft guns
and succeededto shoot down two planes , . . Three of our
men were killed, one of them while operating an
anti-aircraft gun and after he had succeededto hit one of
the planes, Seven of our men were wounded.”

55. On 31 July a terror squad which had crossed into
Israel from Lebanon attacked Israeli positions in the
Fashkul area. Return fire by the Israel Defence Forces
killed one of the saboteurs, while one Israeli soldier was
wounded,
56. On 1 August the town of Qiryat Shemona was
attacked from Lebanese territory with Katyusha rockets.
One civilian waswounded.
57. The next day, on 2 August, an Israeli Vehide
was
blown up by a mine near Yaroun, a village on the Lebanese
border.

70. Yesterday the Egyptian Middle East News Agency
announced that five saboteurs were killed and that the
funeral of one of them, a Syrian, would take place in
Damascus itself.

58. On 3 August Qiryat Shemona and the area of the
villages of Misgav’Am and Kefar Gil’adi came again under
Katyusha rocket tire originating from Lebanese territory.

71. These communiques leave no doubt regarding the
target of the Israeli action and the character of the resulting
casualties.

59. Later that day the area of the village of Fashkul was
shelled from Lebanon with mortars.

72. It is true that for obvious, basic reasons the terror
organizations established their camps in the immediate
proximity of Lebanese villages, and even utilized buildings
situated within the confines of these villages. The Israeli
action, however, was carefully aimed at the saboteur
concentrations. If, in spite of all evidence to the contrary,
there is nevertheless an innocent civilian among the
casualties of Monday’s action, it is indeed a causefor regret.
We are deeply sensitive to the tragedy of civilian casualties,
and they are the victims of the same brutal and senseless

60. On 4 August a vehicle of the border police wasblown
up by a mine in the vicinity of the village of Yaroun.
61. Also on 4 August mortar shells were fired from
Lebanese territory on an Israeli position in the Hermon
area. The same area wasshelled for a second time later that
day.
5

depend on Israel’s willingness to halt Syrian infiltration in
the Mount Hermon area.”

warfare that has been waged against Israeli civilians by Arab
forces for the last two decades. It requires the same
callousness on the part of the Arab terrorist chieftains to
establish their basesin the vicinity of Lebanese villages as it
takes for them to murder in cold blood Israeli women and
children across the border. In fact those glorified murderers, whose ideology centres on two words only: “Kill
Jews”, make no secret of it that the more victims they can
count among the civilian population on both sides, the
nearer they are to their sinister goals.

78. Israel, however, subjected to Arab aggression for more
than two decades, is concerned with its own security. Like
all Governments, the Government of Israel is responsible
for the safety of its citizens. Like all Governments, it
cannot permit that they be the targets of wanton assault
and murder. This is the primary responsibility of every
Government. The citizens of Israel, in towns and villages,
civilians and soldiers, those who pursue their peaceful daily
endeavours and those who stand guard on the cease-fire
lines, know that their security is the Israel Government’s
supreme objective and that nothing will deter the Government from ensuring it. Surely the Arab States must know it
as well by now.

73. It is not by making preposterous allegations against
Israel in the Security Council that the Government of
Lebanon will discharge its duty towards its civilian population, but by an honest attempt to put its house in order,
and by assuming the full responsibility of a sovereign
Government for barring its territory to aggressorsagainst a
neighbouring State.

79. Since 1948 they have tried all means of warfare
against Israel. They fought Israel with their regular armies.
They have assaulted Israel with their irregular forces, trying
sometimes, as the Lebanese representative did today, to
masquerade them as groups of disgruntled refugees. They
failed repeatedly in their aggression because they were
motivated by nothing but a desire to deny the people of
Israel its right to independence and sovereignty. They failed
miserably because Israel fought back in self-defence,
because Israel fought for its life. Arab aggression has proved
a continuous failure because bloodshed for the sake of
bloodshed, even as it is being carried on by the Arab States
now, is a sickly, degenerating pursuit. The soldier who
fights under the slogan “kill, butcher, destroy” is a pitiful
man, and the assassinwhose orders are: murder Jews, men,
women or children, is hardly the embodiment of courage
and dedication. That is why the people of Israel know that
they shall prevail over the conspiracy of darkness that.
surrounds them today and that in the end peace and
security for all will reign in the Middle East.

74. It is a callous and cowardly act to place military
positions in the proximity of civilians. The SecretaryGeneral has been right to point out recently that military
positions in the proximity of United Nations observation
posts endanger the lives of the Observers. What is true on
the West Bank of the Suez Canal is also true on the slopes
of Mount Herman. If there have been any civilian Lebanese
casualties, those responsible are the ones who continue to
wage war and sow bloodshed, even if Arab representatives
choose to use these hapless victims of Arab warfare for
further incitement and propaganda.
75. The presence of the terror encampments in the areas
of Israel’s air action is generally known and documented.
76. For instance, the Lebanese daily Al-Yom reported on
28 April 1969:
‘Mr. Abd el-Majan el-Zin, member of the Lebanese
Parliament, declared: there is a no-man’s land between
Lebanon and Syria in which the fedayeen are now
concentrated.”

80. No feats of propaganda can alter these basic facts,
Arab aggression against Israel has been from its very
inception an international crime. That was true in 1948,
when the Arab States invaded the nascent State, It was true:
in the fifties and sixties when terror warfare became the:
method of Arab belligerency. It was true in 1967 when the:
Arab States felt that the time was ripe for the resumption1
of full-scale hostilities against Israel. It is also true today
when the so-called “war of attrition” is being wagedagainsl.
US primarily by means of terror operations. In all its stages,
in all its forms Arab aggression against Israel has remained s
crime contrary to the Charter of the United Nations and
the tenets of international law.

77. In the Washington Post of 19 May 1969 we read the
following eyewitnessaccount dispatched from Beirut:
“It has now been established beyond doubt that some
Syrian-trained commandos in southern Lebanon are
actually regular Syrian army soldiers in commando
uniform . . . Ostensibly, the Syrian-trained commandos
called Al-Saiga are in the rugged Mount Hermon area to
harass Israel from a refuge within Lebanon.
“But in fact, the AI-Saiga commandos in southern
Lebanon, seeded with camouflaged Syrian regulars, are
now serving a double and highly insidious purpose-both
to harass Israel and to create dangerous political tensions,
possibly civil war, within Lebanon itself. Syria has long
had a covetous eye on the Lebanon, a nation of bankers
and traders which the French carved out of ancient
Syrian territory as a homeland for Christian Arabs.

81. To claim for terror warfare conducted today any
special dispensation is a travesty of law and justice. To try
to portray it as a consequence of the 1967 hostilities is a
falsification of fact, of history. The present terror warfare is
not different in origin, method or character from that
pursued against Israel five, ten and fifteen years ago. The
failure of Arab aggression in 1967 does not bestow on
warfare by terror, always criminal, always despicable and
condemnable, an aura of respectability. United Nations
jurisprudence has proscribed it. Impartial Members of tl~l~
United Nations have always condemned it.

“The more orthodox commando units in southern
Lebanon belong to Al-Fatah.
“Thus the security of vulnerable Lebanon, with its
half-Christian, half-Moslem population, may ironically
6

82. The Government of Lebanon cannot be absolved of
responsibility for the use of its territory as a base of terror
warfare against Israel. Lebanon has frequently tried to garb
itself in a mantle of innocence. Yet it has taken part in
aggression against Israel ever since the Arab invasion of
1948. On the eve of the 1967 hostilities it identified itself
completely with the acts ‘of war undertaken by Egypt,
Speaking in the Security Council, in the debate dealing with
Egypt’s blockade of the Straits of Tiran, Egypt’s removal of
the United Nations Emergency Force from Sinai and Gaza,
and the amassing of huge armies for attack on Israel, the
Lebanese Minister for Foreign Affairs declared on 30 May
1967:
“Lebanon supports this exercise by the United Arab
Republic of its sovereign rights over the entrance to the
Gulf of Aqaba. We will stand by the United Arab
Republic . . . In a total war the Arabs will use all means to
defeat their enemy . . .” (1344th meeting, paras. 18
and 21.1
83. On 5 June 1967 Lebanese planes attacked the Israeli
town of Metulla. At the end of the hostilities Lebanon
informed the Secretary-General of the United Nations that
it accepted the Security Council resolutions on the ceasefire. Lebanon had, however, ignored its obligations under
the cease-fire by failing to prevent attacks from its territory
against Israel, in violation of the cease-fire, and by allowing
the establishment on Lebanese soil of the terror warfare
bases which were the target of Israel’s action on 11 August.
84. The attitude of the Lebanese Government is reflected
in the following recent statement by its Prime Minister on
7 August 1969:
“There is a need to convene an Arab summit conference
as soon as possible. The Arab States must assist Lebanon
to impIement her obligations according to a plan which
the summit will decide upon. Lebanon should be respon-

sible towards the Fedayeen military operation in the
framework of the resolutions adopted by a high Arab
level through a co-ordination with the Fedayeen themselves.”
85. The Prime Minister of Israel, Mrs. Golda Meir, declared
yesterday:
“Our policy towards Lebanon is no different from that
towards other Arab States. Lebanon must be responsible
for acts of sabotage originating from her territory , , .
Israel wants peace with Lebanon but peace must be
reciprocal,”
86. The Government of Lebanon knows that Israel’s aim is
scrupulous maintenance of the cease-fire and the attainment of lasting peace. The Government of Lebanon is
aware that Israel has shown great patience and restraint in
the hope that the Lebanese authorities would put an end to
the utilization of their territory for armed attacks against
Israel, in breach of the cease-fire. It is the failure of the
Lebanese authorities to do so that has necessitated Israel’s
recourse to the right of self-defence.
87. It is not too late to secure observance of the cease-fire
between Lebanon and Israel. It is not too late for the
Security Council to call on Lebanon to abide by its
cease-fire obligations. Such a call may well prove of cardinal
importance to future developments in the area.
88. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish to
thank the representative of Israel for the kind words he has
addressed to me.
89. As no other representative wishes to speak at this
time, I shall adjourn the meeting.
me meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

United

Nations

UNITED

may

be obtained

Your

bookstore

or write

Conrult

COMMENT

SE PROCURER
der
monde

Nations

Unier,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Los publicaciones

Section

Notions
entier.
der

Unies
ront
Informer-vour

ventes,

PUBLICACIONES
de

in United

Nations,

New York

laa

Price:

from
to:

LES PUBLlCATlONS

Nacioner

en todas
portes del mundo.
Csnsulte
Ventar,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

publications

the world.
or Geneva.

les
publications
dbporitoires
du

NATIONS

New

York

bookstores

United

DES NATIONS

distributors
Sales

throughout

Section,

New

York

UNIES

et

en vente
danr
ler librairier
ler
agencer
oupr&s
de votre
librairie
ou adrersez-vow
6:
ou Gen&ve.

DE LAS NACIONES
Unidos

and

Nations,

est6n

en venta

o su librero

a dirijose

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

UNIDAS
en libreriar

in other

y casas

a: Naciones

currencies)

Unidar,

disfribuidorar
Seccicin

de

82175-November

1972-2,oSo
