VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

7. Reaffirms its strong conviction that the presence of
military bases and installations in the Territory could con­
stitute a major obstacle to the implementation of the Dec­
laration and that it is the responsibility ·of the administer­
ing Power to ensure that the existence of such bases and
installations does not hinder the population of the Terri­
tory from exercising its right to self-determination and
independence in conformity with the purposes and princi­
ples of the Charter of the United Nations;
8. Urges the administering Power to continue to take
all necessary measures not to involve the Territory in any
offensive acts or interference directed against other States
and to comply fully with the purposes and principles of the
Charter, the Declaration and the resolutions and decisions
of the General Assembly relating to military activities and
arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration;
9. Welcomes the recent exchanges and visits under­
taken by the territorial Government with its Caribbean
neighbours and recommends that further regional contacts
be pursued;
10. Urges once again the administering Power, in co­
operation with the territorial Government, to continue to
take all effective measures to guarantee the right of the
people of Bermuda to own and dispose of their natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
11. Strongly urges the administering Power, in consul­
tation with the Government of Bermuda, to make every
effort to diversify the economy of Bermuda, including
increased efforts to promote agriculture, fisheries and the
manufacturing sector, which will benefit the people of the
Territory;
12. Welcomes the role being played in the Territory by
the United Nations Development Programme in provid­
ing assistance in the fields of agriculture, forestry and fish­
eries and urges the specialized agencies and all other
organizations of the United Nations system to continue to
pay special attention to the development needs of
Bermuda;
I 3. Reiterates its call upon the administering Power, in
co-operation with the local authorities, to continue to
expedite the process of "bermudianization" in the Terri­
tory and, in that connection, urges that particular attention
be paid to greater localization of the managerial, executive
and professional positions of the public service and the
private sector;
14. Calls upon the Government of the United King­
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to receive a
visiting mission in the Territory at an appropriate time;
15. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to Bermuda at
an appropriate time and in consultation with the adminis­
tering Power, and to report thereon to the General Assem­
bly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/34. Question of the British Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the British Virgin
Islands,
15 Ibid., chaps. IV and XXI.
16 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.l). vol. IV,
chap. XXVIII, annex, para. 162.

241

Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries anq Peoples. 15
Recalling its resolution 15 14 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
the British Virgin Islands, including in particular its reso­
lution 38/44 of 7 December 1983,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power relating to the Territory, 13 in
which he said that his Government would fully respect the
wishes of the people of the British Virgin Islands in deter­
mining the future political status of the Territory,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the
Territory,
Noting with appreciation the continued active participa­
tion of the administering Power in the work of the Special
Committee in regard to the British Virgin Islands, thereby
enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful
examination of the situation in the Territory, with a view
to accelerating the prooess of decolonization for the pur­
pose of the full implementation of the Declaration,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the administering Pow­
er for the economic and social development of the
Territory,
Taking note of the fact that the economy of the Territory
has continued to grow, particularly in the real estate, con­
struction, tourist and banking industries, although at a
slower pace, due to the world recession,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strength­
ening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability,
Recalling the recommendation of the United Nations
visiting mission dispatched to the British Virgin Islands in
197 6 16 that the administering Power should facilitate the
participation of the Territory as an associate member in
various organizations of the United Nations system as part
of the overall strategy of accelerating the decolonization
process,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the British
Virgin Islands; 17
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
British Virgin Islands to self-determination and indepen­
dence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, con­
tained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exer­
cise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
17 /hid., Thirty-ninth Sesswn. Supplement No 23 (A/J9/23). chap. XXI.

242

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

with the Declaration contained in General Assembly reso­
lution 15 14 (XV), which fully applies to the British Virgin
Islands;
4. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to create such conditions in the Ter­
ritory as will enable the people of the British Virgin Islands
to exercise freely and without interference their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in accord­
ance with General Assembly resolution I 514 (XV), as well
as all other relevant resolutions of the Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is ultimately for the people of the
British Virgin Islands themselves to determine their future
political status in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration,
takes note of the general elections held in the Territory on
l l November 1983 and reaffirms the importance of foster­
ing an awareness among the people of the Territory of the
possibilities open to them in the exercise of their right to
self-determination;
6. Notes the continuing commitment of the territorial
Government to the goal of economic diversification, par­
ticularly in the areas of agriculture, fisheries and small
industries, and reiterates its call upon the administering
Power, in consultation with the local authorities, to inten­
sify its efforts in this regard;
7. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to safeguard the inalienable
right of the people of the British Virgin Islands to the
enjoyment of their natural resources by taking effective
measures to ensure their right to own and dispose of those
resources and to establish and maintain control of their
future development;
8. Urges the specialized agencies and other organiza­
tions of the United Nations system, as well as regional
institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, to
take or intensify measures to accelerate progress in the
social and economic life of the British Virgin Islands and,
in that regard, notes with appreciation the contribution
which the United Nations Development Programme con­
tinues to make to the development of the Territory;
9. Notes with satisfaction the admission of the British
Virgin Islands as an associate member of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Car­
ibbean and its subsidiary body, the Caribbean Develop­
ment and Co-operation Committee, as well as of various
other international and regional organizations, and calls
upon the administering Power to facilitate further the par­
ticipation of the British Virgin Islands in those
organizations;
IO. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the British Virgin Islands at an appro­
priate time should be kept under review;
1 1. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to the British
Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 Decemher 1984
18 Ibid.. chaps. IV, V and XXII

39/35. Question of the Cayman Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Cayman Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 18
Recalling its resolution 15 14 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all other
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
the Cayman Islands, including in particular its resolution
38/45 of 7 December I 983,
Noting the statement of the representative of the admin­
istering Power relating to the Territory, 13 in which he said
that his Government would fully respect the wishes of the
people of the Cayman Islands in determining the future
political status of the Territory,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the Declaration in respect of the
Territory,
Noting that although the main sectors of the economy of
the Cayman Islands, specifically tourism, international
finance and real estate, continued to sustain some degree
of growth during the period under review, they have
shown signs of being affected by the world recession,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of the Territory and
bearing in mind the necessity of diversifying and strength­
ening further its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the
small Territories and expressing its satisfaction at the
willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting
missions in the Territories under its administration,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implemen­
tation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Cayman
lslands; 19
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
Cayman Island_s to self-determination and independence
in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, con­
tained in General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV);
3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exer­
cise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration contained in General Assembly reso­
lution 1514 (XV), which fully applies to the Cayman
Islands;
4. Notes with appreciation the participation of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
as the administering Power, in the work of the Special
Committee in regard to the Cayman Islands, thereby
enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful
examination of the situation in the Territory, with a view
to accelerating the process of decolonization for the pur­
pose of the full implementation of the Declaration;
5. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the adminis­
tering Power to create such conditions in the Cayman
1" !hid.. chap. XXII.
