S/2021/291

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 25 March 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan; and Ms. Shaharzad
Akbar, Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission,
as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United States of America and Viet Nam
in connection with the video-teleconference on “The situation in Afghanistan”,
convened on Tuesday, 23 March 2021. A statement was also delivered by the
representative of Afghanistan.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations submitted written statements,
copies of which are also enclosed: Germany, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Pakistan, Qatar and Turkey.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of
the Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefing and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Linda Thomas-Greenfield
President of the Security Council

21-04025 (E) 290321 160421

*2104025*

S/2021/291

Annex 1
Statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, Deborah Lyons
Over six months have now passed since the launch of the Afghanistan peace
negotiations on 12 September. It has been one year since the signing of the agreement
between the United States and the Taliban, and the concurrent joint declaration
between the Government of Afghanistan and the United States. It is therefore a
timely moment to take stock and to assess what more must be done to support the
Afghan people on their path towards peace. The killings, the displacement, the
suffering of the Afghan people must end now.
Since my last briefing (see S/2020/1274), progress at the negotiations in
Doha has slowed. Afghans and their international partners have begun to voice
understandable frustrations about the lack of real outcomes, against the backdrop of
extreme violence around the country. It is notable that both sides have been dedicated
to remaining at the negotiating table. In my recent trip to Doha, I was encouraged
to hear from both sides of substantive progress being made on key agenda items.
But more must be done to demonstrate to Afghans that the negotiations are truly
progressing in the interests of the Afghan people.
As talks continue, many stakeholders are increasingly looking to the United
Nations to play a more prominent role. I welcome the appointment of my experienced
colleague Jean Arnault as the Secretary-General’s new Personal Envoy on
Afghanistan and Regional Issues, which will enhance and complement our ongoing
work on regional cooperation. We in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) will be working closely with the Personal Envoy in support
of Afghan peace and regional engagement.
For their part, Member States have played a vital role in coming up with
new initiatives to reinvigorate the peace process. International attendees at the
recent meeting in Moscow made it clear that they all wanted to see fresh impetus
in the negotiations. The extended troika — comprising Russia, China, the United
States and Pakistan — released a statement advocating a “durable and just political
resolution” resulting in “the formation of an independent, sovereign, unified,
peaceful, democratic, and self-sufficient Afghanistan”.
The proposed meeting to be held in Turkey is another opportunity to solidify
the principles on which the process will be based and potentially lay the foundations
for a just and inclusive political settlement.
These initiatives must be focused and coherent. Above all, they must reinforce,
rather than undermine, the Afghanistan peace negotiations in Doha. As we enter this
upcoming period of heightened intensity, all of us — neighbours, regional players
and international partners — have the responsibility to ensure that our actions are
well integrated, mutually reinforcing and, most importantly, are in the best interests
of the Afghan people.
Given the many interests involved — domestic and international — we always
knew that this would be a complicated peace. Decades of conflict have created real
grievances on all sides and there remains a lack of trust among the parties. There are
also genuine and profound differences between the Islamic Republic and the Taliban
over their desired end state.
None of this can be resolved in the work of a moment or in a few meetings,
no matter the location or format. Addressing these issues will require patience and
commitment on both sides. But my experience, from speaking to the parties in Doha
2/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

and to Afghans from all walks of life, tells me that peace is possible. Afghans are not
just ready for peace: they are demanding it. And all sides need the violence to stop.
If the peace process is to be sustainable, the parties must look not to
Afghanistan’s past, but to its future. Any peace settlement must take into account the
views and concerns of all Afghans — not just those of an elite few. I pay tribute to
Ms. Akbar, who, along with her colleagues in the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission and other organizations, such as the Afghan Women’s Network,
has done tremendous work to make the process more inclusive — of women, of
youth, of ethnic minorities, of victims of war. As the international standard bearer
for human rights, the United Nations is working side by side with all Afghans to
promote an inclusive peace.
I have followed with admiration the work of many Afghan women throughout
these negotiations. While still too few in numbers, they are demonstrating through
their contributions how the country has changed over the past two decades. Women
must and will inform discussions on all topics. They must be present in the room and
at the table when the future of the country is decided on.
Because this is not the Afghanistan of 20 years ago! Both the peace process and
any peace agreement must reflect the Afghan population of today. Allow me to recall
that half of all Afghans were born after the signing of the Bonn Agreement in 2001.
This generation has grown up in a different Afghanistan — one in which women
have access to positions of power; young people aspire to a proper education; media
play a vital civic role and civil society has had the space to flourish. These Afghans
are now a majority. They deserve to have their voices heard during negotiations and
to have a substantial role in Afghan society after a peace agreement is concluded.
But all Afghans are suffering from unprecedented levels of violence, even
as peace negotiations continue. In the first two months of 2021, we have witnessed
the continued trend of rising civilian casualties, documented since the start of the
Afghanistan peace negotiations in September. Particularly worrying is the spate of
attacks deliberately targeting civilians. Already this year, UNAMA has documented
more than 80 Afghans — including in the media, civil society, members of the
judiciary, religious scholars and government officials — who have lost their lives in
these brutal targeted attacks.
But this does not convey the full, crippling impact of the violence on
Afghanistan’s civic life. For every Afghan killed, there are many more who leave
their professions or intend to leave their country. I thank members of the Council
for their statement of 12 March condemning the recent spate of attacks deliberately
targeting civilians (SC/14464). We must all raise our voices against these egregious
acts of violence.
Against this backdrop, Afghans continue to suffer from a deepening
humanitarian crisis, and the threat of drought is looming. Food insecurity is at
record levels, with more than 40 per cent of the population in emergency and crisis
situations. The low precipitation and high temperatures witnessed over the La Niña
season have raised concern over a further deterioration, and as always, the poorest
Afghans will suffer most. I count on you, and all Member States, to contribute
generously to the humanitarian response plan, which stands at just 6 per cent funded.
Much more support is needed if Afghanistan is not to fall further behind.
But money alone is not enough. Humanitarian workers continue to be targeted
with threats, violence and interference with the impartial delivery of assistance. Such
acts are illegal and unjustifiable. They also have grave consequences for the lives
and livelihoods of Afghans. Humanitarian partners must be able to operate without
being illegally taxed, harassed, threatened or killed. I raised this issue recently with
21-040253/50

S/2021/291

the Taliban, and members of our humanitarian team are following up with them
in Doha. We have also been working with the Afghan Government to ensure its
legislative framework protects the space of non-governmental organizations carrying
out humanitarian work.
For now, Afghanistan seems to have weathered the second wave of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. While we must remain vigilant about
a potential third wave, vaccinations have now begun, thanks to donations from
the Government of India and the support of the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
(COVAX) facility. As the vaccination campaign continues to ramp up, we must
ensure that vaccines reach all prioritized groups across the country.
Developments in Afghanistan do not affect only Afghans — they affect the
global community. To take just one example, the cultivation and trafficking of illegal
narcotics continues to threaten stability in Afghanistan and the region. Last year
saw opium poppy cultivation increase by over a third, while the number of counternarcotics operations was reduced significantly. We know from other processes that
an illicit economy can continue to threaten peace and security long after a peace
agreement is signed. Sustained cooperation will be needed to mitigate this threat to
Afghanistan and the region.
Another enduring threat is that of transnational terrorism, particularly
associated with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. In the last quarter, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province claimed responsibility for 25
violent attacks, a steep increase over the previous three months. Recently, the group
claimed responsibility for the brutal killing of three female media representatives
in Jalalabad city. This violence is a vivid demonstration of the ongoing threat that
terrorism poses to Afghanistan, the region and the world.
When I speak to you next, we will have passed the proposed date for the
withdrawal of international troops under the United States-Taliban agreement. I hope
that by then, we will be able to discuss real progress, brought about by continued
negotiations in Doha, tangible outcomes from the Turkey meeting, and, if not a
ceasefire, at least a substantial de-escalation in violence. The coming months will
also see further increased activity on the regional front, starting with the Heart
of Asia ministerial meeting in Dushanbe, Tajikistan, at which regional countries
will gather and, I know, reaffirm their ongoing support for peace and stability
in Afghanistan.
All this could mark a turning point, but the road ahead is still not clear. We will
continue working with all parties — the Government of Afghanistan, the Taliban,
community leaders and the international community — to foster coherent support
for a much-needed peace.

4/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 2
Statement by the Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission, Shaharzad Akbar
I thank you, Madam President, for giving me the opportunity to address the
Security Council. I would like to thank the United States for inviting me to share
my perspectives on human rights in Afghanistan and the Afghanistan peace process.
Let me begin by thanking the Council for its statement on 12 March condemning
the targeted killings in Afghanistan (SC/14464). It was a welcome recognition of the
unbearable cost of targeted killings to Afghanistan’s present and future, and the
environment of fear and intimidation created by this horrendous tactic. The war
in Afghanistan remains one of the deadliest conflicts for civilians in the world.
The ongoing targeting of civilians that may constitute war crimes is almost a daily
occurrence. The onslaught of attacks has further shrunk the civic space, leading
to self-censorship for journalists, human rights defenders and religious scholars,
among others, thus impacting the quality of public engagement and debate on issues
critical to Afghanistan’s present and future. Every day I hear about another activist
or businessperson that has decided to leave owing to security concerns. As efforts
for peace intensify, there should be a greater sense of urgency to end the violence and
declare a ceasefire, to save lives and improve public engagement and participation.
I previously had the honour of addressing the Council last June (see S/2020/597),
at the kind invitation of France, before the intra-Afghan peace negotiations began in
Qatar in September. At the time, I stressed the importance of an inclusive, transparent
peace process and a comprehensive ceasefire. Ten months later, I regret to report that
the situation has worsened and therefore my message is more urgent than before.
Since the talks began, the violence towards Afghans has intensified and the public
has lost hope in the process.
We need your attention. With re-energized regional and international
engagement, there could be renewed hope in the possibility of peace, but a rushed
process could tip the country back into full-scale war. The recent events have
displayed a trend towards the capture of the negotiations by a group of elite men,
some of whom have been responsible for perpetuating the violence. Any settlement
that excludes the wider public will almost certainly be short lived and is unlikely to
lead to lasting peace.
I urge the Council to not look the other way as members push us towards a
peace deal doomed to fail. Building peace takes more than a deal among elites. It
must be an inclusive national endeavour. We urgently need the killing to stop and we
urgently need to begin that national dialogue with all Afghans.
Only if the process is inclusive, represents the diversity of Afghanistan and is
not cut too short to avoid difficult but critical issues does it have a chance of success.
We in the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission urge the peace
negotiations to include a fair representation of persons from a range of backgrounds
in order to reflect the experiences and needs of different communities, including
religious, regional and ethnic groups. The process should ensure the participation
of women, minorities, youth, civil society and the vibrant Afghan media, as well
as victims. Women’s equal participation and full involvement in the peace process
are essential. A minimum of 30 per cent of the participants in the talks should be
women with the steps being taken to achieve full gender balance. Women and civil
society’s participation in the process contributes to the success and durability of
peace agreements everywhere. A process that excludes women or tokenizes their
participation will lack credibility and fail to inspire public confidence. At the recent
21-040255/50

S/2021/291

conference in Moscow, I, like many Afghan women, was shocked and angered to see
only one Afghan woman, Dr. Habiba Sarabi, in a room full of men discussing the
future of my country.
Afghan women have fought for their human rights for many decades and have
made considerable progress in education, employment and political participation.
Afghan women are experts everywhere — from politics to public administration,
security, business, science and information technology. Despite the environment of
violence and fear, Afghan women and civil society continue to mobilize and raise
their voices in support of a ceasefire, a political solution to the conflict, victims’
rights and the human rights of all Afghans. Excluding or marginalizing them
from the main discussions about the future of Afghanistan is not only unjust and
unacceptable, but unwise and unhelpful to lasting peace.
If they are to lead to a lasting peace, the talks should address human rights
and victims’ rights. A robust reparations programme, a national community-based
programme focused on reconciliation, a truth-seeking process, memorialization and
victim recognition should be key elements of the peace agreement. The existing legal
obligations in relation to fundamental rights must be respected by both parties to the
peace agreement and by any new government. This includes a commitment to the
bill of rights in the current Afghan Constitution and to Afghanistan’s commitments
under international human rights treaties, which include respect for the rights of
women and minorities and the equality of all citizens. Amnesties for certain crimes
are permissible at the end of conflicts but cannot be applied to war crimes, crimes
against humanity or grave human rights violations. Impunity for such egregious
crimes is unlawful and undermines sustainable peace.
Afghans are exhausted by war and yearn for peace. With the start of
negotiations and international support for a political solution to Afghanistan’s
conflict, many of us experienced a glimmer of hope and began to imagine a better
future for ourselves and our children. That hope can be sustained and strengthened
only if Afghans get relief from the relentless violence; the peace process reflects the
concerns and aspirations of all our society, including women and victims; and our
fundamental rights as citizens, without gender, ethnic or other discrimination, are
recognized and upheld, not violated or bargained off.
Peace in Afghanistan will contribute to peace in the region and the world.
The Commission welcomes the United Nations heightened role in the process. By
standing with Afghans to ensure a process that is more likely to end the violence
and deliver a just and durable peace in my country, the Council will be fulfilling its
historic mandate.

6/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 3
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese and English]
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons for the
briefing and I listened carefully to the statement by Ms. Akbar, Chairperson of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to address the Council at this meeting.
At present, the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan is at a critical
juncture. Political means provide the only right way to achieve lasting peace in
Afghanistan, which is the common goal of all parties. Since the start of the intraAfghan talks last September, the Afghan Government and the Taliban have agreed
on a code of conduct to advance the talks, and progress has been made. We appreciate
the efforts of all parties in Afghanistan in this respect. As the intra-Afghan talks
are hard to come by and the negotiations enter the substantive stage, the process
will not be an easy one. But as long as the two sides set store by the interests of
the country and the people, demonstrate political determination and wisdom, and
remain committed to dialogue and consultations, they will arrive at a viable path
towards a political solution.
In the light of recent developments, I would touch on three points.
First, the Afghan peace process should continue to be Afghan-led and Afghanowned. China has taken note of some new initiatives on the Afghan issue on the
part of the international community recently. We welcome all efforts conducive to
the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan. At the same time, China has
always maintained that the Afghan peace and reconciliation process must adhere
to the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned principle. The future of Afghanistan should
be in the hands of the Afghan people themselves. The country’s future political
arrangement should be decided independently by the Afghans and no solutions
should be imposed from the outside. All elements in Afghanistan, especially women,
should fully participate in the peace process on an equal footing. Efforts by the
international community should serve to encourage and support the peace and
reconciliation process and must respect the ownership of the Afghan people. We
welcome the positive outcome of the extended troika held in Moscow last week.
This helps build international consensus and encourages all parties in Afghanistan
to advance the peace talks. At present, there are various international mechanisms
on the Afghan issue, along with some recent initiatives to hold conferences on it. We
hope that the relevant parties will fully communicate and coordinate with each other
and define the goals in order to form synergy. Relevant conferences should yield
tangible results and should not be convened for the sake of convening. China notes
that the Secretary-General appointed a Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional
Issues last week, whose mandate and objectives should be further fleshed out along,
with the division of labour with Special Representative Lyons, among others.
Secondly, we should help Afghanistan achieve security and stability as soon
as possible. The cessation of fighting and violence and the enjoyment of peace are
the greatest aspirations of more than 37 million Afghans, and also the common
expectation of regional countries and the international community. The current
frequent violent attacks and insecurity in Afghanistan remain worrisome. China
condemns the violent attacks against civilians and civilian facilities, such as schools,
medical facilities and hospitals, and calls on all parties in the country to actively
respond to the Secretary-General’s global ceasefire initiative and stop the fighting
21-040257/50

S/2021/291

and violence as soon as possible. The international community should continue
to support the Afghan security forces in their capacity-building, so that they can
effectively respond to the threats of transnational crimes and drug-trafficking,
crackdown on the activities of terrorist organizations, such as the Eastern Turkistan
Islamic Movement, protect civilians and ensure the protection of women and children
from violence. Consideration should be given to the impact of the withdrawal of
foreign forces on peace and security in Afghanistan. China maintains that foreign
troops cannot come and leave as they wish. The withdrawal of foreign forces from
Afghanistan should be orderly and responsible to avoid leaving a security vacuum
that would undermine the security and stability of the Afghanistan and other
countries in the region.
Thirdly, we should support Afghanistan in carrying out regional cooperation
to promote its economic and social development. Afghanistan is the hub for South
and Central Asia. Only by strengthening connectivity and engaging in regional
cooperation can Afghanistan fully tap its geographical advantages, promote
development and improve people’s livelihoods. The international community should
help Afghanistan engage in regional cooperation and connectivity, implement its
2021-2025 National Peace and Development Framework, and resolve a series of thorny
issues, such as poverty, refugees and drugs, so as swiftly to achieve stability and
prosperity. China has all along actively supported Afghanistan’s economic and social
development and helped deepen connectivity and economic and trade cooperation
with regional countries under the framework of the Belt and Road Initiative. China
encourages the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to make good
use of the working group of the six neighbouring countries, and actively contribute
to promoting regional cooperation and connectivity between Afghanistan and
regional countries.
The coronavirus disease has posed huge challenges to the economic and
social development of Afghanistan. China has delivered multiple shipments of antipandemic materials to Afghanistan. We will continue to work with the international
community to provide necessary help in controlling the pandemic as soon as possible
and promoting economic and social recovery.
In closing, I would like to reiterate that, as a good neighbour and a true friend
of Afghanistan, China will as always stand with the Afghans and be a supporter, a
mediator and a facilitator for the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan. We
will continue to contribute to the achievement of peace, reconciliation, development
and prosperity in the country.

8/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 4
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to begin by thanking Special Representative Lyons and Ms.
Akbar for their detailed and sobering briefings on the situation in Afghanistan. With
the violence and attacks on civilians, the need for humanitarian assistance and the
coronavirus disease pandemic, conditions in Afghanistan today are looking worse
than they have in a decade.
It is deeply troubling to hear that the security situation has deteriorated to
its worst level since the deployment of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). The intensifying armed clashes continue to take the heaviest
toll on the civilian population, with the number of casualties noticeably increasing
since the start of the peace negotiations. The recent wave of deliberate attacks
targeting civilians is indefensible. These assassinations — in particular, of prominent
civil servants, human rights defenders and journalists — must be investigated and
the perpetrators held accountable. I would like to recall that the Council has recently
underlined that these targeted killings of civilians may constitute war crimes and
must stop immediately.
The increased violence has been accompanied by the humanitarian situation
deteriorating to unprecedented levels. Nearly half the population of Afghanistan
is in need of humanitarian assistance, but, at the same time, increasing violence
is severely impeding humanitarian access and claiming the lives of ever more aid
workers. It is vital to support UNAMA’s efforts to improve the accessibility of
humanitarian aid to people in dire need.
I would like, separately, to highlight the distressing effect the conflict is having
on children in Afghanistan, with almost one-third of all civilian casualties being
children and half of all kids under the age of five now facing acute malnutrition.
Today, we reiterate once again our call for an immediate, permanent and
comprehensive ceasefire to save the Afghan people from more meaningless suffering
and to create a conducive environment for sustainable peace in the country as well as
stability in the region. The current soaring violence has contributed to diminishing
public confidence and trust in efforts towards peace. All parties, particularly the
Taliban, must fulfil their commitments and work towards ending violence to save
civilian lives.
We welcome the recent agreement to accelerate intra-Afghan peace
negotiations. Sustainable peace can be achieved only through a sustainable political
settlement accepted by all constituencies, including marginalized groups. To achieve
this, the peace process must protect and reinforce the rights of all Afghans, including
women, youth and persons belonging to minorities, and preserve the gains achieved
in the past two decades and guaranteed by the Afghan Constitution. We emphasize
the importance of the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in the peace
process. Women are equally experiencing the devastating impact of this unending
war and have been fighting for the survival of countless families.
Estonia and the European Union remain ready to support Afghans as they pursue
the peace process. Such sustained cohesive support of the international community, in
particular the countries of the region, is crucial to facilitating and guaranteeing peace
in Afghanistan. We welcome active outreach by all parties in support of the peace
process and endorse here the engagement of UNAMA and the Secretary-General’s
new Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional Issues, Mr. Arnault.
This is certainly the most difficult phase that UNAMA has witnessed since the
beginning of the Mission in Afghanistan. I would like to conclude by commending
21-040259/50

S/2021/291

UNAMA for its continuous efforts, in particular for its work in promoting the role of
women with regard to peace and security agenda, addressing the situation of children
affected by armed conflict, supporting transitional justice, victim-centred justice
and the inclusion of civil society, and for its activities in supporting the protection of
human rights under challenging conditions in Afghanistan.

10/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 5
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst
[Original: French]
I would like to begin my remarks by thanking Deborah Lyons and Shaharzad
Akbar for their briefings. I would also like to welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan. Each in her own way — with her
experience, commitment and total dedication to a country and its security —
reminds us, as if there were still any need, of the central role that women play in
peace negotiations. In this regard, I would also like to welcome Habiba Sarabi,
2021 laureate of the Simone Veil Prize of the French Republic, and to welcome her
commitment to reconciliation and lasting peace.
The numerous diplomatic initiatives under way give us grounds to hope for
momentum towards and prospects for peace, which are most welcome. They are
invaluable for the resumption the Afghan-led intra-Afghan talks in the context of
the process taking place in Doha between the negotiating teams designated by the
two parties.
In this regard, we welcome the appointment of Jean Arnault alongside
Deborah Lyons. Thanks to his extensive experience, we expect him to help ensure
the overall coherency of these multiple initiatives, in close collaboration with the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and regional partners. The full,
active and effective participation of women in all formats of the peace process is an
essential condition for its long-term success.
Moreover, the process must be inclusive. In this regard, we advocate the
participation of Afghanistan’s major supporters. The European Union, as leading
donor and whose member States contribute almost half of all troops on the ground,
has a rightful place in these discussions.
While there is renewed hope for peace, this must not hide the fact that trust
has been sorely tested and weakened by the level of violence. The Security Council
recently firmly condemned targeted attacks in its press statement of 12 March
(SC/14464). The murder women and men participating in the life of a democracy
is unacceptable. Such violence is an obstacle to peace, as recalled in the troika
statement issued following the Moscow conference on 18 March.
We call for the implementation of a ceasefire, in accordance with resolutions
2532 (2020) and 2565 (2021). The protection of civilians, in particular women and
children, and of civilian infrastructure must be an absolute priority. Respect for
international humanitarian law, human rights and press freedoms, by all parties, is
non-negotiable. Those responsible for these horrific crimes must be held accountable.
There can be no impunity for them.
Many speakers highlighted the serious and deteriorating humanitarian
situation: one in two children under the age of five will be acutely malnourished by
2021. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has contributed to doubling the
number of people in need of humanitarian assistance in one year. In the face of this
situation, donor mobilization is essential. Accordingly, we welcome the European
Union’s pledge at the donor conference last November of €1.2 billion over four years.
Access for medical and humanitarian personnel to all those in need, as
well as their protection, must be guaranteed. The number of incidents impeding
humanitarian access more than doubled in 2020; this is unacceptable. We must also
ensure equitable access to the COVID-19 vaccine. In this respect, the COVID-19
Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) facility has a key role to play.
21-0402511/50

S/2021/291

Finally, peace will not be sustainable as long as drug trafficking continues to
gain ground. The fight against drugs in all its dimensions, from prevention to the
eradication of production and trafficking, must be a priority. Terrorist groups benefit
from the resources generated by drug trafficking and use them to destabilize not
only Afghanistan but the whole region. We welcome the role of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime in combating this scourge and call on all parties, in
accordance with their commitments, to resolutely undertake to fulfil this objective.
The challenges are numerous, but I can assure the Council that France is ready,
alongside its partners, to assist Afghanistan on the road to peace.

12/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 6
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
I would like to begin by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Deborah Lyons for her comprehensive briefing and join other members in
expressing appreciation for the work done by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan. I would also like to thank Ms. Shaharzad Akbar, Chairperson of
the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, for her briefing. I deeply
appreciate the statement delivered by Ambassador Adela Raz of Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is going through a critical phase. The violence, unabated terror
attacks and targeted assassinations have reached unprecedented levels. Targeted
attacks on Afghan security forces, ulamas, innocent students in schools and
universities, women occupying positions of responsibility, journalists, civil rights
activists, youth and minority communities only serve to highlight the concerted
effort by terrorists and their sponsors to erode the gains of the last two decades. The
report of the Secretary General (S/2021/252) makes it clear that the commencement
of the intra-Afghan talks has, regrettably, not resulted in a decrease in violence; on
the contrary, it has only increased.
Members of the Security Council came together earlier this month to
strongly condemn the alarming number of attacks deliberately targeting civilians in
Afghanistan (see SC/14464). They also expressed their deep concern about the threat
posed by terrorism to Afghanistan and the region. These attacks are aimed at forcing
the Afghan people to make predetermined choices through coercion and at spreading
fear and intimidation within the society. As Afghanistan’s immediate neighbour, we
are deeply concerned at the rising use of violence as a tool for pressure tactics.
India believes that an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire in Afghanistan
is the need of the hour. This is not only in the interest of the people of Afghanistan,
who have been the victims of unrelenting violence, but a basic prerequisite for the
success of the peace process. It goes without saying that talks and violence cannot
go hand in hand.
India supports all efforts aimed at achieving sustainable peace, security and
stability in Afghanistan. Such a process must be transparent, inclusive, Afghan-led,
Afghan-owned and Afghan-controlled, fully respecting the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country.
The gains of the last two decades must be preserved in any constitutional
framework that Afghanistan designs for itself. The rights of women, minorities and
the vulnerable need to be protected, and respect for human rights and democracy
must be ensured. The full participation of women and ethnic and religious minorities
in the peace process is essential to preserving a democratic and pluralistic polity.
For enduring peace in Afghanistan, terrorist safe havens and sanctuaries must
be dismantled immediately and terrorist supply chains be broken. There needs to
be zero tolerance for terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. It is important to
ensure that the territory of Afghanistan is not used by terrorist groups to threaten or
attack any other country. Those providing material and financial support to terrorist
entities must be held accountable, without any double standards.
For Afghanistan’s economic development, it is important that it have
unhindered access to the high seas. The international community should work
towards the removal of artificial transit barriers imposed on the country and ensure
the full transit rights guaranteed to Afghanistan under bilateral and multilateral
transit agreements without any hindrance.
21-0402513/50

S/2021/291

As neighbours, India and Afghanistan share a natural and long-standing
historical relationship. Our strategic partnership and enduring commitment to
the development of Afghanistan reflect this time-tested partnership. In pursuance
of the same, over the last 20 years, India has committed over $3 billion towards
development, reconstruction and capacity-building in the country. We have recently
signed a memorandum of understanding with the Government of Afghanistan
for building the Shahtoot Dam, which would provide safe drinking water for the
residents of Kabul city. India is also launching phase IV of its high-impact community
development projects in Afghanistan, which include more than 100 projects, valued
at $80 million. As of today, our developmental footprint is spread across all 34
provinces of the country.
To provide greater regional connectivity, India has operationalized air-freight
corridors and the Chabahar port. India has extended humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan with the transfer of 75,000 metric tons of wheat through Chabahar
port in order to overcome food insecurity resulting from the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. Further, as a part of our endeavour to help Afghanistan get
through the COVID-19 pandemic, we have contributed a supply of 968,000 Madein-India vaccine doses to the country, 500,000 of which were supplied by India in
the form of a grant.
Several Indian nationals, in particular our diplomats, including my dear
colleague V. Venkateshwara Rao and also Brigadier Ravi Datt Mehta, as well as
engineers and doctors, have sacrificed their lives for Afghanistan while on duty. We
in India therefore have faced the highest stakes in ensuring peace and stability in
Afghanistan. We are ready to work with all stakeholders, including countries of the
region, towards that objective.
India continues to stand with Afghanistan in ensuring restoration of
normalcy through a legitimate democratic process that is essential for the long-term
stability of the country and the region. India will continue to provide all support
to the Government and the people of Afghanistan in realizing their aspirations for
a peaceful, democratic and prosperous future, free of terror, so as to protect and
promote the rights and interests of all sectors of Afghan society.

14/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I want to thank Special Representative Lyons and Ms. Akbar for their
informative — and, I must say, sobering — briefings today. I also want to welcome
to the Security Council my dear friend and colleague Ambassador Adela Raz, whose
compassion for her people humbles many of us in this meeting today.
Today’s debate comes at a pivotal moment for the country and the people
of Afghanistan. We have heard a lot to remind us of the truism that peace really
is a process and not a moment. We have heard about the ongoing challenges for
the country, including the high levels of violence. We are forced once again to call
for an end to that violence and for a comprehensive and permanent ceasefire. This
is clearly what the Afghan people desire and demand, and it is surely what the
Afghans deserve.
Through Special Representative Lyons, I want to express Ireland’s appreciation
and full support for the critically important work that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has taken on under her leadership, in what we all
know are really challenging circumstances in the country.
The Security Council’s recent condemnation of targeted attacks against
women, human rights defenders, journalists and media workers, medical personnel
and humanitarian workers, among others, demonstrates the scale of — but also the
unity of our own purpose against — this horrific violence. Ireland stands in support
of those in Afghanistan who demonstrate such bravery in the face of threats, lest we
forget, as Mrs. Raz poignantly said this morning.
Ms. Akbar recently wrote powerfully about the terror and fear that those
attacks have generated, including forcing many into silence or into leaving their own
country, Afghanistan. She highlighted that this would create a void in the country
that will take another generation to fill. This violence and intimidation cannot stand.
In response to the escalating threats, Ireland is increasing the assistance we provide
in the country to support those who are in danger.
Today we are also at a critical juncture on the path to peace — with new
initiatives, we hope — in addition to the ongoing Doha negotiations. It is crucial
that Afghans themselves remain engaged at the core of all processes. We urge all
parties to work in good faith to reach a negotiated settlement and a fully inclusive
and sustainable, dignified peace that reflects and respects the needs and wishes of
the Afghan people, who, after decades of conflict and instability, deserve no less.
Special Representative Lyons said this morning that building peace takes
more than a deal among elites, that the process must be inclusive, which is a point
that we reiterate. It is vital that all peace negotiations protect the hard-won gains of
the last two decades and reinforce fundamental rights. The international community
has a role to play in supporting these negotiations. As a long-standing partner of and
significant donor to Afghanistan, the European Union (EU) can make an important
contribution to any future discussions, while recognizing that, above all, it is the
Afghan people — all Afghans, including men, women, youth, and minorities — who
belong at the heart of their own process, building their own future together — a
future based on equality, democracy and the rule of law. Only an inclusive peace,
which upholds the inalienable rights of the Afghan people, will be sustainable.
Ireland is very proud to co-chair, with Afghanistan, the United Nations Group
of Friends of Peace Processes. We are committed to ensuring that all peace initiatives,
including the full, equal and meaningful participation of women, occur not just in
21-0402515/50

S/2021/291

words, but in actions. Women’s participation in the room and at the negotiating table
is fundamental to the success of any peace process. I am very concerned at the
shockingly low levels of female representation at the meetings in Moscow last week.
I share the opinion expressed by Habiba Sarabi, the sole female delegate, that “the
views of 51 per cent of people should not be ignored”. As my good friend Adela Raz
has often said, “peace will fail if women’s rights are not guaranteed”.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/252) highlights the extremely
high levels of violence faced by women and children in Afghanistan, as well as the
difficulties victims of gender-based violence encounter in accessing justice. I echo
the call on the Afghan Government to strengthen the implementation of the law on
the elimination of violence against women.
The Special Representative’s briefing on the scale of the humanitarian crisis
in Afghanistan today was really marked and stark. Half of the population, some
18.4 million people, are in humanitarian need. The ongoing violence is exacerbating
this crisis. Interference with humanitarian access is always unacceptable and always
prolongs the suffering of vulnerable people.
We are gravely concerned about the impact of drought, combined with the
coronavirus disease, on what is already the world’s second worst — I underline
this — the world’s second worst food-insecurity crisis. At a time where the
humanitarian plan for Afghanistan is chronically underfunded, Ireland, the EU and
the wider international community will continue to stand with the Afghan people to
provide the required assistance.
In conclusion, the challenges facing Afghanistan are many and complex. But
peace would create the space in which they could be tackled. As we have heard, a
stable and peaceful Afghanistan is also critical for regional security, stability and
development. We value the role played in Afghanistan by UNAMA and also welcome
the appointment of Mr. Jean Arnault as Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan and Regional Issues.
Together with the EU and our international partners, Ireland continues to
stand with the people of Afghanistan at this moment of hope and expectation, to
achieve a dignified peace that will build a stable, inclusive and prosperous future for
all Afghans.

16/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 8
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael Kiboino
My delegation thanks Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, and Ms. Shaharzad Akbar, Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission, for their briefings, and welcomes the participation of
the Afghanistan Permanent Representative at today’s meeting. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2021/252) and for appointing Mr. Jean Arnault
as his Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional Issues.
Kenya’s delegation notes with concern that, since September 2020, when the
Afghanistan peace negotiations began, the number of targeted attacks and killings
have continued to rise. Kenya joins other delegations in condemning these atrocities.
Our sympathies and condolences go out to the families of the targeted civil servants,
judiciary staff, media and health-care personnel, members of the civil society and
ethnic and religious minorities who have been affected by the violence in one way
or another.
Kenya is opposed to the use of terrorism or any form of violence and
intimidation as a means for political ends. We urge all parties to immediately
cease hostilities, bring a stop to targeted attacks and embrace dialogue as the only
viable means to achieve sustainable peace. In this regard, we welcome regional and
international efforts in support of the peace process.
In order to maintain the desired renewed commitment and sustain the efforts
to advance the inter-Afghan negotiations, Kenya’s delegation wishes to make four
points. First, the Government of Afghanistan should do more to stem the culture
of impunity. It must conduct thorough investigations into the ongoing killings and
other forms of violence and promote genuine accountability and ensure that the
perpetrators are prosecuted.
Secondly, it is imperative for the parties to honour their obligations under
international humanitarian law in all circumstances, including the protection of
civilians and in facilitating humanitarian access. Kenya notes that Afghanistan is
facing an acute food-insecurity crisis with more than 40 per cent of the population
at crisis or emergency levels. Regrettably, the widespread insecurity, which grew
by 146 per cent from 2019 to 2020, regularly delayed assistance and prolonged the
suffering of vulnerable people.
Thirdly, sustainable peace in Afghanistan will require a comprehensive and
inclusive Afghan-led, Afghan-owned peace process that is aimed at a permanent
and comprehensive ceasefire, as well as an inclusive political settlement. In this
regard, Kenya fully supports the ongoing intra-Afghan peace talks and hopes that
the aspirations of the population for peace and stability will be delivered, bringing
the decades-old conflict to an end.
Fourthly, the inclusive political peace process must have the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women. Although women’s networks continue to
amplify calls for a ceasefire, they remain underrepresented in key bodies, including
both negotiating teams, as well as the High Council for National Reconciliation.
On the sanction regime, Kenya’s delegation is of the view that any review of
the 1988 sanction measures, targeted on the Taliban, should be in line with resolution
2513 (2020) and predicated on the Taliban demonstrating commitment to ceasing all
forms of violent activities and targeted attacks. Further, any proposal to delist some
of its members should be considered only on the merits and on a case-by-case basis.
21-0402517/50

S/2021/291

To conclude, I wish to reiterate the imperative of making progress in the
Afghanistan peace process. Any setback or a failed Afghan peace process would
be costly, given the enormous material and human capital already invested and the
desire of the Afghan people for durable peace and stability.

18/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
I begin by thanking Special Representative Lyons and Chairperson Akbar
for their briefings. We welcome the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan
and acknowledge the work carried out by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan.
As has been well said, Afghanistan is at a critical juncture. We recognize
the challenges inherent in negotiating the Afghan peace process and we therefore
join the call on the parties to redouble their efforts to build a just, sustainable and
inclusive peace. The progress made has been very important and should not be
diluted or dissipated by the stalemate in the negotiations.
Mexico will continue to support all diplomatic efforts in the framework of
the peace process, in particular the meeting of the extended troika that took place
in Moscow on 18 March and the high-level meeting that will take place in Turkey in
the next few weeks. In this regard, we welcome the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral’s Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional Issues, Mr. Arnault, and
recognize the role played by the countries of the region, whose work is essential to
creating an environment conducive to promoting peace efforts.
Securing a plurality of Afghan voices in this process is essential. Women are
underrepresented, both in the negotiating teams and in the High Council for National
Reconciliation. We acknowledge the creation of 13 commissions to work on specific
issues concerning the peace process, with the involvement of civil society and
international observers, including the Commission on Women’s Affairs. However,
we note that of the 46 members of that Committee, only 9 are women. We therefore
call on the Government of Afghanistan to increase the participation of women in
all structures that concern the peace process, and we reiterate to both parties the
importance of having the full, equitable and meaningful participation of women in
order to ensure that their interests are reflected at the negotiating table.
Mexico recognizes the Government’s commitment to continuing to work to
guarantee and strengthen the rights of the Afghan people. It is essential that, within
the framework of dialogue, fundamental rights and freedoms — in particular the
economic and social rights of women, youth and minorities — be preserved. It would
be unacceptable to renounce the progress made in the past two decades.
We have also heard how the security situation in Afghanistan has seen a
regrettable deterioration. The figures reflecting that decline in 2020 were the highest
since the United Nations began keeping records in 2007. This trend is worrying and
unacceptable in the framework of a peace process. The normalization of violence is
a sign of outright social deterioration. It should be ended as soon as possible.
Mexico most emphatically condemns deliberate attacks on civilians, in
particular against women, officials, the media, health and humanitarian sector
personnel, and human rights defenders. The murder of two Supreme Court judges in
Kabul last January, and the case of the three women employees of a radio station who
were killed in Jalalabad earlier this month, are tragic evidence that women continue
to be targeted by deliberate attacks in Afghanistan. Furthermore, we call for an
end to the use of mines and improvised explosive devices, which disproportionately
affect civilians, and for redoubled efforts to prevent and mitigate the impact of air
strikes on the civilian population.
21-0402519/50

S/2021/291

We support efforts in the fight against terrorism, aware of the threat it poses.
Mexico reiterates that the strategy against this phenomenon must be comprehensive
and include a gender dimension; that prevention strategies are essential to addressing
its underlying causes; that control over the transfer of small arms and light weapons
is essential; and that the fight must be carried out by legal means, in full compliance
with international law, without affecting human rights.
Almost half of the Afghan population is in need of humanitarian aid. We
regret the fact that, coupled with the armed conflict, the deteriorating food
insecurity situation, natural disasters and the challenges added by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, they are exacerbating a humanitarian situation that was already
very sensitive. We follow with concern reports of access problems for humanitarian
personnel, and we underline the importance of respecting international humanitarian
law and allowing safe and unrestricted access for humanitarian personnel.
My country reiterates its support for the efforts led by the United Nations and
the countries of the region to cement a lasting and inclusive peace in Afghanistan.
We recall the Secretary-General’s appeal for respect for the ceasefire, which would
undoubtedly constitute a fundamental measure of confidence, an opportunity for
diplomacy and the well-founded hope of an Afghanistan in full peace.

20/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 10
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I would first like to thank Ms. Deborah Lyons for the quality of her briefing.
The Niger commends the tireless efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan to promote peace, governance and development in
Afghanistan. Coordination among all United Nations entities and other humanitarian
actors is important to achieving optimal effectiveness of action, especially in these
times of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The testimony of Ms. Shaharzad Akbar, which we have just followed, gives
us a clear idea of the environment in which human rights organizations operate in
Afghanistan. That is why we salute the courage and resolve of these actors in all
of their contributions to the return of peace and the final resolution of the crisis in
that country.
I would also like to reiterate that my delegation condemns in the strongest
terms attacks deliberately targeting civilians in Afghanistan. Having been the target,
again this week, of such violence, the Niger expresses its deep sympathy and offers
its sincere condolences to the families of the victims and wishes a speedy recovery
to the injured.
The intra-Afghan negotiations are undoubtedly a crucial step for the future
of Afghanistan. My delegation wishes once again to assure the Government and
the people of Afghanistan of its full support in this regard. We dare to hope that
the latest statements of the various parties, aimed at accelerating the talks, will be
translated into concrete actions on the ground, in particular as regards a lasting
ceasefire. Attacks and other acts of intimidation against civilians should not be used
as leverage to obtain concessions from the other party in negotiations.
The Niger welcomes the commitment of several neighbouring countries
and friends of Afghanistan to working to find an enduring, peaceful solution to
this conflict, which has lasted too long. We also welcome the appointment by the
Secretary-General of his new Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional Issues
and wish him every success in his mission.
In the context of these talks, it behoves us to keep in mind that any viable
negotiated solution must include the protection of the constitutional rights of Afghan
women and youth, as well as the preservation of the achievements of the past two
decades, including with respect to human rights and minority rights, as embodied in
the Constitution.
Equally important is the post-conflict and reconstruction period in
Afghanistan. It is imperative that these negotiations address the issue of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants, as well as security
sector reform.
Finally, it is incumbent on us to place particular emphasis, during this
process, on the need to provide the country with significant economic support and
humanitarian assistance in sectors as important as health, education, infrastructure
and agriculture, given that, in addition to the conflict, Afghanistan is facing the
coronavirus disease pandemic, the vagaries of climate change and food insecurity,
all of which are exacerbating an already delicate situation.
To conclude, at this time when a dynamic of peace, howsoever modest, is
emerging in Afghanistan, the violence must stop, because no peace can be obtained
in a context of the killing of women and children.
21-0402521/50

S/2021/291

Having lost 205 people to terrorist attacks in recent days alone, my country,
the Niger, expresses its solidarity with the Afghan people and its strong support for
the Special Representative.

22/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
We welcome this meeting today on Afghanistan, our first as penholder together
with Estonia. Let me take this opportunity to commend the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Lyons and her dedicated staff for their relentless efforts to address the demanding issues
confronting Afghanistan. I also thank Chairperson Akbar for her insightful briefing
and the important work of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission.
We also welcome the appointment of the experienced diplomat Jean Arnault as the
Secretary-General’s Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional Issues.
Norway has four overarching priorities for our time on the Council: peace
diplomacy, the equal participation of women, the protection of civilians and climate
change and security. These are all highly relevant to Afghanistan and we intend
to bring these issues to the forefront. Part of pursuing these priorities is working
towards an end to the conflict that has haunted Afghanistan for more than four
decades. Recent developments in the country give cause for both hope and anguish.
The humanitarian situation remains grave. The number of people in need of
humanitarian assistance nearly doubled last year, now accounting for almost half of
the total population.
Furthermore, almost 17 million Afghans are experiencing crisis level or
emergency level food insecurity, making it the second worst food insecurity situation
in the world. The dire humanitarian needs are driven by conflict, insecurity and
natural disasters — all exacerbated by climate change. Climate change amplifies
conflict risks. And sustainable solutions will require the coming together of our
humanitarian, development, peace and climate efforts.
UNAMA has reported that the number of civilian deaths and casualties in
Afghanistan in 2020 — a year with an active peace process — was the lowest since
2014. While this is a positive development, we are still troubled by the continued
high levels of violence. The targeted killings of human rights defenders, journalists
and media workers, judges, prosecutors, religious scholars, political analysts,
civil servants and other civilians are particularly disturbing. These killings target
Afghans with skills and talents that are needed to build a successful and sustainable
post-conflict society. We reiterate our strong condemnation of these attacks. They
must end immediately.
The perpetrators of human rights violations and abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law must be brought to justice. In this respect, we are
also deeply disturbed by attacks on health facilities and workers, which increased
in 2020. Important vaccination campaigns for the coronavirus disease, but also for
other diseases like polio, are likely to be negatively impacted. Health workers must
have unimpeded access and the security they need to do their vital work. Children
have also been disproportionally affected by the challenges facing Afghanistan. The
continuing recruitment of children in armed conflict and attacks on schools need to
be addressed.
Norway strongly supports the ongoing peace talks, and we hope that they will
finally bring peace after so many years of conflict. We urge the parties to pursue
negotiations in good faith and with a sense of urgency. We also welcome recent
initiatives towards securing international support for the Afghan peace process,
including the recent meeting in Moscow and the upcoming meeting in Turkey. It
is important that these initiatives complement and build on the Doha talks. And we
21-0402523/50

S/2021/291

value the proposal for a stronger United Nations role. At the same time, the Afghan
parties must own the process and fulfil their responsibility by leading the way to
an inclusive peace. The process is far more likely to succeed if the broader Afghan
society is involved, including minorities, youth and victims.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of women is also essential, not
only at the negotiating table but in every room where decisions about the future of
Afghanistan are being made. A sustainable peace process — and indeed, sustainable
peace — should be inclusive and preserve the rights of all Afghans, regardless of
gender, ethnicity or religious affiliation.
Progress made during the last two decades must not be reversed.

24/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ms. Deborah Lyons,
for her thoughts and assessments of the situation in Afghanistan. We are firmly
convinced that UNAMA plays an important role in coordinating international
assistance to that country. We also thank the Chairperson of the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, Ms. Shaharzad Akbar, for her briefing.
We welcome the participation in this meeting of the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan to the United Nations, Ambassador Adela Raz.
Russia has consistently supported the Afghan-led peace process. We have
done much to promote national reconciliation and direct intra-Afghan dialogue.
On 18 March, Moscow hosted a regular meeting of the extended troika,
comprising representatives of Russia, China, the United States and Pakistan.
The event was attended by representatives of the Afghan sides: the Government
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Afghanistan’s High Council for National
Reconciliation, prominent Afghan political figures and leaders of the Taliban
movement, as well as of Qatar and Turkey as guests of honour.
Since the troika was established in 2019, that mechanism has played a
meaningful, positive role. Last week, it once again proved relevant and highly in
demand, as well as capable of promoting peaceful settlement.
The negotiations resulted in the extended troika’s adopting a statement that
put matters into perspective and called on the sides to act flexibly. We expect these
results to be taken on board by the Afghans as they discuss substantive issues on
their agenda in order to achieve the long-awaited progress in the intra-Afghan talks.
Preserving regional consensus on peaceful settlement in Afghanistan remains
a priority task. We are in favour of combining the efforts of the extended troika and
the Moscow format, which includes Afghanistan, all its neighbours and the United
States. It was the Moscow format that in November 2018 first brought together the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban at one negotiating table.
It is now vital to seize every opportunity to achieve political solutions and
compromises in the interests of national reconciliation. We proceed from the need to
consolidate all international and regional efforts. New initiatives should be thoroughly
considered and issues relating to their added value, agenda and modalities clarified.
We have closely studied the recent report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations activities and efforts in Afghanistan (S/2021/252).
First and foremost, we share its assessments about the unprecedented level of
violence and its toll on civilians, women and children. Unfortunately, throughout
the years of war deadly terrorist attacks have become a sad routine for the Afghan
people. Many of the large-scale attacks are the responsibility of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We note that, despite numerous losses, the Afghan
wing of ISIL has not abandoned its regional plans and seeks to enhance capacity and
spread its terrorist activity to neighbouring Central Asia.
The situation with the drug threat is also far from optimistic. Despite certain
counter-measures taken by Kabul, the drug industry is flourishing and re-energizing
terrorism. It remains a serious challenge for Afghanistan, the region and the entire
21-0402525/50

S/2021/291

world. Against this backdrop, we are disappointed by the delay by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the publication of its regular report. This
topic is insufficiently covered in the Secretary-General’s report as well. Attempts
to silence or underestimate the presence and scale of terrorist and drug threats in
Afghanistan are unacceptable. We appreciate the fact that Special Representative
Lyons highlighted the topic of drug threat in her briefing today.
Afghanistan cannot counter these challenges without the support and
assistance of the regional States, above all its neighbours, and the global community.
Therefore, it is fundamentally important to engage the full potential of the relevant
mechanisms, first and foremost the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and
the renewed SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group, as well as the Collective Security
Treaty Organization. We will continue to provide help and assistance to our Afghan
friends, including in the framework of the Paris Pact Initiative.
Let me conclude by saying that Russia has been Afghanistan’s friend and
partner for many years, and we stand for establishing the long-awaited sustainable
peace in that long-suffering land. To that end, the Afghans will need to work on a
unifying platform. It is only they who can guide the peace process in Afghanistan.
No scenarios must be imposed from the outside. As for the regional and international
partners, they should be creating the environment necessary for negotiations and
providing lasting political and economic support.

26/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Inga Rhonda King
I begin this morning by expressing our condolences to the people and
Government of the Niger for the senseless killings of innocent civilians in southwestern Niger. We condemn that action in the strongest terms, and we stand in
solidarity with the people of the Niger as they mourn the loss of life and grapple
with that most recent and heinous terrorist attack.
I also thank the Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Afghanistan,
Deborah Lyons, for her comprehensive briefing on the situation in Afghanistan
and the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
and the Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission,
Shaharzad Akbar, for her invaluable contribution to this debate.
Today violence levels in Afghanistan are unacceptably high, undermining
confidence in the negotiation process. The only path to durable peace in Afghanistan
remains an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led process towards a political settlement
and an immediate, unconditional and comprehensive ceasefire to facilitate the peace
negotiations. Women’s participation in and support for the peace process is crucial
to ensuring its effective implementation and sustainability.
Despite the United States-Taliban agreement made on 29 February 2020 and
the initiation of Afghan peace talks in September 2020, many challenges remain.
The Afghan peace negotiations represent a real prospect for sustainable peace and
stability in Afghanistan. We welcome the joint statement of the extended troika on
peaceful settlement in Afghanistan following the Moscow international conference.
We also take this opportunity to encourage the parties to accelerate peace talks and
hope that they can recommit to that process.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains precarious. We condemn
in the strongest terms acts of violence committed against civilians, which have
exacerbated an already alarming humanitarian situation. Far too often civilians
and civilian objects, such as hospitals and schools, are targeted on purpose. We
recognize the urgent need for a humanitarian response and to mobilize resources
for the Afghanistan Humanitarian Response Plan 2021. In reaffirming the enduring
commitment of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to Afghanistan and its people, we
underscore the urgent need to minimize the harm and suffering caused by the armed
conflict, protect civilians and allow unhindered access of humanitarian relief to the
affected areas. We also renew our call on the parties to the armed conflict to end the
violence and promote confidence-building. All parties to the armed conflict must
comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law to better protect
and assist the civilian population.
It is also particularly worrisome that women and children account for the
majority of those adversely affected by the armed conflict. Specific measures must
be taken to maintain the safety of victims of armed combat, with an emphasis on
women and children. We encourage the Government to bolster its promotion and
protection of the rights of women and children and address the needs of victims of
sexual and gender-based violence in the conflict.
A unified approach to increasing the quality of life for all Afghans must be
built by the Afghan Government and all segments of society. In that connection,
we welcome and support the second version of the Afghanistan National Peace
and Development Framework for 2021-2025. Delivering on the Sustainable
Development Goals, such as Goal 16, on peace, justice and strong institutions,
21-0402527/50

S/2021/291

should remain an integrated and indivisible package in ensuring that no one is left
behind in Afghanistan.
Finally, we reiterate our support for the work of UNAMA, acknowledging
its close cooperation with key stakeholders, including the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission. We also welcome the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral’s Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional Issues, Jean Arnault,
and wish him every success in his new role aimed at strengthening relations with
regional countries and supporting the peace negotiations. At this critical juncture,
we reiterate our call on the international community, particularly regional countries,
to support the conditions for advancing sustainable development, peace and stability
in Afghanistan and the wider region.

28/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 14
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and Ms. Shaharzad Akbar, Chairperson of the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, for their briefings. I welcome the
participation of Ambassador Adela Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
and thank her for her insightful intervention.
Tunisia reiterates its full support for the peace process in Afghanistan. While
regretting that the negotiations initiated between the Government and the Taliban
in Doha in September 2020 have not yet brought the results expected, we welcome
the discussions held in Moscow last week and hope that tangible progress will be
achieved during the next round of negotiations, scheduled in April in Istanbul.
In that regard, we would like to renew our appreciation for the continuing
support by the international community and all Afghanistan’s neighbours for the
peace process.
We remain deeply concerned by the continuing high level of violence and
the security situation in Afghanistan. We reaffirm that there can be no military
solution to this protracted conf lict, and we stress again the need for an immediate
cessation of hostilities. The extremely high number of victims among the civilian
population in Afghanistan, especially women and children, continues to be a source
of great concern.
We stress again the importance for all parties to abide by their assigned
responsibilities according to international humanitarian law and international human
rights law and prevent civilian casualties. In that connection, we underline that all
allegations of violations against civilians in Afghanistan must be investigated and
the perpetrators be held accountable.
We are especially troubled by the deliberate targeting of civilians, particularly
women, including media representatives, judges, health and humanitarian workers,
human rights defenders and ethnic and religious minorities.
In that regard, we welcome the unity demonstrated by the Council earlier this
month in condemning in the strongest terms such attacks, which have more than
doubled since the start of the peace negotiations. On this occasion, we would also
like to pay tribute to the courage and dedication of Ms. Akbar and her colleagues
and to echo her appeal to respond quickly to the environment of fear and terror
created by the attacks in order to restore hope in the peace process. In that context,
we reiterate our call to the Taliban to put an end to the attacks perpetrated by its
members, honour its counter-terrorism commitments and negotiate in good faith
with the Government.
We would like to underline again the importance of an inclusive Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace process, with the meaningful participation of women
and young people, in order to achieve a sustainable peace. Lastly, we reiterate our
firm belief that any future peace agreement should clearly include guaranties to
protect and promote fundamental rights and freedom for all in Afghanistan, with
a particular focus on women’s rights and their active and substantial participation.

21-0402529/50

S/2021/291

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
I thank Special Representative Lyons for her briefing and for guiding the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan’s activities in support of peace,
human rights and the rule of law. I also thank Shaharzad Akbar for her courageous
leadership in advancing human rights, women’s inclusion and justice. Finally, I thank
Ambassador Raz for participating and sharing her views with us today.
As Secretary Blinken told our Congress recently, the United States is
enlisting the help of international partners, including the United Nations, in support
of Afghanistan’s peace. Afghanistan’s neighbours and other supporters, including
the members of the Council, have a critical role to play in securing the region and
ensuring peace and stability in Afghanistan. Last week’s extended troika meeting
reflects the growing international consensus on the need to accelerate the Afghan
peace process.
To that end, we look forward to the upcoming meeting of senior Afghan
leaders in Turkey. We expect that effort to be complementary to, and coordinated
with, the United Nations efforts and the ongoing Doha process.
We also welcome the appointment of Jean Arnault as the Secretary-General’s
Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional Issues. Mr. Arnault has decades of
experience helping parties find political solutions to conflict and will help the United
Nations fulfil its critical role. An Afghanistan at peace with itself and its neighbours
is in all of our interests.
Today, I would like to discuss three key components of achieving that common
goal: stopping attacks against innocent civilians; supporting women and girls; and
addressing Afghanistan’s humanitarian crisis.
First, the ongoing violence, including targeted killings of civilians, is just
simply unacceptable. Violence now prevents progress towards a sustainable peace.
Journalists, human rights defenders and civil servants cannot continue to live in fear
at a moment when they are needed most. We condemn those attacks and reiterate
our deepest sympathies to the families of those who have lost their lives. For a peace
agreement to be durable and just, it must respect the universal human rights of all
Afghans, including women, girls and members of minority groups.
Secondly, we must do more to support the women and girls of Afghanistan. Any
agreement must preserve their gains if Afghanistan wants to ensure the international
community’s continued political and financial support. We will not give an inch on
that point. Earlier this month, I joined First Lady Jill Biden and Secretary Blinken
to honour seven brave Afghan women who were killed last year. I am in awe of their
courage. Their deaths are a devastating testament to the violence perpetrated against
women simply for contributing to their communities.
The violence was meant to silence. Well, I will not be silent. I know that the
women of Afghanistan will not be either. Throughout this conflict, Afghan women
have bravely stepped up, often at great personal risk, to call for a sustainable,
just peace. Their strong voices must be fully included in all discussions about the
country’s future. The United States will continue to advocate with both Afghan sides
for women to have real, meaningful participation in upcoming gatherings on peace.
Thirdly, and finally, we must address Afghanistan’s humanitarian crises.
The ongoing conflict, coupled with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
refugee and migration flows and the threat of drought, has put innocent people in a
30/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

desperate situation. More than 16.9 million people — and Council members heard
this number repeated several times today — are now acutely food insecure, including
5.5 million at emergency levels of food insecurity — the second highest rate in the
world. I say that again, and we heard it earlier — the second highest rate in the world.
These are real people, and they may die without our help.
For its part, this past year, the United States provided $276 million in
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan and for Afghan refugees in the region. To
support the growing COVID-19 response, the United States has provided more than
$39 million in development, economic, health and humanitarian assistance. Our
hope is that this will help to alleviate the country’s deep suffering. We welcome the
efforts of others to contribute to that vital humanitarian cause.
We thank the Security Council, the United Nations and all our partners for
working together towards a lasting peace — a peace that the people of Afghanistan
so desperately want and deserve. Let us hope that we can achieve it soon.

21-0402531/50

S/2021/291

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam, Dang
Dinh Quy
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and Ms. Shaharzad Akbar for their statements. I welcome
Ambassador Adela Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, to this meeting
and thank her for the comprehensive statement.
Viet Nam continues to closely follow the situation in Afghanistan, and we
reiterate our support for the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned inclusive peace process.
While some progress has been made, long-term peace in Afghanistan cannot
be taken for granted. We are concerned about the alarming increase in the level of
violence and civilian casualties. We strongly condemn the attacks by the Taliban
and other terrorist groups targeting civilians, including women, children, students,
health-care workers and civil servants, during the past months.
In the context of this meeting, I wish to raise the three following points.
First, it is crucial that a timely permanent ceasefire can be achieved, thereby
putting an end to the ongoing violence. The Afghan people have suffered for far too
long. We call on the relevant parties to overcome their differences so as to reach an
agreement on the ceasefire as soon as possible. The intra-Afghan peace negotiations
need a stable and conducive environment in order to succeed and achieve a lasting
political solution.
To that end, the continued support of the United Nations, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), regional countries and other
international partners will remain crucial. We welcome regional cooperation and
the role of regional countries in promoting peace and development in Afghanistan.
We congratulate Mr. Jean Arnault on his appointment as the Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Afghanistan and Regional Issues and look forward to his
efforts in supporting the peace process in the country.
We note that attention continues to be given to women in terms of protection,
socioeconomic development and decision-making. We encourage further efforts to
enable the full potential of Afghan women to be free from fear and want and to lead
their country on equal basis with men.
Secondly, we once again urge all relevant parties to fully respect international
humanitarian law, immediately stop targeting civilians and civilian objects and allow
unhindered access to humanitarian services in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Strengthened efforts are also needed to combat the threat of terrorism, crime
and drug trafficking and assist people with licit sustainable livelihoods.
We also commend the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), the United Nations Mine Action Service and partners
in addressing pressing humanitarian challenges in Afghanistan, including mine
clearance and risk education during the past months in this difficult time of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Thirdly, we call on the Government to strengthen efforts in promoting the
economic development and reconstruction of the country, as well as in addressing
pressing issues, with the assistance of the international community, such as food
insecurity and the COVID-19 pandemic.
We are concerned about the increasing number of people facing high levels
of food insecurity since the winter period, which reached 16.9 million by March. In
32/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

that regard, we call on the United Nations and regional and international partners
to continue to strengthen humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan to ensure its
projected needs.
In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to reiterate its support for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Afghanistan, as well as the pursuit of peace,
stability and development in the country. We reiterate our support for the efforts of
UNAMA and of Ms. Lyons.

21-0402533/50

S/2021/291

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Adela Raz
It is my great honour to have the opportunity to address the Council today.
Allow me to first congratulate you, Madam President, on your able leadership of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and for convening this important
debate on the situation in Afghanistan.
I also would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Deborah Lyons for her comprehensive and thorough briefing, as well as for her
dedicated work in leading the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report on the situation in Afghanistan (see
S/2021/252).
Finally, let me thank my sister, Chairperson Shaharzad Akbar, for her
persistent and strong voice as a prominent Afghan woman and for her moving and
informative testimony. The important work of the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission in advocating for the protection of human rights at this critical
time is essential and needed more than ever. I thank you, Chairperson Akbar, for
your outstanding work.
Like many other developing countries, Afghanistan has also been hit hard
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The economy is disrupted, our
health sector is still struggling with the challenge of COVID-19, and many have lost
their livelihoods.
Simultaneously, we have witnessed a record number of security incidents. The
Taliban has increased its level of violence against our security forces and Afghan
civilians. It is directly targeting those who strive for a better future. It is targeting
our young democracy, our vibrant civil society, and our free and independent press.
These attacks are meant to dissuade the participation of women and youth in the
peace process, create widespread panic and crush our aspirations for peace. These
attacks are against the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
These targeted attacks have killed journalists working to bring the truth to
their fellow citizens; they have harmed civil society advocates, who bravely stand
for the rights of their Afghan brothers and sisters; and have killed and injured public
servants, who chose a career in service for the new Afghanistan, and our scholars
and religious leaders, who have denounced the ongoing war and continued bloodshed
in Afghanistan as contrary to the core tenets of Islam.
These targeted attacks do not affect anonymous targets, but fellow Afghans
with families, dreams and aspirations. Early this month, Mursal Wahidi, Sadia
Sadat, and Shahnaz Raofi were murdered in Jalalabad. They were all in their
early 20s and worked as reporters. Just last week, four women and a three-yearold child — Shukria Shams, Aziza Malikzada, Nargis Kohistani, Arsh Mayil and
Khatera Mayil — lost their lives while going through their day riding a bus in Kabul.
We must all remember their names and honour their lives by relentlessly pursuing
a peace that protects our gains, our young democracy and our universal rights and
the rights given by Islam. These attacks target not only the Government, but more
fundamentally the very values of humankind that all of us here hold dear.
These dreadful killings and the surge in violence are occurring during one of
the biggest humanitarian crises in Afghan history. We started 2020 with 9.4 million
people in humanitarian need, already a high number that was driven by drought and
conflict. But today the number has now hit a record of 18.4 million people. In other
34/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

words, almost half of all Afghans need humanitarian assistance. In turn, the most
recent humanitarian response plan estimates that $1.3 billion are needed to respond.
We also need to vaccinate all Afghans against COVID-19 to recover from
the pandemic. The vaccination campaign has started, and we are grateful to the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility and our bilateral donors,
notably India and China, for providing the first doses.
The overwhelming number of people in need, the pressing challenge to
address food insecurity and other humanitarian concerns, including the situation of
returning refugees and the continued re-emergence of polio, underscore the urgency
of a comprehensive ceasefire and efforts to achieve a durable and sustainable
peace — a peace in which every Afghan, regardless of their gender, ethnicity or age,
sees themselves included and protected.
The dire humanitarian situation and protracted conflict in Afghanistan
continue to stress our vital need for tangible progress in our quest for peace. We
entered the peace process with the Taliban understanding that we were facing a
long and a complicated process. We knew that it would be difficult and that we were
meeting at the negotiating table a group with radically different views on what the
future of Afghanistan should look like. Nevertheless, early agreements in Doha on
the code of conduct of negotiations and contact groups for discussions show us the
power of dialogue, while offering hope for a path forward under an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned format.
I would be remiss if I did not express our strong appreciation to the State
of Qatar for its tireless efforts, as well the United States for facilitating the initial
steps towards the intra-Afghan negotiations, together with our regional partners,
neighbours, friends and allies.
While we are cautiously optimistic about these early results, we remain
adamant that a stronger and more genuine commitment to peace must be shown and
translated into action by the Taliban, particularly considering the continued high
levels of violence and targeted attacks, its continued relationships with terrorist
organizations, its lack of adherence to a humanitarian ceasefire despite multiple
calls, and reports of its preparations for a counterproductive spring offensive.
As done on previous occasions, we again take this platform to ask the Security
Council and the United Nations as a whole to continue to call on the Taliban to
observe a comprehensive and a permanent ceasefire.
In moving forwards towards peace, I would like to stress the following
three points.
First, the Afghan Government is firmly committed to reaching an end to the
conflict in our country and achieving a sustainable peace that the Afghan people
urgently demand. This commitment requires a united national approach and the
support of regional and international partners in pursuing our collective efforts.
Secondly, I would like to underscore the importance of regional consensus
and support to reaching a durable peace. In this regard, we welcome all regional
and international efforts that contribute to the achievement of peace and stability in
Afghanistan, including the recent meeting of the extended troika in Moscow and its
final joint statement emphasizing the implementation of the resolution 2513 (2020)
and reaffirming that it does not support the restoration of the Islamic Emirate.
Similarly, we welcome the upcoming meeting to be organized in Turkey. The
Government will participate in the meeting, and we emphasize the importance of an
inclusive process, including the full, equal and meaningful participation of women,
21-0402535/50

S/2021/291

youth and civil society. These groups are the cornerstone of the new Afghanistan
and their voices should be heard in all peace efforts. We view these meetings as
key steps to strengthen and complement the intra-Afghan negotiations in Doha, and
we hope that the outcomes of these meetings will reinforce the progress already
made and result in tangible advancement towards the achievement of a lasting peace
commensurate with the will of the Afghan people.
And thirdly, we welcome the United Nations further engagement in
Afghanistan and the appointment of Mr. Jean Arnault as the Secretary-General’s
Personal Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional Issues. The United Nations has been a
trusted partner and ally of the people of Afghanistan for decades. Its efforts during
the past 20 years are applaudable. We hope that through his efforts, Mr. Arnault
will be able to complement and amplify the ongoing critical United Nations mission
in Afghanistan and, together with the dedicated efforts and excellent leadership
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons, bring us closer to a
sustainable and dignified peace in Afghanistan and an end to the conflict.
As we proceed with these meetings, allow me to reiterate the Government’s
position once again that a sustainable peace can be achieved only if it has the support
of all Afghans and only if it ensures the effective inclusion of all Afghans, including
women, youth, minorities and our vibrant civil society, in decision-making. Any
decision about future peace and a political settlement should be based on the free
will of the Afghan people, as expressed in free, fair and just elections, guaranteed
by our regional and international partners. No peace can last in Afghanistan without
securing, protecting and promoting the gains that we have achieved over the past 20
years. The constitutional order must be preserved and our democracy be protected.
We also aim to promote the vision of an Afghanistan that serves as an active
player in the region, a hub for connectivity and trade and a catalyst for the development
and integration of Central and South Asia. We believe this is achievable, and your
support will be fundamental to ensure that we fulfil this shared goal.
The people of Afghanistan want no more empty chairs in classrooms — chairs
left empty by students facing insecurity or by girls banned from attending school.
We want a society that defends and stands for the rights of the women, men and
ethnic groups that make up our rich and diverse Afghan family, a democracy in
which all are heard, respected and represented. We want a prosperous nation and a
country that is at peace with itself, our region and the world.
This is a strong and firm message from the people of Afghanistan who are
tired of decades of suffering and war. The Government will continue to fulfil the
mandate of the people, and we call on the Taliban to genuinely commit to peace so
we may see a prosperous, democratic and peaceful Afghanistan.

36/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Germany to the
United Nations
The security situation in Afghanistan remains of great concern. We condemn
the high level of violence, especially against women, and the targeted assassinations
of civilians over the past weeks and months. We concur with the recent press statement
of the Security Council (see SC/14464) and speak out against these heinous acts.
And we underline the call for an end to targeted attacks.
The Afghanistan peace negotiations in Doha have shown progress, but
certainly more momentum is needed. The aim and ambition must be to achieve a
permanent and comprehensive ceasefire as soon as possible, as well as an inclusive
political settlement to end the conflict in Afghanistan. We call upon all parties
involved, especially the Taliban, to engage in meaningful negotiations and to
contribute to their outcome, including by taking confidence-building measures, such
as an obligation to an immediate reduction in violence.
Recent initiatives have provided new impetus to the peace process. We
welcome the fact that the United Nations has committed to playing a greater role in
this process and that countries in the region and key international partners are being
involved. The statement from the meeting of the extended troika in Moscow —
referencing resolution 2513 (2020) — was certainly a welcome step.
For a sustainable solution to the conflict, it is important that Afghans,
including women, sense ownership of the process. We urge a close coordination
with the peace negotiations in Doha, which so far remain the major avenue to
come to a peace agreement with the Taliban. We also emphasize the importance
of ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation of women at all levels and
all stages of the peace process, in line with resolution 1325 (2000) and all relevant
resolutions addressing the women and peace and security agenda. Also, regional
and international consensus needs to be inclusive and robust. Such a consensus
must involve all main stakeholders required to ensure long-term peace, stability and
development in Afghanistan. Germany remains prepared to assist on this path. We
stand ready to continue our support.
We thank the government of Qatar for its tireless and continued efforts.
Likewise, we welcome the initiative of Turkey to host a leadership conference
in close coordination with the United Nations, Qatar and many other actors,
including Germany.
The United Nations is key to achieving stability and boosting development in
Afghanistan. We have constantly called for an active role of the United Nations in the
peace process and now welcome the appointment of Jean Arnault as Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan and Regional Issues. We will support him
and his team in the weeks and months ahead. We will continue to support the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Deborah Lyons in her commendable efforts
to steer the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. On this occasion, we
repeat our offer to support the mission with experienced personnel.

21-0402537/50

S/2021/291

Annex 19
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of
United Nations, Mohammad Kurniadi Koba

Indonesia

to

the

Allow me to begin by thanking all briefers for their insightful briefings.
Afghanistan is approaching yet another step in its long journey towards peace
and prosperity. While challenges remain, Afghanistan’s road abounds with Afghans’
hopes for their peaceful, united and prosperous homeland.
The Council and all relevant stakeholders must also play their role effectively
to ensure that the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process finally comes to
fruition. On this note, let me focus on three points.
First, with regard to preserving and advancing the intra-Afghan negotiations,
the intra-Afghan negotiations are the soul of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process. All parties must avoid any actions that might hamper this negotiation. The
enhancement of mutual trust and understanding, while prioritizing the well-being
and long-term interest of common Afghans, is crucial.
Indonesia also calls for international and regional stakeholders, especially
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, to maintain their support in
advancing these negotiations.
Secondly, in terms of ensuring an inclusive peace process, the participation of
women and youth is the key element driving and sustaining peace on the ground. We
note the harrowing statistics that 42 per cent of the war victims in Afghanistan have
been women and children. It is for this reason that Indonesia firmly believes that a
successful Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process can only be achieved with
the full and meaningful participation of all elements of Afghan, especially women.
We are encouraged by the growing participation of Afghan women in the
peace process, including the Afghan Women Leaders Peace Summit, held in Dubai
from 15 to 20 November 2020.
For its part, Indonesia has also been working to support the greater involvement
of women in the peace process, as well as being agents of peace in all dimensions
of Afghan society, including by launching the Afghanistan-Indonesia Women
Solidarity Network in 2020.
Thirdly, with regard to enhancing the safety, security and well-being of
Afghans, as reported by the Secretary-General (see S/2021/252), we are deeply
concerned over the record-high humanitarian needs in Afghanistan, especially
the high level of food insecurity being faced by the Afghans. This is happening
while the Afghans are facing a deteriorating security situation and the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
The progress achieved in the ongoing political process has to be reflected in
the daily life of all Afghans. This is critical to restoring the trust of Afghan people
and providing space for peace talks.
We also call on parties to abide by resolution 2532 (2020), which calls for a
global ceasefire in the midst of the global pandemic.
Indonesia remains concerned over terrorist activities and narcotics cultivation.
We support increased cooperation among all relevant entities to combat terrorism
and narcotics, including through the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
To conclude, Indonesia remains committed to continuing its support to the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process through capacity-building programmes
in various fields, including women’s empowerment, in Afghanistan.
38/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
I thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan, for her briefing. Iran stands ready to cooperate with
Mr. Jean Arnault, the newly appointed Personal Envoy of Secretary-General on
Afghanistan and Regional Issues.
At this time, the people of Afghanistan are celebrating Nowruz and the start
of a new year. Conveying Nowruz wishes to all Afghans, we hope that the beginning
of the new year will be the start of a new chapter in their history towards lasting
peace, stability and prosperity.
The demand of Afghans from all walks of life for durable peace has never
been as loud as now. Their voices must be heard and effectively supported. They
must not be left alone at this critical juncture.
The mere fact that there are now a good number of efforts and initiatives on
Afghanistan is a welcome development, as at least they represent the political will of
internal, regional and international players to end the tragic conflict in that country.
Nevertheless, peace cannot be imported or imposed; nor can the high number of
initiatives ensure their success. What is needed most now is to invest in an Afghanled and Afghan-owned, United Nations-facilitated, comprehensive and inclusive
peace process. It must include all Afghan factions, including the Taliban; place the
interests of all people of Afghanistan above the interests of certain segments of that
society; duly take into account the legitimate interests and concerns of neighbouring
countries; and receive the support of the international community.
Any proposed plan must be realistic, comprehensive and balanced. It must
preserve and be built upon the past achievements of the people and Government of
Afghanistan, particularly the present Constitution; the right of the people to selfdetermination through elections; the rights of ethnic and religious minorities and of
women; as well as the commitment to combat terrorism.
In this context, we recall General Assembly resolution 75/90, in which the
Assembly called for the preservation of Afghanistan’s Constitution and rejected
the restoration of the Islamic Emirate. It is to be recalled that the present system
of governance, which was chosen by the people of Afghanistan, enjoys strong
international support.
As a consistent principled position, Iran continues to call for the central role
and further and substantive engagement of the United Nations in an intra-Afghan
peace process. Iran stands ready, in coordination with the United Nations, to further
contribute to the success of this process.
At the same time, peace and violence are contradictory and cannot go hand
in hand. Therefore, to reciprocate the good will of Afghanistan’s Government in
the peace talks, the Taliban must halt all its attacks against Afghan defence and
security forces.
Afghanistan’s security situation has remained a source of serious concern.
On the one hand, the terrorist acts by Da’esh represent a grave threat to the security
of Afghanistan and the region and, on the other, the presence of foreign forces is
another source of Afghanistan’s instability. We reiterate our long-standing call for
the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Afghanistan, which, as many speakers have
stated, must be orderly and responsible and must not lead to a security vacuum in
Afghanistan.
21-0402539/50

S/2021/291

At the same time, prior and simultaneous to the withdrawal of foreign forces,
Afghanistan’s military and security forces must be supported and strengthened,
and effective assistance must be extended to Afghanistan in combating the illicit
production of and trafficking in narcotic drugs, which is a source of financing for
terrorism and other crimes.
It is a given fact that durable peace in Afghanistan cannot be established
without improving its economic situation, which requires strong regional and
international support.
For our part, in addition to hosting over 3 million Afghans despite facing
savage United States economic terrorism, we have promoted economic cooperation
with Afghanistan and, by implementing certain projects, established the link of that
landlocked country to high seas through Iran’s Chabahar port and to Europe through
the Khaf-Herat railway. The latter was inaugurated last December by the Presidents
of both countries, who called the inauguration of this project an historic event,
further strengthening bilateral and regional economic cooperation, thus enhancing
the foundations of durable peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Iran and Afghanistan enjoy common religious, cultural, linguistic and
historical backgrounds and our stability, sociocultural development and economic
growth are intertwined and mutually reinforcing. The Islamic Republic of Iran is
committed to contributing to a more secure and prosperous Afghanistan through
further enhancing relations between two fraternal nations.

40/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United Nations
Italy welcomes the opportunity to submit its written remarks on the occasion
of the debate on the situation in Afghanistan in the Security Council.
Afghanistan currently finds itself at a crucial juncture of its history, filled
with challenges but also with opportunities. For the first time after more than 40
years of conflict and 20 of international intervention, a window of opportunity has
opened for the country to achieve the goals of restoring stability and creating the
conditions for national reconciliation.
Italy appreciates the commitment of the United States to giving greater
impetus to the intra-Afghan negotiations and the overall peace process. We also
welcome the reinvigorated role that the United Nations has been called to take on in
this new context, ensuring coherence, consistency and coordination in the planned
initiatives. In this respect, while expressing our deepest and continuous appreciation
to the outstanding work of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Deborah
Lyons and her team, we would like to take this opportunity to convey our sincerest
wishes of success to the newly appointed Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
on Afghanistan and Regional Issues, Jean Arnault.
New threats are emerging in Afghanistan as we see a surge of violence
that indiscriminately affects civilians. We are particularly saddened by this and
categorically condemn the wave of violence that, in recent months, has ravaged the
country. We are observing with great apprehension the many assassinations targeting
journalists, media operators, human rights defenders, public employees, members of
civil society and intellectuals, many of whom are women. These cowardly attacks
block the road to peace and diminish the space for civil liberties for which the
Afghan people have been so bravely fighting with the support of the international
community.
It is essential that these actions, together with all other forms of violence, cease
immediately to make way for real opportunities of success in the peace negotiations.
By the same token, we renew our urgent appeal for an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire that leaves room for conflict resolution by way of an inclusive political
accord that ensures a sovereign, united and democratic Afghanistan, at peace
internally, with its neighbouring countries, and with the rest of the world.
The initiatives planned for the coming weeks have the potential to open the
way for the ultimate pacification and stabilization of Afghanistan and to give the
Afghan people the prospect of a dignified life, which the conflict has so far denied.
Every effort has to be made to seize this historic opportunity. Therefore, we strongly
encourage all sides to commit, in earnest and in good faith, to keeping the peace
process on the right track. At the same time, it will be crucial to ensure the support
and contribution of all relevant stakeholders: the United Nations, the main regional
actors and the long-standing donors and partners of Afghanistan.
Any future political settlement will have to preserve the fundamental gains
of the past two decades, first of all with regard to the protection of the human
rights of women, children and civil society. There can be no lasting peace, effective
reconciliation, harmonious and sustainable development for Afghanistan without
the meaningful participation of these actors in the societal and political life of the
country. It will also be important to consolidate the substantive results achieved in
the fight against terrorism, so that Afghanistan will never return to being a threat to
its neighbours or to the international community.
Italy will continue to support these prospects for the Afghan people by
continuing to support the peace and stabilization process and by strengthening
21-0402541/50

S/2021/291

its bilateral cooperation with the country. It is a cause to which Italy has attached
particularly great importance in these past decades. It is also on behalf of our fellow
citizens who have sacrificed their lives for this cause that we will continue to stand
by the Afghan people, the United Nations and our international partners dedicated
to peace in the country.

42/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I thank you for convening this video-teleconference debate on Afghanistan. I
also thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Deborah Lyons,
for her briefing and her steadfast efforts to bring peace and stability to Afghanistan.
Just over a year ago, the international community witnessed the historic signing
of the agreement between Afghanistan and the United States of America, which
paved the way for the long-awaited commencement of intra-Afghan negotiations in
September. Six months on, we are watching the situation with both hope and anxiety.
Although the parties remain engaged in the peace process, we continue to see the
unbearable human toll among innocent Afghans on an almost daily basis.
We are highly alarmed by the increasing number of targeted killings of
civilians, including civil servants, journalists, human rights defenders, and religious
leaders. Human security remains seriously threatened in this country. Japan
strongly condemns these heinous attacks and urges all concerned parties to enact an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire.
Japan believes that a sustainable peace in Afghanistan can only be achieved
through an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process, in which the voices of
all segments of society are heard and taken into account. Political settlement must
respond to the strong desire of Afghans, including women, youth and minorities, for
lasting peace. Japan continues to support the Government of Afghanistan and its
partners in their efforts to advance an inclusive peace process.
We also believe that a sustainable political settlement to the conflict in
Afghanistan requires the strong commitment and cooperation of neighbouring and
regional countries, which must be well coordinated and harmonized with broader
international efforts to support the Afghan stakeholders. In this context, Japan
welcomes the appointment of Mr. Jean Arnault as the Secretary-General’s Personal
Envoy on Afghanistan and Regional Issues. We strongly hope that Mr. Arnault and
Ms. Lyons will work closely together to effectively coordinate international and
regional support to the peace process.
Japan is a long-standing partner of Afghanistan. At the 2020 Afghanistan
Conference in Geneva, Foreign Minister Motegi announced that Japan would work
to maintain its assistance from 2021 to 2024 at a level comparable to that of the past
four years, or $180 million per year. As a first step, Japan announced its decision last
month to provide $122.2 million to address the negative impact of the coronavirus
disease and other humanitarian and development needs. This brings the total amount
of Japan’s assistance since 2001 to $6.9 billion.
The late Dr. Nakamura Tetsu dedicated more than 35 years of his life until
his tragic assassination in Jalalabad in December 2019 to the reconstruction and
development of Afghanistan. He called his ties with the country the “bonds of fate”.
This sentiment has been inherited by many in Japan and will continue to be the
foundation of Japan’s solidarity with the people of Afghanistan. We will remain
fully committed to supporting Afghanistan’s efforts to achieve sustainable peace.

21-0402543/50

S/2021/291

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan to the
United Nations, Magzhan Ilyassov
We commend the presidency of the United States for hosting this debate on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Addressing peace
and security in Afghanistan has always been a priority for Kazakhstan, including
during our tenure on the Security Council in 2017 and 2018. We see Afghanistan as
an important regional partner and are thus working on integrating it into the Central
Asian region.
Kazakhstan traditionally co-sponsors an annual General Assembly draft
resolution on Afghanistan, as we see its significance for peace in the country.
Kazakhstan also supports the international community’s efforts to continue
with peace talks, which will, hopefully, result in a ceasefire and a reduction of
violence in Afghanistan. Kazakhstan is of the strong conviction that the settlement of
the Afghan conflict must be based on the principle that it is Afghan-owned, Afghanled and Afghan-controlled. We see dialogue, compromise and mutual understanding
as the only means to de-escalate the conflict and lay the foundations for stability in
the country. At the same time, positive perspectives for the Central Asian region’s
own future are directly related to corresponding stability in Afghanistan.
We highly appreciate the role of UNAMA, which contributes to the bilateral
and multilateral interactions of the Central Asian States with Afghanistan. Bearing
in mind that the stability of Afghanistan is closely linked with its economic
development, Kazakhstan has been providing long term financial, technical and
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. In 2020, we provided food and other
humanitarian aid to pandemic-hit Afghanistan. Despite the negative impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on the global economy, we managed to
increase our bilateral trade turnover by 55 per cent.
Both Kazakhstan and Afghanistan, like the rest of Central Asian States, are
landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) and have therefore been particularly hardhit by COVID-19. Our trade and supply chains have been severely damaged and our
ability to invest in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and in countering the COVID-19 pandemic has been substantially reduced.
To mobilize funds and efforts towards structural economic transformation,
export diversification and recovery from COVID-19 pandemic in LLDCs,
Kazakhstan, as the global chair of LLDCs for 2020-2021, has initiated the adoption of
the innovative Roadmap for Accelerated Implementation of the Vienna Programme
of Action for LLDCs in the Remaining Five Years.
Afghanistan needs a comprehensive strategy on infrastructure, trade,
investment, transit and transport development to integrate into the region. Thus,
projects, such as the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan,
the Belt and Road Initiative, the Central Asia-South Asia Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project, and the Turkmenistan–Afghanistan–Pakistan–India Pipeline
provide the much-needed natural land bridge connecting Afghanistan to Central
Asia, South Asia and beyond.
To enhance the country’s infrastructure and increase connectivity and access,
Kazakhstan is participating in the Khaf-Herat railway project.
Another major step we have taken is the establishment of the United Nations
regional centre for the Sustainable Development Goals for Central Asia and
Afghanistan, in Almaty. The regional centre will be based in the new United Nations
44/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

building in Almaty, opened in May 2019 by President Tokayev, where 18 United
Nations agencies with regional and subregional mandates are located.
The Centre is aimed at ensuring efficiency and improved coordination among
all stakeholders towards delivering on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
at the regional level. We believe that an expanded United Nations presence in Central
Asia and the establishment of the United Nations regional centre in Almaty will
contribute to sustainable development in the region.
Education is a critical agent of social change, and so we value our partnership
with Afghanistan in building its capacity and expertise. Since 2010, more than 1,000
Afghan students have graduated from Kazakh universities on grants sponsored by
the Government of Kazakhstan.
Kazakhstan is also implementing, together with the United Nations
Development Programme, the European Union and Japan, several triangular
cooperation projects on education, training and capacity-building for Afghan women
and youth. To institutionalize our development assistance to Afghanistan and
other countries in the region, Kazakhstan recently established an official overseas
development assistance agency, KazAID.
To conclude, Kazakhstan is strongly committed to assisting Afghanistan in
partnership with Central Asian countries and other States Members of the United
Nations to lay the long-term foundations for an enduring economic recovery and
peace in the country.

21-0402545/50

S/2021/291

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations, Munir Akram
We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Deborah Lyons for
her briefing today.
Pakistan and Afghanistan are linked by the unbreakable bonds of geography,
history, culture, ethnicity and faith. Our destinies are intertwined.
Afghanistan has endured endless conflict and suffering for the past 40 years.
We have shared its trials and tribulations and hope to share its joy when peace returns
to the country.
Pakistan has consistently maintained that the conflict in Afghanistan can
be ended not by military force but through a political settlement involving the full
spectrum of Afghanistan’s political landscape. Towards that end, Pakistan has
contributed actively to advancing the Afghan peace process. We facilitated the
commencement and the conclusion of the United States-Taliban peace agreement
and the subsequent intra-Afghan negotiations.
The Doha peace process has made important progress in the last year. We are
glad that the relevant Afghan parties, including the Afghan Government and Taliban
representatives, are fully engaged in this peace process.
It is time for the Afghan leaders to seize this historic opportunity and continue
to work constructively to secure an inclusive, broad-based and comprehensive
political settlement. A peaceful and stable Afghanistan is indispensable to peace and
stability in the region and beyond.
Terrorism has had a devastating impact on Afghanistan and its neighbouring
countries. We share the determination of the international community not to allow
Afghanistan’s territory to be used by Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant or other international terrorist groups and their affiliates to threaten or attack
any country.
Some who have waxed eloquent about terrorism today are the very ones who
wish to continue to foment terrorism from Afghanistan’s ungoverned spaces to
conduct their war of terrorism against my country. It is regrettable that the Council
has been prevented from considering the evidence of their sponsorship of terrorism.
A reduction in violence is a natural expectation from the peace process.
All sides should work towards a reduction of violence leading to a ceasefire. The
continuation of violence will strengthen the hands of spoilers, both within and outside
Afghanistan, to subvert the peace negotiations and prevent a comprehensive political
settlement in Afghanistan. We must guard against those who desire to frustrate a
peaceful settlement on the pretext of safeguarding democracy and human rights and
to continue to use Afghan territory against its neighbours.
We hope that despite the multiple challenges facing them and possible periodic
setbacks, all Afghan parties will persevere in the pursuit of a political settlement.
We welcome the recent efforts to re-energize the peace process. We should
assure ourselves that such efforts complement, not subvert, the peace process.
Bringing spoilers to the table will retard the prospects of an early settlement.
Pakistan will welcome and support the consensus between Afghan leaders and
the Taliban on any inclusive political settlement in Afghanistan. It is the Afghans
who must be the masters of their destiny and decide their own future, without outside
influence or interference.
46/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic and English]
I wish to thank you for having convened this meeting, Madam President, and
for giving us the opportunity to participate in it. We congratulate you on your effective
presidency of the Council for this month. We also thank Mrs. Deborah Lyons for her
briefing, and we commend her efforts at the helm of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We have taken the initiative to participate in
this meeting, which is being held at an important juncture, within the framework of
the role of the State of Qatar as an international partner of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan, and a mediator in support of the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process. We hope that this process will lead to a comprehensive political settlement.
Concrete gains were made on Afghanistan’s path towards that desired peace
last year, when the Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between the
United States of America and the Taliban came to fruition on 29 February thanks
to the sustained good offices made lately by the State of Qatar to bring the parties
to the table for dialogue and by holding several rounds of negotiations in Doha. The
Doha agreement enabled the taking of significant steps towards ending the war and
opening the door to intra-Afghan negotiations, as stated in resolution 2513 (2020).
Among the most import steps enabled by the agreement was the launch of
the intra-Afghan peace negotiations on 12 September in Doha, which constitutes
a significant step towards achieving a comprehensive political settlement by
putting an end to violence and human suffering and paving the way to stability and
prosperity. Indeed, negotiations in Doha have made progress that includes reaching
an agreement on procedural matters.
Other gains have also been made as a result of the Afghan dialogue facilitated
by the State of Qatar last summer, namely, the ceasefire during Eid al-Fitr and Eid
al-Adha and the successful exchange of prisoners between the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban. Last January, the second round of
talks between the Government and the Taliban began in Doha, and teams appointed
by the two sides held a series of meetings to agree on the agenda.
At this critical stage, every possible effort should be made to preserve the
gains made thus far within the Doha process, especially since we have witnessed
first-hand, through our role as facilitator of the talks between the Afghan parties,
how they are approaching the peace process with eagerness and awareness of the
need to end the state of war and achieve lasting peace.
The sincere endeavours of the State of Qatar to support the peace process to
support the peace process in Afghanistan reflect its well-established foreign policy,
which attaches importance to the settlement of disputes through peaceful means,
mediation and international cooperation, including with the United Nations. The
State of Qatar is therefore keen to coordinate with its international partners, be they
the United Nations or friendly countries, with a view to supporting and making
the Doha process a success. In that regard, this month the State of Qatar received
Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, the United States Special Envoy for Peace in Afghanistan,
once again, as well as Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan.
The State of Qatar participated in the expanded troika meeting that was hosted
by the Russian Federation on 18 March, which deemed valuable the role of the State of
21-0402547/50

S/2021/291

Qatar in facilitating the peace process and supported the ongoing Doha negotiations.
The State of Qatar also looks forward to convening, along with the Turkish Republic,
a meeting next month to promote the peace process. My country also welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Jean Arnault as Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan and Regional Issues and looks forward to supporting and cooperating
closely with him.
The Afghan people have recently made some gains. Now they need the
support of the international community in order to preserve those gains, complete
the transitional phase and overcome the numerous challenges that they face in terms
of security, economy and sustainable development. The State of Qatar commends the
efforts made by neighbouring countries and countries that are friends of Afghanistan
in providing support, including in, but not limited to, the political, humanitarian and
development fields.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar reaffirms its support for our brothers in
Afghanistan in their quest to consolidate peace, security, stability and development,
and, in collaboration with the United Nations and international partners, will
continue to make every effort to have successful peace negotiations and achieve
their intended goal.

48/50

21-04025

S/2021/291

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun Hadi Sinirlioğlu
I would like to express our appreciation to Special Representative Lyons and
Ms. Akbar for their briefings and to the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Raz, for her statement. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2021/252).
The level of violence in Afghanistan, especially the high number of civilian
casualties and the deliberate targeting of civil service employees, civil-society activists,
human rights defenders, journalists and media workers, is cause for grave concern.
The Secretary-General reports that the security situation worsened in 2020,
with the number of security-related incidents reaching record levels since the United
Nations started documenting incidents in 2007. Violence continued to inflict serious
casualties on children. The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) documented 86 cases of violence against women and girls from November
2020 to January 2021.
We once again call for a cessation of violence. A time-bound ceasefire or at
least a clear-cut, significant reduction in violence is necessary to build confidence
between the parties. That could also create an environment conducive to making
meaningful progress in the peace process.
After decades of conflict, Afghanistan is now at a new crossroads. The intraAfghan negotiations in Doha have opened a window of opportunity for ending the
decades-long conflict in Afghanistan through a political solution. We fully support
that process.
On the other hand, the desired progress has not been achieved in these talks so
far. In that regard, we support the recent international efforts to reinvigorate the peace
process, building upon the existing talks in Doha. We believe that bringing together
high-level representatives from the relevant sides may help make rapid progress.
With that understanding, we are working on co-hosting a high-level meeting in
Turkey together with Qatar and the United Nations, with a view to complementing
and energizing the talks in Doha. That could be a platform for discussing a future
political road map for Afghanistan.
The constructive role assumed by the United Nations in peace endeavours
in Afghanistan is key. We hope that the recent appointment of Mr. Jean Arnault as
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan and Regional Issues can
bring added value to the existing efforts.
We also appreciate the international community’s contribution to peace efforts
in Afghanistan and value its support to the Istanbul meeting that aims to advance the
peace process.
I take this opportunity to underline the importance of the meaningful
representation of women at the negotiating table.
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan, Turkey acknowledges and
supports the Afghan people’s desire for a more peaceful future. The ultimate
objective should be fair and lasting peace, so that all Afghans, especially women and
children, can continue to enjoy the achievements made during the last two decades.
We cannot emphasize enough the need to consolidate the gains made to date,
in particular in the field of human rights. That requires the sustained support of
21-0402549/50

S/2021/291

the international community for the Afghan people. We commend UNAMA for its
efforts in assisting the Afghan Government and people in their endeavours to bring
about a stable, peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan.
Addressing the challenges to the establishment of durable peace, stability
and security in Afghanistan remains central. Turkey continues to stand ready to
contribute to Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation efforts.

50/50

21-04025
