S/2016/714

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 August 2016
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present thirtieth report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security
Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Council resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of Council resolution 2191 (2014) and paragraph 5 of Council
resolution 2258 (2015), in which the Council requested the Secretary -General to
report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to United
Nations agencies on the ground, from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
other Syrian sources and open sources. Data from United Nations agencies on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to 31 July 2016.
More recent data has been included when available.

II. Major developments
A.

Developments on the ground
3.
During the reporting period, the deteriorating security environment had a
significant impact on the humanitarian situation, including further damage to civilian
infrastructure such as hospitals and schools, limiting the ability of United Nations
agencies and their partners to deliver much-needed humanitarian support. Military
activities, including airstrikes, continued in Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah and Idlib,
as well as in Rif Dimashq and other governorates. In line with resolution 2258 (2015),
the following description of developments on the ground reports on the compliance by
all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic with resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014). This information is provided without prejudice to the work of the
International Syria Support Group Task Force on the Ceasefire.
4.
Military activity intensified in Aleppo governorate in July, including major
military operations by both Government and non-State armed groups in Aleppo city.
On 7 July, Government forces advanced north of Aleppo city, cutting the Castillo
road, the only remaining supply route to non-State armed group-held areas in the

16-14077 (E)

170816

*1614077*

S/2016/714

eastern part of Aleppo city. On 11 July, airstrikes on a residential area in the old city
area of Aleppo reportedly resulted in the killing of 18 civilians, including two
children and one woman, and the injury of at least 30 others. On 16 July, various
neighbourhoods in non-State armed group-held Aleppo including Firdaws, the old
city of Aleppo and Ma‘adi were hit by several airstrikes that reportedly resulted in
the killing and injury of at least 22 civilians. Umar ibn Abdula ziz hospital in Ma‘adi
neighbourhood was also allegedly damaged and put out of service by airstrikes
which hit in its vicinity. The next day, airstrikes on residential areas of Abu al -Zuhur
reportedly killed 11 civilians from one family and injured five ot hers. On 23 and
24 July, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) received reports of four makeshift hospitals, along with the central blood
bank, being hit by airstrikes in eastern Aleppo city (see para. 42). On 25 July,
airstrikes hit a residential area in Mashhad neighbourhood, reportedly killing at least
six civilians. On 31 July, airstrikes on three non-State armed group-controlled
neighbourhoods of Aleppo — Mashhad, Ansari and Sukkari — destroyed a number
of residential structures and reportedly killed at least 15 civilians, including a child,
and injured another 10 civilians. Moreover, following an opposition advance in the
south-west of the city, 25,000 people were displaced. The United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) is providing assistance to these internally displaced persons in
temporary shelters around the city.
5.
Non-State armed groups significantly increased mortar and rocket attacks on
Government forces-controlled areas in the western part of Aleppo city, causing
significant casualties among civilians. During the Eid al-Fitr holidays, on 8 and
9 July, non-State armed groups reportedly increased the firing of mortars and
rockets into Government-held areas of the city. At least 44 civilians were allegedly
killed and dozens injured, including many women and children. Tens of civilians
were reported as having been admitted to Razi and Jam‘iy hospitals. The strikes
continued throughout July, allegedly causing further civilian deaths and injuries. For
example, on 22 July, six civilians, including a child, were reportedly killed in
Government-controlled Aleppo when mortars fired from eastern Aleppo hit a public
park. On 25 July, a civilian woman and her child were allegedly killed by a mortar
that fell on Khalidiyah neighbourhood.
6.
Attacks on civilian infrastructure in Aleppo city took their toll on civilians.
They include attacks on 31 July and 1 August that reportedly damaged a
transmission centre, resulting in an electricity blackout throughout western and
eastern Aleppo. Consequently the two main water pumping stations, both located in
eastern Aleppo and serving over 2 million people across the city, stopped
functioning. In western Aleppo, humanitarian actors are scaling up alternative
sources of water; however, these are not sufficient to meet the full needs of the
population. In eastern Aleppo, public wells are serving a portion of the population
but will require sustained access and supplies of fuel to continue operating.
7.
On 10 July, airstrikes on a residential area of Kafr Ibbin reportedly killed at
least 19 civilians, including 11 children and two women. The same day, seven
civilians were allegedly killed by airstrikes in Shantarah. Another airstrike, on
18 July, in Tukhar Taymu allegedly killed eight civilians from a single family,
including women and children. In the early morning hours of 19 July, numerous
airstrikes again hit residential areas in Tukhar Taymu, allegedly killing at least
70 civilians from nine families, including at least 20 children. A medical unit in
Atarib was also allegedly hit by airstrikes on 24 July. On 30 July, a makeshift
hospital was allegedly hit by an airstrike in north-western Huraytan and put out of

2/14

16-14077

S/2016/714

service. No casualties were reported. On 30 July, four ground strikes hit the village
of Kafr Naha reportedly killing five civilians and injuring 10 others. On 31 July, a
ground strike hit a residential home in Anadan allegedly killing at least three
civilians and injuring seven others.
8.
Fierce fighting continued between Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and Syrian Democratic Forces and their allies in and around the town of Manbij in the
eastern countryside of Aleppo. On 18 July, at least 15 civilians from one family,
including women and children, were reportedly killed when an airstrike hit their home
in the Hazawnah neighbourhood of Manbij. On 28 July, airstrikes hit residential
buildings in the ISIL-controlled town of Ghandurah located north-west of Manbij, and
allegedly killed at least 28 civilians and injured dozens more, including a number of
children. On 2 August, OHCHR received a note verbale from the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic which stated that those airstrikes killed 45 civilians. Hazawnah
neighbourhood and the nearby village of Shuwayhah were also struck, and an
unknown number of civilians were reportedly killed in Shuwayhah. Also on 28 July,
an airstrike hit the Sharia Al-Rabita neighbourhood of Manbij and reportedly killed
five civilians and injured dozens of others. On 28 July, ISIL allegedly exe cuted at least
25 civilians, including a number of women and children, when they temporarily took
over Buwayr village to the north of Manbij. Approximately 13,000 civilians were
reportedly displaced from the town of Manbij because of ongoing infighting.
9.
Fighting continued throughout the reporting period in Damascus and Rif
Dimashq governorates, including the first attacks reported in recent months against
Damascus city. On 2 July, airstrikes and artillery fire on Jayrud reportedly killed at
least 35 civilians, including three children, four women and a doctor. On 4 July,
airstrikes on a residential area in Khan al-Shih allegedly killed two civilians and
injured five others. Airstrikes on a residential area of Marj on 12 July reportedly
killed three civilians, including a woman, and injured at least six others. A woman
and a child were allegedly killed in airstrikes in Hammurah on 23 July. The next
day, artillery fire reportedly killed at least six civilians in the same town. On
24 July, at least five civilians were allegedly killed, including one woman and three
children, when airstrikes hit a local market and houses in Irbin. Also on 24 July, at
least seven civilians were reportedly killed, including three women and one child,
and at least 19 others injured when ground strikes hit the old city of Damascus,
damaging houses and restaurants. On 25 July, further ground strikes in Damascus hit
the Ush al-Wurur area and reportedly injured at least six civilians. On the same day
mortars landed in a residential area of Qaymariyah neighbourhood in the old city of
Damascus and allegedly injured at least four civilians.
10. A number of strikes were also reported in the towns of Duma and Darayya
during the reporting period. On 2 July, airstrikes on residential areas in Duma
reportedly killed three civilians, including a child, and injured two other civilians. On
22 July, airstrikes and artillery fire which hit commercial and residential areas in
Duma reportedly killed three civilians. Also on 22 July, an airstrike alleg edly killed a
woman and her two-month-old baby in a residential area of Darayya. On 25 July, three
civilians including a child were reportedly killed and at least another two injured as a
result of artillery fire and airstrikes which hit a residential area of the town.
11. In Idlib governorate, on 8 July, airstrikes struck a local market in Darkush
allegedly killing at least 22 civilians, including nine women, and injuring 20 others.
The town is reported to be densely populated with internally displaced pe rsons from
other areas in the governorate. The incident, which took place during the Eid al -Fitr

16-14077

3/14

S/2016/714

holiday, coincided with the last day of a 72-hour ceasefire agreement. On 11 July,
airstrikes hit the town of Ihsim in close proximity to Shifa’ hospital and a llegedly
killed three civilians, including one child, and injured at least three others. The
hospital was severely damaged and put out of service. On 13 July, airstrikes hit a
local market in Ariha and reportedly killed at least 13 civilians and injured se veral
others. On 21 July, an airstrike hit a residential area in Tallmannis and reportedly
killed at least nine civilians, including two children. At least 10 other civilians were
injured. On 29 July, a maternity hospital in the village of Kafr Takharim in Idlib was
hit by an airstrike. Two civilians were allegedly killed in the incident and the
facility put out of service.
12. In Homs governorate, on 13 July airstrikes hit a number of civilian facilities in
Rastan, including a Syrian Arab Red Crescent medical unit. As a result of the
strikes, at least 17 civilians, including three women, were reportedly killed and
approximately 48 others injured.
13. On 3 July, armed clashes broke out between Kurdish forces and national
defence forces in Hasakah city. OHCHR received reports that at least five civilians
were killed and three others injured in the crossfire. On 5 July, a suicide bomber
targeted a bakery in the Salihiyah neighbourhood of Hasakah city. OHCHR received
the names of 21 people — 15 men and 6 children — believed to be civilians who
were reported to have died in the attack. Six others were also allegedly killed, four
of whom remain unidentified. In addition, 29 individuals including six women were
reportedly injured in the attack. A car bomb on 27 July in Qamishli close to the
offices of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
allegedly killed 48 civilians, including women and children, and injured 140 more,
along with the destruction of civilian homes and buildings.
14. Fighting continued between ISIL and Government forces around Dayr al -Zawr
and Raqqah governorates. On 8 July, ISIL fighters fired mortar rounds into
Government-held areas of Dayr al-Zawr city and reportedly killed four children in
the Tulaytulah public garden area of Jurah neighbourhood. In Raqqah governorate,
on 12 July, airstrikes on residential areas in Raqqah city allegedly killed four
children, all siblings. On 19 July, at least 57 civilians, including women and
children, were reportedly injured by airstrikes on a residential area of Tabaqah.
15. OHCHR has received reports of airstrikes allegedly conducted by international
actors which resulted in civilian deaths and injuries, but was unable to identify the
parties responsible. The United States Department of Defense confirmed that in July
the United States-led coalition carried out 366 strikes against ISIL targets in the
governorates of Aleppo, Raqqah, Hasakah, Dayr al-Zawr and Homs, 80 per cent of
them around the area of Manbij. During a press briefing on 27 July, the United States
Department of Defense stated that a formal investigation had been launched into
allegations of civilian casualties as a result of a coalition airstrike on 19 July in
Manbij. The Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation provided no information to
OHCHR on its operations in July, although on 28 July the Russian Defence Minister
stated that Russian aerospace forces were providing active support to Government
troops in response to ISIL and Nusrah Front 1 offensives in June and July near Aleppo.

__________________
1

4/14

On 28 July, the Nusrah Front announced that it would henceforth be known as Jabhat Fatah
al-Sham, or Front for the Conquest of the Levant, and said it no longer owed allegiance to
Al-Qaida.

16-14077

S/2016/714

16. My Special Envoy for the Syrian Arab Republic continued to assess the
environment across the country in order to determine the most opportune moment
for the formal resumption of political negotiations and consistently called upon the
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group, the United States of America
and the Russian Federation, to strengthen the cessation of hostilities and take
measures that enhance humanitarian access across the country for actors providing
emergency support. Bilateral discussions between the United States and the Russian
Federation in Moscow on 15 July paved the way for a trilateral meeting of the
co-Chairs and the United Nations in Geneva on 26 July. All parties agreed at that
meeting to prioritize political negotiations while the co-Chairs agreed to continue
their bilateral engagement in order to strengthen the cessation of hostilities while
pursuing counter-terrorism cooperation, and ensure the provision of humanitarian
access and aid. In preparation for the resumption of formal political negotiations,
my Special Envoy continued to engage the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, regional States, and Syrian civil society on topics related to political
transition throughout the month of July.

B.

Human rights
17. OHCHR continued to receive reports of serious human rights violations in July.
On 19 July, a video and photographs emerged of members of a non-State armed group
in the Shi‘ar district in the city of Aleppo taunting and mistreating a young male in the
back of a pickup truck before one of the fighters beheaded him. The age of the male,
who has the appearance of a child, was unknown. On 20 July, OHCHR received a note
verbale from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in which it was stated that
the boy was 12 years old. On the same day, the Nur al-Din al-Zanki movement issued
a statement condemning the incident and indicating that those responsible had been
detained and handed over to an investigation committee.

C.

Humanitarian response
18. In July, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach
millions of people in need through all modalities from within the Syrian Arab
Republic and across borders pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and
2258 (2015) (see table 1). Non-governmental organizations also continued to deliver
assistance to people in need in line with previous months. The Government
continued to provide basic services to areas under its control as well as in many
areas beyond its control.
Table 1
Number of people reached by United Nations organizations, July 2016
Organization

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

2 613

International Organization for Migration

45 561

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

175 570

United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Development Programme

16-14077

Number of people reached

1.4 million
878 091

5/14

S/2016/714

Organization

Number of people reached

United Nations Population Fund

384 507

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East

450 000

World Food Programme

4.2 million

World Health Organization

746 334

19. Cross-border deliveries continued during the reporting period. In July,
10 consignments consisting of 335 trucks crossed from Turkey and Jordan to the
Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and
2258 (2015). Six of the consignments crossed from Bab al-Hawa (307 trucks), three
from Bab al-Salam (13 trucks) and one from Ramtha (15 trucks). This brings the
total number of trucks since the beginning of operations to 9,013 (6,582 through
Bab al-Hawa, 716 through Bab al-Salam and 1,715 through Ramtha).
20. Shipments through the Ramtha crossing from Jordan resume d on 28 July after
they were delayed by the Government of Jordan on 21 June because of the security
situation along the Syrian-Jordan border. In Turkey, shipments were suspended for
two days following the failed coup attempt of 15 July. They resumed withou t any
problem on 18 July.
21. In line with Security Council resolutions, the United Nations notified the
Syrian authorities in advance of each shipment, including content, destination and
number of beneficiaries. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism fo r the Syrian
Arab Republic continued its operations, monitoring 335 trucks in the
10 consignments in July, confirming the humanitarian nature of each, and notifying
the Syrian authorities after each shipment. The Mechanism continued to benefit
from excellent cooperation with the Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
22. The inter-agency convoys to the besieged and hard-to-reach locations listed in
table 2 were completed in July. Moreover, the World Food Programme (WFP)
completed 22 airdrops, dropping a total of 405 tons of food commodities and
humanitarian assistance on behalf of other United Nations agencies over Dayr al-Zayr
city. Overall, since April, WFP has completed 87 airdrop rotations, dispatching
1,552 tons of food, nutrition, shelter and water, sanitation and hygiene supplies. In
addition, the WFP Logistics Cluster completed 39 airlifts to Qamishli from Damascus,
airlifting 1,464 tons of mixed food commodities as well as water, sanitation and
hygiene, nutrition and shelter assistance as at 2 August. United Nations agencies also
undertook single agency deliveries to cross-line and hard-to-reach locations or reached
those locations through their regular programmes during the reporting period.
Table 2
Inter-agency convoys, July 2016

6/14

Date

Location

Requested target
(number of
beneficiaries)

2 July

Eastern Harasta

21 000

Targeted people
reached

10 000

Type of assistance

Food, nutrition, water,
sanitation and hygiene,
education, health

16-14077

S/2016/714

Date

Location

Requested target
(number of
beneficiaries)

12 July

Shaykh Maqsud

27 000

27 000 a

Food, nutrition, water,
sanitation and hygiene,
education, non-food items,
health

14 and 18 July

Wa‘r

75 000

75 000

Food, water, sanitation and
hygiene, nutrition, non-food
items, health

19 July

Sirghaya

15 000

15 000

Food, nutrition, water,
sanitation and hygiene, nonfood items, health

21 July

Qal‘at al-Madiq

32 000

32 000

Food, water, sanitation and
hygiene, nutrition, education,
non-food items, health

21 July

Urum al-Kubra

70 000

50 000

Nutrition, non-food items,
health, medical

24 July

Mu‘addamiyah
al-Sham

45 000

40 000

Food, water, sanitation and
hygiene, education, health

26 July

Hajib and Banan

7 000

7 000

Food, water, sanitation and
hygiene, nutrition, education,
non-food items, health

26 July

Talbisah

84 000

84 000

Food, nutrition, health

28 July

Rastan

110 000

110 000

Food, water, sanitation and
hygiene, non-food items,
health

31 July

Hulah

71 000

71 000

Food, water, sanitation and
hygiene, nutrition, education,
non-food items, health

a

Targeted people
reached

Type of assistance

This was the third of three convoys that together reached 27,000 beneficiaries. The two previous convoys
reached Shaykh Maqsud on 23 and 28 June.

Humanitarian access
23. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need of assistance in the
Syrian Arab Republic remained extremely challenging in many areas of the country
as a result of active conflict, shifting conflict lines and delibera te restrictions by the
parties to the conflict on the movement of people and goods.
24. In July, the number of people living in besieged and hard -to-reach areas stood
at 5.47 million, an increase of some 900,000 people from the previous estimate of
4.6 million. As previously reported, this increase is based primarily on the inclusion
of areas in parts of Aleppo, Raqqah and Hasakah governorates as a result of

16-14077

7/14

S/2016/714

insecurity, as well as constrained access for humanitarian actors both from within
the country and via cross-border operations. Moreover, the population in eastern
Aleppo, where an estimated 250,000 to 275,000 people reside, is at serious risk of
besiegement as the fighting closes in and basic necessities run out.
25. Access to the millions of people living in besieged and hard-to-reach locations
remained of critical concern. Overall, the United Nations agencies and partners
reached 39 of the 182 besieged and hard-to-reach areas (21 per cent) through either
inter-agency convoys or single agency deliveries. Details of assistance to those
areas by sector in July are shown in table 3. Meanwhile, non -governmental
organizations continued to provide limited medical, education and protection
services, as well as some support in other sectors, in hard -to-reach locations, under
extremely challenging circumstances.
Table 3
United Nations deliveries to hard-to-reach, besieged and priority cross-line
locations, July 2016
Sector (United Nations delivery only)

Number of people reached (percentage of 5.47 million)

Food security

891 945 (16%)

Health (treatments)

402 433 (7.3%)

Non-food items

119 983 (2.1%)

Water, sanitation and hygiene

120 898 (2.2%)

26. Active conflict in several governorates hindered the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance, as well as people’s access to essential services. Markets,
schools, medical and other civilian infrastructures were damaged as a result of
fighting in July, reducing the availability of basic and essential services in critical
areas. For example, on 20 July, an airstrike reportedly hit the schoolyard of the
Khalid Shaar examination centre in Idlib city, resulting in the death of a female
student and one other adult. As a result of repeated airstrikes during the period, local
education authorities decided to postpone all examinations, which resumed on
27 July. Further, an aerial bombardment on Saraqib city in Idlib, on 30 July,
reportedly struck a university, resulting in partial structural damage. The United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) was not able to conduct any mission in July to Yalda because of ongoing
security concerns.
27. Fighting also disrupted humanitarian supply lines to communities at risk. For
example, no deliveries to eastern Aleppo could be made during the month of July, as
the Castillo road, the only access route, has been cut off since 7 July. Prior to the
interruption of access, WFP had pre-positioned food supplies for tens of thousands
of people for July and partially for August. However, distributions are currently on
hold, owing to ongoing fighting and volatile security conditions. Since access was
cut, prices of essential supplies like fuel and fresh produce have increased. Some
basic commodities are no longer available on the market. Further, UNICEF partners
have identified over 170 cases of acute malnutrition in eastern Aleppo and provided
essential nutrition treatments. As doctors and facilities are increasingly scarce,
however, humanitarian partners are having difficulty in sustaining services. A lack

8/14

16-14077

S/2016/714

of access to nutrition supplies has already disrupted services for 115 malnourished
children who were, until recently, under treatment in eastern Aleppo.
28. On 28 July the Russian Federation announced the start of a large -scale
operation to assist the civilian population of Aleppo and to ensure the exit of
civilians through humanitarian corridors. The United Nations has been actively
working on preparedness planning to assist all those in need, and held detailed
discussions with Member States, including on the proposal of the Russian
Federation, to ensure that key humanitarian principles would be strictly safeguarded
in any possible initiative.
29. Deliberate interference and restrictions by the parties also continued to prevent
aid delivery. For example, WFP continues to be unable to access populations in need
in ISIL-controlled areas of the country, as all plans to deliver assistance to those
areas have been suspended because of the inability to work independently and
monitor activities. This is preventing WFP from reaching Raqqah governorate and
most of Dayr al-Zawr governorate, except Dayr al-Zawr city where assistance is
received via airdrops, as well as pockets of northern rural Aleppo, southern rural
Hasakah and north-western rural Hama. Meanwhile, in July, more than
214,000 children, women and men in besieged and hard-to-reach areas were
supported by UNICEF and partners with therapeutic foods, hygiene supplies and
self-learning materials, as well as nutritional and psychosocial support.
30. The United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for July requested access to
1.2 million people in 35 besieged, hard-to-reach and priority cross-line locations. Of
those 35 locations, 34 have been approved for access, representing approximately
75 per cent of total beneficiaries targeted, given the discrepancies between approved
beneficiaries. Seventeen locations were approved in full for 502,500 people;
17 were partially approved with restrictions on the type of assistance and/or t he
number of approved beneficiaries for 354,000 peop le; and one location (Qabun)
with 28,000 people was not approved. Overall, United Nations inter -agency convoys
in July reached 484,000 2 beneficiaries in nine locations (40 per cent of targeted
people reached). Medical items continued to be removed from convoys (see
para. 46). Increased insecurity, delays in administrative procedures at the national
and local level, and lack of agreement of the parties to the Four Towns ceasefire
agreement prevented the United Nations agencies and other partners from fully
implementing the July plan. On 4 July, the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator
for the Syrian Arab Republic, Yacoub El Hillo, issued a statement expressing alarm
over reports of deteriorating humanitarian conditions in the four towns (Fu‘ah,
Kafraya, Zabadani and Madaya), and calling on the parties to the agreement to
allow for immediate humanitarian access to avoid starvation. The statement also
highlighted the detrimental impact of the tit-for-tat approach on medical
evacuations, and underlined the need for a principled approach to emergency
lifesaving response. While there were a limited number of medical evacuations in
July, several children are currently in need of immediate medical evacuation from
the four towns.

__________________
2

16-14077

The total does not reflect the 10,000 beneficiaries reached on 2 July in eastern Harasta as part of
the June plan.

9/14

S/2016/714

31. The Nusaybin/Qamishli crossing in Hasakah governorate has been temporarily
closed by the Turkish authorities because of security concerns since 27 December
2015. Hasakah governorate also remains largely inaccessible by road for United
Nations agencies from within the Syrian Arab Republic. On 9 July, the United
Nations commenced airlifts from Damascus to Qamishli airport. As at 2 August, the
Logistics Cluster had completed 39 airlifts carrying 1,464 tons of mixed food
commodities, nutrition, shelter and water, sanitation and hygiene assistance on
behalf of other humanitarian agencies, including 24,300 food rations sufficient for
121,500 people for one month. During the month of July, 13,091 WFP food rations
were dispatched to partners in Hasakah governorate for distribution, sufficient to
support 65,455 people for one month. This is the first time food assistance has
reached the governorate since December 2015.
32. A total of 31 new visa requests were submitted in July; 21 requests were
approved, including older applications, and 10 remain pending. Moreover, a total of
43 visa renewal requests were submitted in July, 23 of which were approved
(including older applications); 19 remain pending, while one visa renewal request
was rejected.
33. A total of 17 international non-governmental organizations are registered with
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to operate in the country. Four more
international non-governmental organizations are in the process of completing
registration. Those organizations continued to face a series of administrative hurdles
and restrictions that affect their ability to operate, including in gaining permission to
undertake independent needs assessments.
Besieged areas
34. The number of people living in areas designated by the United Nations as
besieged currently stands at 590,200. Humanitarian conditions in besieged areas
continue to be dire. In besieged areas, the flow of commercial supplies through
official routes remained largely blocked, leading to high prices for commodities
reaching besieged areas through unofficial and irregular supply lines. Freedom of
movement remained heavily restricted, though limited numbers are sporadically
allowed to exit and re-enter some besieged areas.
35. In recent months, inter-agency convoys to besieged areas have highlighted
numerous critical protection concerns beyond physical protection from ongoing
fighting and lack of freedom of movement. A number of families have been
separated, including children from their parents. Indications of severe trauma were
observed, children being particularly affected. People in all locations expressed
serious concerns about the unavailability of civil registration and documentation
services. Access to education has been severely affected and significant numbers of
children appear to have been recruited into armed groups, with many boys aged
under 18 — in uniform and plain clothes — brandishing weapons. Child marriage
has also been documented as widespread, as families are marrying their daughters at
an increasingly younger age, often as a coping mechanism against poverty. The
situation is further compounded by lack of opportunities for young people in
besieged areas.
36. In July, the United Nations assisted approximately 224,000 people in besieged
areas (37.9 per cent of the total besieged population) through inter -agency
operations, including airdrops to Dayr al-Zawr city. Overall, since the beginning of

10/14

16-14077

S/2016/714

the year, inter-agency and UNRWA operations have reached a net total of
401,650 people in besieged areas (68 per cent of the total besieged population),
many more than once.
37. The following locations are besieged by Government forces: (a) in eastern
Ghutah, in Rif Dimashq governorate, some 282,500 people remain besieged in
Duma, eastern Harasta, Irbin, Zamalka, Ayn Tarma, Hammurah, Jisrayn, Kafr Batna
and Saqba; (b) in Darayya, in Rif Dimashq, about 4,000 people remain besieged;
(c) in Madaya and Buqayn, in Rif Dimashq, some 43,000 people remain besieged;
(d) in Zabadani, Rif Dimashq, some 700 people remain besieged; (e) in
Mu‘addamiyah al-Sham, in Rif Dimashq, about 45,000 people remain besieged by;
and (f) in the Wa‘r neighbourhood in Homs governorate, about 75,000 people are
besieged. Some locations, including Madaya and Buqayn, have not received United
Nations assistance since 30 April.
38. In Fu‘ah and Kafraya in Idlib governorate, some 20,000 people remain
besieged by non-State armed groups and the Nusrah Front. These locations have not
received United Nations assistance since 30 April.
39. In Yarmuk, in Damascus, some 10,000 people are besieged by Government
forces and non-State armed groups.
40. In the Government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Dayr al-Zawr city,
some 110,000 people are besieged by ISIL.
Attacks on medical facilities and free passage of medical supplies, personnel
and equipment
41. Primary, secondary and tertiary health-care services continue to experience
severe gaps in performance and service delivery, owing to the exten sive damage
caused to health facilities, the rapid turnover of health staff, and the lack of
qualified professionals in the different medical specialties. Paediatric and maternal
health services, including routine vaccinations, remain negatively affected,
particularly in the governorates of Aleppo, Hama, Homs and Dar‘a, as well as in the
besieged areas of Rif Dimashq.
42. In blatant disregard for the special protected status of health-care facilities under
international humanitarian law and Security Council resolution 2286 (2016), adopted
on 3 May, medical facilities continued to be damaged or destroyed as a result of
fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic. The United Nations and health partners received
credible reports, which are in the process of being verified by the United Nations and
partner organizations, of 44 attacks against health facilities in July alone. For example,
in July, five out of nine hospitals in eastern Aleppo were repeatedly attacked, severely
disrupting and limiting life-saving health services for children and their families. This
includes attacks on Bayan, Hakim, Daqqaq, Sayidah al-Zahra’ and Umar ibn
Abdulaziz hospitals, in which patients were killed and medical staff reportedly
injured. According to reports, a two-day-old baby died in his incubator as a result of
oxygen interruptions following the attack. Three other babies reportedly died the next
day because of respiratory problems caused by the fallout of the bombardment. Those
medical facilities are severally damaged. The remaining hospitals in eastern Aleppo
cannot cater to the needs of the approximately 250,000 to 275,000 people. The few
staff that remain are overstretched and working in shifts. Lack of health workers is
compounded by the fact that many health workers are no longer able to make the daily

16-14077

11/14

S/2016/714

journey from their homes in the west of the city to the eastern area. Power and water
shortages are severely affecting the delivery of health services.
43. Moreover, a hospital in Anadan, a blood bank in Atarib (both in Aleppo
governorate) and a field hospital in Jasim (Dar‘a governorate) were hit by airstrikes
on 31 July. The previous day, a maternity hospital in Idlib was struck by airstrikes,
putting the facility out of service and killing at least two people in addition to
injuring a number of patients, including several babies and three female staff. This
was the only maternity facility of its kind in the area, serving more than
1,000 women and children a month and delivering hundreds of newborns. Local
health authorities reported that the facility was specifically targeted, as three out of
six airstrikes on that morning were against the hospital. Dozens of casualties and
injuries resulting from the strikes have been reported, including pregnant women
and children as well as health staff. Prior to the reported strikes, these medical
facilities provided life-saving health care to tens of thousands of people. Many of
the locations are now inoperable. Moreover, according to verified reports, Raqqah
National Hospital continues to be used by ISIL for military purposes with armed
combatants, including children, posted outside as guards to control access to the
facility.
44. The World Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEF continued with the
implementation of the nationwide vaccination campaign. To date, the first round of
the cross-border component of the campaign has reached about 1,070,245 children,
equivalent to a coverage rate of 86 per cent. Moreover, from Damascus, the United
Nations has reached 1.2 million children, 476,000 of whom live in hard-to-reach
and besieged locations. In July, WHO, UNICEF and partners launched the second
round of the campaign from within the Syrian Arab Republic, targeting children
under the age of 5, with a focus on hard-to-reach and besieged locations.
45. Since the beginning of 2016, WHO has filed with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic 29 requests to access 93 locations in 11 governorates
(four requests were submitted in July). The Government has approved 8 of the
29 requests. No approvals were received in July, and 21 requests remain
unanswered, for which WHO has sent many reminders.
46. The removal of life-saving medicines and medical supplies from humanitarian
aid convoys continued. Serum drugs, renewable items (razors, scalpel blades,
gauzes) and surgical equipment (forceps, scissors, needles) are consistently removed
from midwifery kits, inter-agency emergency health kits, paediatric kits, and
diarrhoeal disease sets. The following treatments and supplies were removed from
convoys during July: 3
Location

Number of treatments

Type of treatments

Irbin

343

Burn kits, medicine for the treatment and prophylaxis of heart
failure, angina, and reduction of the pneumonia kit B

Wa‘r

2 104

Italian trauma A and B, steam sterilizer, psychotropic
medicines, atropine and lidocaine, surgical items

__________________
3

12/14

Medical, health and surgical items have also been removed from convoys to Rastan and Hulah.
The number of removed items is currently being verified.

16-14077

S/2016/714

Location

Number of treatments

Type of treatments

Sirghaya

509

Psychotropic medications, burn kits, items removed from
supplementary inter-agency emergency health kits and
pneumonia kit B, in addition to reducing the quantities of kits

Qal‘at al-Madiq 1 572

Pneumonia kit B, supplementary and basic inter-agency
emergency health kits (intravenous fluid, psychotropic
medicines, anaesthetic and life-saving medicines) and
antiseptics

Talbisah

Antiseptics and intravenous sets

660

47. Fears about the targeting of health facilities remain a driver of home deliveries
among pregnant women in the southern Syrian Arab Republic. This trend is further
exacerbated by the desire to obtain proper notification documents that a birth has
occurred — a service which is increasingly available only from Government salaried midwives who are fearful of retaliation by the Government if they are
detected as practising within unauthorized or unofficial health facilities. An
assessment of civil documentation conducted by the International Rescue
Committee from April to June 2016 reported that the proportion of births for which
a birth notification was issued was only 35 per cent in Dar‘a and 15 per cent in
Qunaytirah. Furthermore, participants in Rif Dimashq, Qunaytirah and Dar‘a ranked
“lack or loss of personal civil documents” as their main protection threat.
Safety and security of staff and premises
48. A total of 27 United Nations staff members, 25 of whom are UNRWA area
staff, one from the United Nations Development Programme, and one from
UNICEF, are still detained or missing. Since the start of the conflict, dozens of
humanitarian workers have been killed, including 18 staff members of the United
Nations, 53 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, and
eight volunteers and staff members of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society. This
includes Yaser Mahmoud Shuaeeb, an UNRWA staff member, who died on 17 July
after being struck by shrapnel fragments. In addition, scores of staff members of
international and national non-governmental organizations are reported to have been
killed.

III. Observations
49. There are few words left to convey the suffering being endured by Syrians,
more than five years into the conflict. In addition to the ongoing civilian deaths and
injuries, the destruction of property and cultural heritage and the displacement of
tens of thousands of people, many Syrians are also facing severe water and fuel
shortages, causing increased levels of disease and hardship, in particular in besieged
and hard-to-reach areas.
50. In besieged areas, Syrian suffering continues largely unabated. In particular
areas which are part of the Four Towns ceasefire agreement — Madaya, Zabadani,
Fu‘ah and Kafraya — Syrians in dire need of medical evacuation continue to be
denied the right to access the necessary medical treatment owing to the tit -for-tat

16-14077

13/14

S/2016/714

nature of the agreement. This includes children, mothers, the elderly, and other
vulnerable people. Moreover, these areas have not received United Nations
assistance since 30 April, raising concerns about cases of malnutrition possibly
leading to starvation. These illegal practices of holding civilians hostage to the
fighting must stop.
51. In Aleppo, more than 2 million people across the city are in fear of
besiegement and in an uncertain and dangerous situation as fighting rages around
them. The situation is growing worse for those 250,000 to 275,000 trapped in
eastern Aleppo since 7 July, and it is extremely precarious for those in th e west. The
conduct of hostilities continues to be characterized by a prevailing disrespect for the
fundamental rules of international humanitarian law. All parties to the conflict are
failing to uphold their obligation to protect civilians. The fight for territory and
resources is being undertaken through indiscriminate attacks on residential areas,
including through the use of barrel bombs, killing hundreds of civilians, including
dozens of children. In Aleppo we risk seeing a humanitarian catastrophe
unprecedented in the more than five years of bloodshed and suffering in the Syrian
conflict. I cannot stress strongly enough the need for a 48 -hour pause in fighting, as
well as safe and sustained humanitarian access in all areas of Aleppo. I also urge the
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group, the United States and the
Russian Federation, to rapidly reach agreement on a ceasefire in Aleppo and
elsewhere. Not only would such an agreement ease the suffering of the Syrian
people, it could also facilitate a more conducive environment for the resumption of
the intra-Syrian talks.
52. In July, tens of thousands of people were forced from their homes in search of
safety. Fighting continued to punish civilians across the country: in Aleppo, in Manbij,
eastern Ghuta, in Dar‘a and elsewhere. Attacks on hospitals, schools, basic services
and humanitarian deliveries have continued unabated. The United Nations and health
partners received credible reports, which are in the process of being verified by the
United Nations and partner organizations, of 44 attacks against health facilities in July
alone. What was inconceivable more than five years ago has become the norm for
Syrian families and communities. The fighting must stop for humanitarians to be able
to deliver aid and save lives. But most importantly the fighting must be halted to ease
the suffering of those who already have lost so much.
53. As my Special Envoy prepares to convene the next round of political
negotiations, I reiterate my call to the international community, and to the members
of the International Syria Support Group in particular, to strengthen the cessation of
hostilities and take measures that enhance humanitarian access across the Syrian
Arab Republic. I commend the continued efforts by the Russian Federation and the
United States to maintain the momentum and spearhead international support for the
Syrian parties to work towards reaching a political agreement on the basis of
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). The people of the Syrian Arab Republic
should not be forced to wait any longer for Syrian, regional and international parties
to settle their scores. They have suffered enough and deserve our full attention,
genuine effort, vision and leadership to end what has become one of the worst
humanitarian tragedies of our times.

14/14

16-14077
