91

Reeola.tions adopted on the reporte of the Tldrd Committee

3. Requests the Secretary-General, in the light of
further replies from Member States and non-govemmental organizations in consultative sitatus with the
Economic and Social Council and of the views expressed during the proceedings of_ the thirtieth sess!on
of the General Assembly, to subm1t an updated vers10n
of his report to the Assembly at its thirty-second
session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the status of the intemational conventions in
the field of human rights for which he acts as depositary;
5. Decides to consider with high priority at its
thirty-second session the question of a1temative approaches and ways_ and _means withi~. the. United
Nations system for 1mprovmg the effecttve enJoyment
of human rigbts and fundamental freedoms.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

him for an act he has committed or is suspectcd of having
committed, or intimidating him or other persons. lt does not
include pain or suffering arising only from, inherent in or
incidental to, lawful sanctions to the extent consiste:nt . with
the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. 31
2. Torture constitutes an aggravated and deliberate form of
cruel, inhuman or degrading lireatment or punishment.

3452 (XX.X). Declaration on the Protection of
All Penons from Being Subjected to Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment

Each State shall, in accordance with the provisions of this
Declaration, take effective measures to prevent torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
from being practised within its jurisdiction.

The General Assembly,
Considering that, in accordance with the principies
proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the inherent dignity and of tbe equal ~d
inalienable rights of all members of the human famtly
is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the
world,
Considering that tbese rights derive from the inherent dignity of the human person,
Considering also the obligation of States under the
Ch.arter, in particular Article 55, to promote universal
respect for, and observan.ce of, human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
Having regard to article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights29 and article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 30 both
of which provide that no one may be subjected to
torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punisbment,
Adopts the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the text of which is annexed to the present resolution, as a guideliné for all States and other entities
exercising effective power.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

AllTICLE 5
The training of law enforcement personnel and of other
public officials who may be responsible for persons deprived
of therr liberty shall ensure that full aocount is taken of the
prohibition against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. This prohibition shall also,
where appropriate, be included in such general rules or instructions as are issued in regard to thc duties and functions of
anyone who may be involved in the custody or treatment of
such persons.

ARTICLE

2

Any act of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment is an offence to human dignity and
shall be condemned as a denial of the purposes of the Oiarter
of the United Nations and as a violation of the human rights
and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
AllTICLE

3

No State may permit or tolerate torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Exceprional
circumstaoces such as a state of war or a threat of war, internal política! instability or any other public emergency may not
be invoked as a justification of torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment.
AllTICLE 4

ANNEX
Deelaration on the Protection of All Per11on11 from Being
Subjeeted to Torta.re and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degradinc Treatment or Punishment
1
1. For the purpose of this Declaration, torture means any
act by which severe pai.n or suffering, whethcr physical or
mental, is intentionally infticted by or at the instiption of a
public offlcial on a person for such purposes as obtafoing from
him or a third person information or confession, punishing
AllTICLE

20 R.esolution 217 A (111).
80 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), anncx.

ARncLE 6
Each State shall keep under systematic review interrogation
methods and practices as well as arrang,ements for the custody
and treatment of persons deprived of their liberty in its t«ritory, with a view to preventing any cases of torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
ARTICLE 7
Each State shall ensure that a.U acts of torture as defined in
artlcle 1 are offeuces under its criminal law. The S8IDe lhall
apply in regard to acts which constitute participation in, complicity in, incitement to or an attempt to commit torture.
ARTICLE

8°

Any person who alleges that he has been subjected to torture
or other cruel, ,inhuman or degrading treatmcnt or puuiahment by or at the instigation of a public official shall have the
right to complain to, and to have his e.ase impartially examined by, the competent authorities of the State concemcd.
AltTICLE 9

Wherever there is reasonable ground to believe that an act
of torture as defined in article 1 has been committed, the competent authorities of the State concemed shall promptly proc:eed
to an impartía! investigation even if there has been no formal
complaint.
ARTICLE 10

If an investigation under artide 8 or article 9 establishes that

an act of torture as defined in article 1 appears to have been
committed, criminal proceedinss sba1t be instituted qainst
the alleged offender or offooders in accordance with national
law. If an allegation of other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is considered to be well
founded, the alleged offender or offenders shall be subject to
criminal. disciplinary or othcr nppropriate proc:eedin,s.
31 First Uriitc·d N,1tions C1>,agrr.rs on tlt• PHw,efiolt of Crlltw
,m,I tl1e Trratmrnt o/ 06rndrrs: rrporl 61 tlt• ~
(United Nl\tions publkation, Sales No. J956JV.4), annu J.A.

92

G.meral Aasembly-Thirtieth Sea■ion

ARTICLB 11
Where it is proved that an act of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punisbment has been committed by or at the instigation of a public official, the victim
shall be afforded redress and compensation in accordance with
national law.
ARTICLB 12
Any statement which is established to have been made as a
result of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment may not be invoked as evidence against
the person concerned or against any other person in any
proceedings.

3453 (XXX). Torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment in relation to detention and imprisonment
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the rejection, in its resolutions 3059

(XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and 3218 (XXIX) of
6 November 1974 of any form of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Reiterating its conviction expressed in resolution 3218
(XXIX) ,that, because of the increase in the number of
alarming reports on torture, further and sustained efforts
are necessary to protect under ali circumstances the
basic human right to be free from torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Welcoming resolution 4 (XXVIII) adopted by the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities on 10 September 1975,32
Having cdnsidered the report of the Secretary-Gen-''
eral33 containing an analytical summary of the information received under paragraph 1 of resolution 3218
(XXIX),
Recalling its request to the Füth United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders that it consider steps to be taken far
the protection of ali persons subjected to any form of
detention or imprisonment against torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session,
Noting tbe working paper entitled "Health aspects
of avoidable maltreatment of prisoners and detainees"3• submitted by the World Healtb Organization to
the Füth United Nations Congress on the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral prepared under paragraph 4 of resolution 3218
(XXIX), 311
Taking into account that the Fiftb United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders expressed the opinion that, on the
matter of elaborating an intemational code of police
• ethics, there sbould be further expert consideration,
Having adopted the Declaration on the Protection
of Ali Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, annexed to resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Believing that further intemational efforts are needed
to ensure adequate protection for all against torture and
82 See E/CN.4/1180, chap. XXI, sect. A.
sa A/10158 and Corr.1 and Add.1.
H A/CONF.56/9.
111 A/10260.

other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Fifth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders far the elaboration of the Declaration on the Protection of all Persons from Being
Subjected to Torture and Otber Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at
its thirty-second session to study the question of torture
and any necessary steps for:
(a) Ensuring .the effeotive observance of the Declaration on the Protection of Ali Persons from Being
Subjected to Torture and Otber Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
( b) The formulation of a body of principies for the
protection of all persons under any form. ->f detention
or imprisonment on tbe basis of the Study of the Right
of Everyone to be Free from Arbitrary Arrest, Detention and Exile3 6 and the draft principies on freedom
from arbifrary arrest and detention contained therein;
3. Requests the Commit~ on Crime Prevention
and Control to elaborate, on the basis of, inter alia,
the proposals submitted to and conclusions arrived at
by the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, a draft code
of conduct for law enforcement officials and to submit
this draft code to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session, through the Comm.ission for Social Development and the Economic and Social Council;
4. Invites the World Healtb Organization to give
further attention to the study and elaboration of principies of medica! ethics relevant to the protection of
persons subjected to any form of detention or imprisonment against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punisbment;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punisbment" for the purpose of reviewing the progress
achieved in accordance with the present resolution.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3454 (XXX).

Report of the United Natione
Bigh Commiuioner for Refugeee

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Natioos.
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of

bis Office87 and baving beard bis statement,88
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the High Commissioner in carrying out his duties for those of concem
to his Office as well as the special humanitarian tasks
which he is called upon to undertake,
Reaffirming the eminently humanitarian character of
the activities of the High CommiS&oner for the benefit
of refugees and displaced persons,
as United Nations publication, Sales No. 65.xIV.2.
the General A.s.sembly, Thirtleth Seasion, Supplement No. 12 (A/10012) and Supplement No. 12A.
(A/10012/Add.1).
ss Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Third Committee, 2161st meeting,
paras. 1-10.
87 Offecial Records of
