UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/39
18 August 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3567th meeting of the Security Council, held on 18 August 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Georgia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, of 9 August 1995 (S/1995/657) pursuant
to its resolution 993 (1995).
"The Security Council notes there has been little overall progress in
achieving a comprehensive political settlement and that a stalemate exists
with respect to the return of refugees and displaced persons.
"The Security Council expresses its full support for the efforts of
the Secretary-General and those of the Russian Federation in its capacity
as facilitator aimed at achieving a comprehensive political settlement of
the conflict, including on the political status of Abkhazia, respecting
fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia.
The Council renews its call to the parties, in particular the Abkhaz side,
to reach substantive progress in the political negotiations as a matter of
urgency.
"The Security Council remains deeply concerned at the continued
obstruction of the return of the refugees and displaced persons by the
Abkhaz authorities which is totally unacceptable. Reaffirming its
resolution 993 (1995), the Council reiterates its call to the Abkhaz
authorities to accelerate the return process significantly, to guarantee
the safety of all returnees and to regularize the status of spontaneous
returnees, in accordance with internationally accepted practice and in
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.
"The Security Council welcomes the continuing close cooperation and
coordination between UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force in the
performance of their respective mandates. It reminds the parties of their

95-24311 (E)

180895

/...

S/PRST/1995/39
English
Page 2

obligations to cooperate fully with UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force
and to ensure the safety and freedom of movement of all United Nations and
CIS personnel.
"The Security Council takes note with appreciation of the decision of
the Secretary-General regarding the resident Deputy to his Special Envoy.
The Council also supports the Secretary-General’s efforts with regard to
the establishment of a human rights monitoring mission in the area. It
encourages the Secretary-General to continue his consultations with the
parties to this end."

-----
