UNITED NATIONS / NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFfiCIAL RECORDS
FOURTH YEAR

431st MEETING: iD JULY 1949

-431c-me-SEA-NC-E:-20-JUI-LL-ET-194-9- - -

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES·VEHBAUX OFFICIELS
QUATRIEME ANNEE

LAKE SUCCESS, NEW YORK

No. 34

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLES DES MATIERES

Four hundred and thirty-first meeting

Quatre 'ef'.nt trente et unieme seance
Pages

Page

1. Provisional agenda ...•..........•...

2. Adoption of the agenda
3. Announcements by the President
4. Admission of new Members (continued)

1
2
2
2

1. Ord1'e du jour 'provisoire .......•.....
2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour .•....•...
3. Communications du President •••. ;...
4. Admission de nouveaux Membres (suite)

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in monthly supplements to the OjJicial
Records.
All United Nations documents are designated by symbols, i.e., capital
letteKS combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference
to a United Nations document.
(
.

Les documents pertinents qui ne sort pas reproduits in eztenso dans le
texte des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements
mensueIs aux Proces-verbau.t: ojJieiels.
Le.~ documents des Nations Unies portent tous une cote, qui se compose
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans
un tezte signifie qu'il s'agit d'un document des Nations Unies.

1
2
2
2

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE· SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS .

PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 34

No 34

QUATRIEME ANNEE

FOUR HUNDRED AND THIRTY·FIRST
MEETING

QUATRE CENT TRENTE ET UNIEME
SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Wednesday, 20 July 1949, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York
le merc-redi 20 iuillet 1949, a 15 heu:es.

President: Mr. D. MANUILSKY
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic).

President: M. D. MANOUILSKY
(Republique socialiste' soviftique d'Ukraine).

Pr.esent: The representatives of the following
.countries : Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Nonvay, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique
d'~~ineJ Union des ~epubliques socialistes
sOVletlques, Royaume-Um, Etats-Ucis d'.Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda (SjAgendaj
431jRev.l)

L Ordre du jour provisoire
(Sj Agenda 431/Rev.l)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Admission of new Members.

2. Admission de nouveaux Membres.

(a) Letter dated 11 December 1948 from the

a) Lettre, en date du 11 decembre 1948,
Secretary-General addressed to the Presiadressee par le Secretaire general au Predent of the Security Council, transmitting
sident du COIlsd de securite, transmettant le texte des resolutions relatives a
the text of the resolutions regarding the
admission of new Members' adopted by
l'admission de not1.veau~ Membres, adopthe General Assembly at its 177th meettees par l'Assembh~e generale a sa 177eme
ingheld on 8 December 1948 (S/1170
seance, le 8 decembre 1948 (S/1170 et
and S/1170/Add.1).
.
S/1170/Add.1).
.
(b) Communications dated 22 September and
b) Communications, en date des 22 septembre
et 9 octobre 1948, adressees par le Gou9 OCtober 1948 from the Government of
vernement de la' Republique populaire de
the People's 'Republic of Bulgaria
addressed to the Secretary-General conBulgarie au Secretairegeneral et concercerning Bulgaria's application for admisnant la demande d'admission de la Bulgarie
comme Membre de l'Organisation des'Nasion to membership in the United Nations
tions Unies (S/1012 etS/1012/Add.l).
(S/1012 and S/1012/Add.l). .
(c) Communicationsdated 27 September and
c) Communications, en date des2Z"§~.ptem8 October 1948 from the Government of
bre et 8 octobre 1948, adressees par le
Hungary-addressed to the' SecretaryGc)twernementde la Hongrie au Secretaire
~neral concerning Hungary'sapplica. ,general et concernant la demanded'adtion for admission to membership in thertlission de la Hongrie comme Mernbre de
l'Organisation des' Nations Unies (S/1017
United Nations (S/1017 and S/1017/
Add.l).
et S/1017/Add.1).
. .
.
(d) Communications dated 13 October and
d) C01111nunications, en date des 13 octobre
et 2 decembre 1948, adressees par le Gou2 December 1948 from the Government
of the People's Republic of .A1bania-?-. _~-_vernement de la Republique d'Albanie au
S;cret~i~egenera~ et co~cernant la demande
addr;ssed to tJ1e Secr~tarr-General con-\
cernm~Albama's apphcatl0n for admisd admlsslOn de 1Albame comrne Membre
f i t ·

2
sion to membership in the United Nations
(S/1033 and 5/1105).
(e) Communications dated 12'and 25 October
1948 from the Government of the People's
Republic of Mongolia addressed to the
Secretary-General concerning the application of the Mongolian People's Republic for admission to membership in
the United Nations (S/1035 and S/1035/
Add.1).
(f) Communications dated 12 October and
9 November 1948 from the Government
of the People's Republic of Romania
addressed to the Secretary-General concerning Romania's application for admission to membership in the United Nations
(S/1051 and S/1051/Add.1).

de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
(S/1033 et S/1105).
B) Communications, en date des 12 et 25 octobre 1948, adressees par le Gouvernement
de la Republique populaire de Mongolie
au Secretaire general et concernant la
demande d'admission de la Republique
populaire de Mongolie ~omme Membre des
Nations Unies (S/1035 et S/1035/Add.1).

f) Communications, en date des 12 octobrfl'
et 9 novembre 1948, adressees par le Gouvernement de la Republique populaire de
Roumanie au Secretaire general et concernant la demande d'admission de la
Roumanie comme Membre des Nations
Unies (S/1051 et S/1051/Add.1).

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

2. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du iow' est adopte.

3. Announcements by the Pretilident

3. Communications du President

The PRESIDENT (translated from R1tssian):
Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe): Avant de
Before proceeding with our debate and calling faire reprendre leS debats et de donner la parole
upon the two speakers on the list, I should like aux deux orateurs qui se sont fait inscrire, je
to make an announcement to the Security Council. voudrais faire une communication au Conseil de
As President of the Council, I have received a securite. En tant que Pr-esident du Conseil j'ai
letter from the representative of the Indonesian re<;u une lettre dti representant de la Republique
Republic requesting a laissez-passer which would d'Indonesie; cel~i-ci demande qu'on lui delivre
un laissez-passer qui lui permettrait de se r~ndre
~ grant him the right to free entry into J ogjakarta
for consultations with his Government. I have a Djokjakarta pour consulter son Gouvernement.
demande au Secretariat d'entrer en rapport
asked the Secretariat to get in touch with the representative of the Netherlands Government to the a ce sujet avec le representant du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas aupres de l'Organisation des Nations
~ United ~1"ations on ·tbat matter, and arrangements
have been made to provide the Indonesian repre- 'Unies; il a ete convenu que le laissez-passer desentative with a laissez-passer for free entry into mande serait accorde. J'en informe les membres
J ogjakarta. I am bringing this to the attention du Conseil de securite.
of the members of the Security Council.
Je voudrais egalement les aviser que le MediaI should also like to advise them that a communication. dated 20 July 1949, has been received teur par interim des Nafons Unies pour la Palesfrom the United Nations Acting Mediator for tine a adresse au Conseil de securite une commuF 1estine informing us that Chi armistice has been nication, en date du 20 juillet 1949, annonc;ant
concluded between Israel and Syria. The Secre- qu'un armistice a ete conclu entre Israel et la
tariat has been instructed to circulate this docu- Syrie. J'ai demande au Secretariat de faire distriment to the members of the Security Council. buer ce dlJcument aux membres du Conseil de
securite.

rai

4. Admission of new Members
( continued)

4. Admission de nouveaux Membres
(suite) .

Mr. DE L...\ TOUR.l~ELLE (France) (translated
from French) : The French delegation has spoken
twice. recently [428th and 429th meetings], .and
I shall therefore today merely recall the fundamental principles which have always guided my
delegation since the Security Council was
entrusted with the question of the admission of
new Members in 1946.
At the 204thmeeting of the Security Council
on.25 September 1947 Mr. Parodi stated that in
his opinion two considerations were fundamental.·
The first was the principle of the universality of
the United Nations. We here should all work
toward the time when all the States of the world
will be Members of the United Nations, because
only then will the United Nations have perfeCted
its organization. A second consideration, which
is essential for the French delegation, is the place
Europe should occupy in the United Nations. At
the present time European representation is very

M. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) : La delegation
fran«;aise est intervenue a deux reprises dans les
recentes [428 et 42geme] seances, aussi me bornerai-je aujourd'hui a rappeler les principes fondamentaux dont ma delegatio,1 ne s'est jamais
ecartee depuis qu'en 1946 le Conseil de securite
a ete saisi de la question de l'admission des nouveaux Membres.
Le 25 septembre 1947, a la 204eme ~eance dll
Conseil de securite, M. Parodi a declare que les
deux considerations suivantes lui paraissaient fon'"
damentales: d'abord, celle de l'universalite de
I'Organisation des Nations Unies; nous devons
taus tendre ici vel'S le moment ou tous les Etats
du monde feront partie des NationsUnies, car ce
jour-la seulement ces dernieres auront parachev€
leur organisation. Une seconde consideration,
essentielle .pour la delegation fran«;aise, est la
place que l'Europe devrait occuper au sein de
I'Organisation des Nations ITnies. Actuellement,

II I

JJt_

- . . . I.
I

'lIli,1

r.
.
BJI• • •U L i l
t.
I.
_

...

3

small in relation to the place Europe occupies in
the general balance of the world, and it would
therefore be desirable to make all possible efforts
to achieve a more reasonable state of affairs.

en effet, eUe y est fort peu representee par rapport a la place qu'elle occupe dans l'equilibre
general du monde, et il serait desirable, en consequence, de s'efforcer d'arriver a. un etat de choses
plus conforme a. la raison.

Those considerations led the French delegation in 1947 to consilier very broadly the various
candidatures presented at that time. Consequently, France, which is not moved by any
hostility in principle towards the regimes of the
States of eastern Europe, voted in favour of the
admission of Hungary and Romania at the 206th
meeting of the Council on 1 October 1947, and
at the same time abstained where Bulgaria was
concerned, because the murder of that great Bulgarian patriot and bitter enemy of Germany,
Petkoff, weighed heavily on the conscience of the
world.

Ces considerations avaient conduit la delegation fran~aise, en 1947, a envisager d'une maniere tres large les differentes candidatures qui
etaient presentees a. cette epoque. En consequence,
la France, qui n'est inupiree par aucune hostilite
de principe a. l'egard, des regimes des Etats de
l'Europe orientale, avait vote en faveur de l'admission de la Hongrie et de la Roumanie, le
1er octobre 1947, a. la 206eme seance du Conseil,
tout en s'abstenant au sujet de la BUlgarie, le
meurtre du grand patriote bulgare, adversaire
acharne de I'Allemagne, qu'etait Petkoff pesant
sur la conscience universeUe.

Enfin, je dois rappeler qu'a. la 42geme seance
Finally, I must recall that at the 429th meeting,
the French delegation asked, in accordance with la delegation fran~aise a demande, conformement
Article 4 of the Charter, that each candidature a.l'Article 4 de la Charte, que chaque candidature
should be considered separately, because it did not £11t etudiee separement, aucune liaison ne poubelieve that any link could be established between vant etre etablie a. ses yeux entre les differentes
the various applications. It was" in fact, the deinandes. I1 est apparu, en dIet, a ma de!Cgation,
opinion of my delegation that it would be contrary qu'i1 etait contraire, aussi bien a. l'esprit qu'a. la
to the spirit and to the letter of the Charter to lettre de la Charte, de subordonner l'admission
make the admission of one State dependent on d'un Etat a. celle d'autres Etats; en outre, illui sethat of other States. However, it would now be rait impossible aujourd'hui de renouveler une apimpossible ror the French delegation again to probation de principe a. la candidature d'Etats qui,
approve in principle the candidature of States depuis 1947, n'ont malheureusement pas fait la
which, since 1947, have unfortunately not given preuve de leur capacite d'observer la Charte. Nous
proof of their ability to adhere to the Charter. sommes en effet les gardiens d'un certain nombre
We are indeed the guardians of certain principles de principes et de regles fondamentaux de droit
international et de droit public.
and basic rules of international and public law.
Le representant de l'Union sovietiQue, sans
Wit.llOut, iUs true, endeavouring to justify the
actions of certain States, the representative of the chercher, a. :vrai dire, a. justifier les aglssements
Soviet Union has merely reminded us that the de certains Etats, s'est borne a. nous rappeler
Charter forbids us to intervene in what he defined qu'il nous etait interdit par la Charte de nOllS
as questions essentially within the domestic com- immiscer dans ce qu'il a defini r '1Utle affaires
petence of a State [430th meeting]. He spoke at relevant essentiellement de la COn'lJetenCe natiosome length on that point and, wishing to refute nale d'un Etat [430eme seance]. I1 s'est etendu
the United States representative's appeal to complaisement sur ce point et, desirant refuter
Article 55 c of the Charter, which states that the l'invocation par le representant des Etats-Unis
United Nations shall promote universal respect de l'Article 55, alinea c, de la Charte, stipulant
for and observance of human rights and funda- l'obligation pour les Nations Unies de favoriser
mental freedoms for all without distinction as to le respect universe! et effectif .des droits de
race, sex, language or religion, he reminded us l'homme et des libertes fondamentales pour tous,
that at the San Francisco Conference it was sans distinction de race, de sexe, de langue ou de
decided in committee that nothing in Chapter IX religion, il nous a rappele que, lors de la confeof the Charter coud be construed as giving the .rence de San-Frandsco, il avait ete decide en
Organization authority to intervene in the domes- . commission que rien de ce qui etait contenu dans
le Chapitre IX de la Charte ne pourrait etre intertic affairs of Member States.1
prete comme donnant droit a. l'Organisation d'intervenir dans les affaires interieures des Etats'
Membres1 •
But since the San Francisco Conference, a most
important document, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, has been approved and issued by
the General Assembly on 10 December 1948.2
This is a document which, although of French
inspiration, has universal significance, and one to
which, in my opinion, the Members of the United
Nations cannot attach too much importance.

Mais, depuis la Conference de San..Francisco,
un document capital, la Declaration universelle
des droits de I'homme, a ete approuve et prodame par.!'Assemblee generale, le 10 decembre
19482 • I1 s'agit d'un document qui,bien qu'il soit
d'inspiration fran~aise, a 'une portee universelie,
et auquel, a mon avis, les Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies ne sauraient attacher
trop d'importance.

1 See Documents of the United Nations Conference on
blternational Organization, San Francisco, 1945, Volume X, Commission Il, General A:ssembly, document
823, Il/3/55,page 228.
• See Official Records of the third session of the
General Assembly, Part I, Resolutions; No. 217 (Ill).

"Voir les Documents de la Conference des Nations
Unies sur l'orgatlisation, San Francisco, 1945, Volume X,
Commission Il, Assemblee generale, document 8.23,
Il/3/55, page 245.
.
, Voir les Documents offkiels de la troisieme session
de r Assemblee gb:erale, Premiere partit, Resolutions,
No 217 (Ill).

'

......

"

,

.

4

Without exposing ourselves to the charge of
intervention in the domestic affairs of States, it is
our duty, especially when applications for admission are being considered, to determine whether
the applicants respect those human rights.
The United States representative spoke fully
on this question at our last meeting, the United
States Government not having received the
explanations which it had request,::d concerning
respect for human rights and which it was justified in demanding in view of the provisions of the
peace treaties.
However, today as yesterday, my delegation
continues to favour the broadening of the United
Nations, in particular by greater participation of
European States. It is convinced that the USSR,
if it sincerely desires the admission of those
States, is quite able to give them such advice as
may be necessary to persuade them to conform
to the principles of the Charter. The French delegation will then be able to support the admission
of those States.

Sans qu'on puisse nous reprocher de nous immiscer dans les affaires interieures des Etats, il
nous appartient, notamment lors de l'examen des
demandes d'admission, de determiner si les candidats observent le respect de ces droits.
A cette question, le representant des EtatsUnis a amplement repondu lors de notre derniere
seance, le Gouvernement des Etats-Unis n'ayant
pas obtenu les explications qu'il avait sollicitees
sur le respect des droits de l'homme et que les
dispositions des traites de paix le justifiaient a
rec1amer.
'
Toutefois ma delegation, aujourd'hui comme
hier, demeure favorable a l'elargissement de 1'01'ganisation des Nations Unies, notamment par une
participation accrue des Etats europeens. Elle est
convaincue que l'URSS, si elle desire sincerement
leur admission, a toutes qualites pour donner a
certains Etats les conseils qui s'imposent afin que
ces derniers conforment leur conduite aux prin~
cipe~ de la Charte. ElIe sera alors en mesure
d'appuyer l'admission de ces Etats.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
I have already explained to the Security Council
more than once the reasons why my Government
cannot support the applicatiom. for admission to
the United Nations of certain of the candidates
the names of which are now before us, and I
need not repeat all those arguments again. I have
, also made it clear that my Government could not
vote for a resoLution [Sj1340] such as that submitted by the delegation of the Soviet Union
which, in effect, would admit certain States to
membership on condition that certain other States
were also ad,·nitted. That, we hold to be contrary
,to the Charter, a view which has recently been
upheld by the International Court of Justice. s

I have already quoted· elsewhere, in another
connexion, an opinion of the Permanent Court of
International Justice which supports that view.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais) : J'ai deja expose plus d'une
fois au Conseil de securite les raisons pour lesquelles mon Gouvernement ne peut appuyer
les demandes d'admission dans l'Organisation des
Nations Unies de certains des candidats dont les
noms nous sont actuellement soumis, et point
'n'est besoin que je repete a nouveau les memes
arguments. J'ai aussi nettement indique que mon
Gouvernement ne saurait voter en faveur li'une
resolution teUe que celle qui a ete presentee par
la delegation de l'Union sovietique [Sj1340] et
qui reviendrait a admettre certains Etats comme
Membr. s de 1'0rganisation des Nations Dnies it.
condition que d'autres Etats soient egalement admis. C'est la, a notre sens, une attitude contraire it.
la ChC:1.rte, et la Cour internationale de Justice a
receml'J"lent confirme notre opinionS.
Je vQudrais, toutefois, dire quelques mots sur
un point particulier qui, souleve par le President
lui-meme a la derniere seance [430eme] seance,
lors de laqueUe nous aVOns discute cette question,
a ete developpe dans une certaine mesure a la
meme seance par le representant de l'Union sovietique.
Le President a dit, je crois, a cette occasion, que
le fait de ne pas respecter lesdroits fondamentaux
de l'homme releve de la politique interieure de
l'Etat interesse et que le Conseil de securite n'a
pas competence pour s'occuper de ces qilestions.
QueUe que soit la valeur de cette assertion en
tant qu'affirmation de caractere general - et je
n'ai pas a la discuter maintenant - je dois souligner, comme cela a deja ete fait au sein dti Conseil
de securite, que certains de ces Etats candidats
ont recemrnent signe des traifes de paix aux
termes desquelsils se sont formellement et expressement engages a respecter precisement ces droit$
fondamentaux et que, ce faisant" ils ont soustrait cette question du domaine de leur compe~
tence nationale et assume a son egard une obligation d'ordre international.
rai deja cite ailleurs, apropos d'une autre
affaire,, un avis de la Cour permanente de Justice
internationale qui confirme ce point de viie.

• See Admission of a State to. the United Nations
(Charter Art. 4), Advisory opinion : I.e.]. Reports,

.s Voir:. Admission d'un Etat comme Membre des
Nations Unies (Article £ 1e la Charte), Avis consul-

But there is one particular point which the
President himself raised at the last [430th meeting] at which we discussed this question, and
which was elaborated to some extent at the same
meeting by the representative of the Soviet Union,
on which I should like to say a few words.
.The President said, in effect, on that occasion,
I think, that failure to respect fundamental
li,uman rights was a matter of the internal policy
of any State, and that the Security Council had
no competence to deal with such questions. Whatever force that may have as a general proposition-and I need not argue that now-I mllst
point DUt, as has already been p?inted out here i.n
the Security Council, that certam of these apphcant States have recently signed peace treaties in
which they formaily and specifically bound themselves to respect those particular rights, and by
so doing they have removed this question from
the area of domestic jurisdiction and have, in
re5pect of that question, assumed an international
obligation.

11111""1

.

1948~1~a~:~~THu ,~om~."~ _ _~~,,,~~~;~._--:::~~=::~e:=~~_L • •

ps

5
The President, at our last meeting, again
endeavoured to parry that argument by saying
that the Security Council is not competent to deal
with international treaties. I fear I could not
subscribe here and now to that somewhat sweeping statement, but I do not propose to enter into
a detailed argument on that point because I do
not think it is necessary to ou!' purpose. The
point is-and this, I think, the President will not
deny-that we are bound by Article 4 of the
Charter to consider whether an applicant is,
among other things, willing to carry out the obligations set forth in the Charter. How are we to
reach a decision on that point? I do not know
of any other way except by examining the manner
in which an applicant' is carrying out its existing
obligations. When we find that certain of the
appl!cants now before us have violated certain
obligations which they recently solemnly undertook by an international instrument, a peace
treaty, I thirtk we are forced to one conclusion
and to one conclusion 011ly; that is the view of
my Government, which I have had the honour
to express, and my Government is unable to
depart from it.

A notre dil:rniere seance, le President s'est a
nouveau efforce de refuter cet argument en disant
que le Conseil de securite n'etait pas competent
en matiere de traites internationaux. Je ne sat1rais, je le crains, souscrire id a cette Mclaration
d'une portee par trop generale, mais je n'ai pas
l'intention de discuter ce point en detail, car je
ne pense pas que cela soit utile a notre argumentation. 11 est un fait que le President, je presume,
ne voudra pas contester: c'est que, aux termes
de l'Article 4 de la Charte, nous sommes tenus
d'examiner, entre autres choses, si le .:&udidat
est dispose a execilter les obligations enoncees
dans la Charte. Comment nous former une opinion 'sur ce point? Je ne vois pas d'autre moyen
d'y parvenir que d'examiner la fa~on dont le
candidat execute ses obligations actuelles. Lorsque
nous constatons que tels candidats dont nous
etudions presentement le cas ont viole certaines
obligations qu'ils avaient solennellement assume.es,
il y a peu de temps, en vertu d'un instrument
international, d'un traite de paix, je pense qu'une
conclusion s'impose a nous et qu'il ne saurait y
en avoir d'autre; telle est la position de mon
Gouvernement que j'ai eu l'honneur d'exposer et
dont mon Gouvemement nepeut se departir.

M. TSARAPKINE (Union des Republiques sociaMr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : I should listes sovietiques) (trad2tit du russe) : Je voulike to comment very briefly on the speeches of drais m'arreter tres brieyement sur les declarathe French and United Kingdom representatives. tions des representants de la France et du
They have expatiated on human rights, the French 'Royaume-Uni, qui viennent de ressasser au
representative even going so far as to say that Conseil la question des droits de 1'homme. Le
he would place the Universal Declaration of representant de la France est meme alle jusqu'a
Human Rights, adopted last December, before dire que la Declaration universelle des droits de
the United Nations Charter. This is a new point l'homme, adoptee en decembre dernier, primait,
. of view which we had not heard here before, a son avis, la Charte des Nations Unies. C'est la
and with which it is hardly likely that any premiere fois que le Conseil entend cette declaration· inedite, a laquelle aucun des Membres de
Member of the United Nations will agree.
I'Organisatio~ ne saurait se rallier.
Toutefois, je voudrais parler d'une autre quesI should like, however, to mention another
matter. Certain members of the Security Council tion. QueIques membres du Conseil de securite
have tried persistently to present the question in ont cherche, avec insistance, a faire eroire que
such a way as to imply that human rights are des violations des droits de I'homme auraient ete
being violated. The members who say that commises. 11 faudrait preciser quels sont les droits
human rights are being violated should explain de 1'homme que 1'on viole ainsi et cequ'entendent
what human rights they are referring to, and par la ces representants.
what they mean by violation of human rights.
They allude to the court sentences passed in
Us font allusion aux arrets qu'on a rendus, en
Bulgaria and Hungary on conspirators, criminals Bulgarie et en Hongrie, contre des conspirateurs,
who had connexions with foreign agents for des criminels, des personnes coupabies d'entrethe purpose of overthrowing the existing regime tenir des relations avec des agents de l'etranger
in those countries I must state that this has et de comploter en vue de renverser les regimes •
nothing to do with human rights, and those who etablis dans ces pays. Je dois dire que tout cela
are attempting here to juggle with "human rights" n'a rien de commun avec les droitsde l'homme;
wish to extend the concept of human rights to ceux qui essaient de jongler avec les mots "droits
cover common criminals.
de l'homme" desirent appliquer cette notion aux
criminels de droit comtnun.
Les circonstances dont il s'agit sont bien conWe are all familiar with the facts which were
discussed in detail at the last General Assembly, nues de tous puisqu'elles ont deja fait l'objet
and are aware that they concerned the trials of d'une discussion detaillee a la derniere session de
the criminals in Bulgaria and Hungary. How do l'Assemblee generale; tout le mande sait .qu'il
"human rights" come into the matter? They are s'agissait de proces infentes a des criminels en
artificially dragged in as a pretext for thus pre- BuIgarieet en Hongrie. Pourquoi parler a ce proventing tpe admission to the United-Nations of pos de "droit5 del'homine"? On les invoqt:e
the. peoples' democracies. One pretext' after d'une fac;onartificielle, afin de creel' un pretexte
another is utilized to attain that goal.
et d'empecher, par la meme. l'admission dans
I'Organisation des Nations Unies des pays de la
democratie' populaire. En vue deparvenir a' ce
bu~, on a forge pretexte sur pretexte. '
, We all know that the pretext first used iti the 'On sait que, pou.r empecher l"adrriis~io'tl darts
illt>se of ~1~~:i~:-~,:.a:~~~.~.:-t,
...~""e_M_,_~,_~_-_ ...I'...O_r""g....a...n...is...a...t1...
· o...n_d...e...s_N
...a...t...·i o...n...s _U
.....rt...ie...s _d..e-.l'.A
.....I.b..
.. a:..
'tl...
ie...,__....I

6

,

go!iartPeople's Republic ahd Romania was the
general' accusation that they did not comply with
the Charter of the United Nations. Then the
well-known incident of the Corfu Channel was
put forward as an excuse for refusing Albania
admission to membership in the United Nations.
Then the pretext of the Greek partisans was
advanced. Then the pretext of human rights was
put forward to bring pressure to bear on the
Governments of those countries to change their
policy and to force them to renounce the measures
taken by every Government in every country in
regard to conspirators and persons who have committed crimes and broken the laws of their own
countries.

de la Bulgarie, de la Hongrie, de la Republique
populaire de Mongolie et de la Roumanie, on a
porte tout d'abord des accusations d'ordre general
en pretendant que l'attitude de ces pays n'etait
pas conforme aux dispositions de la Charte. Puis
on a invoque, dans le cas de l'Albanie, la fameuse
affaire du detroit de Corfou pour empecher l'adnlission de ce pays dans l'Organisationdes Nations Unies. Ensuite, on a eu recours a un argument concernant 1'aide aux partisans grecs. Enfin,
on a mis en avant la question des droits de
l'homme; on voulait utiliser ce pretexte pour
exercer un~ pression sur les Gouvernements de
ces pays, afin de les obliger a modifier leur poIitique et a renoncer aux mesures que prend tout
gouvernement, tout Etat a l'egard de conspirateurs, a l'egard de personnes ayant enfreint la loi
et commis des crimes dans leur propre pays.

The artificiality of these pretexts, their groundlessness and worthlessness, have been exposed
more than once in the General Assembly as well
as in the Security Council. Nevertheless, these
pretexts are still being put forward. But as I
indicated in my last statement [430th meeting],
the reason is not that the said peoples' democracies
are violating human rights." Everybody knows
that the constitutions of those. countries are
among the most advanced in the world, that they
provide for freedom to work, protection of the
person, democratic freedoms, etc. which are lacking in many other countries which are Members
of the United Nations.
'

Tant a l'Assembltle qu'au Conseil de securite,
on a demontre plus d'une fois que ces pretextes
etaient entierement artificiels, qu'ils etaient injustifies et denues de tout fondement. Cependant,
on continue ales faire valoir. Comme je l'ai deja
indique dans ma derniere declaration [430eme
seance], on sait [que les pays de la democratie
populaire que je viens d'enumerer n'ont nuUe- .
ment viole les droits de I'holllme; Tout le monde
sait que les constitutions de ces pays sont parmi
les plus liberales dumonde, qu'eIles garantissent
la liberte du travail, la protection de la personne
humaine, les libertes democratiques, etc. qui font
dMaut dans nombre d'Etats Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

As regards the Mongolian People's Republic,
it was certainly difficult to accuse that country of
helping the Greek partisans. Another preteXt was
then put forward: the question was raised whether
the Mongolian People's Republic was in fact a
State at all.

Pour ce qui est de la Republique populaire de
Mongolie, it etait evidemment difficile de l'accuser d'aider les partisans grecs. On a done invoque
un autre pretexte en soulevant la question de
savoir si la Republique populaire de Mongolie
constituait bien un Etat.
Je pourrais citera ce sujet de ncmbrettx documents, -de nombreux 'ouvrages, parus aux EtatsUnis, au .Royaume-Uni et dans n'importe quel
autre pays, pour prouver que la Republique populaire de Mongolie est bien un Etat, qu'elle possede
un territoire, qu'eUe a une population, un Gouvernement central, une constitution, des tribunaux et tous les attributs qui caracterisent un
Etat. Il ne s'agit done pas de contester que la
.Republique populaire de Mongolie est un Etat.
Sil'on met cc fait en doute, c'est parce que 1'0n
desire empecher l'admissiondes'pays de la democratie populaire dans 1'0rganisation des Nations
Unies.

In this connexion I could quote numerous
documents, publications which have appeared in
the United States, the United Kingdom and elsewhere, to prove that the Mongolian People's Republic is a State with its own territory, population, central government and constitution, its own
law courts and all the institutions which go to
make up a State. What is at stake, therefore, is
not doubt as to whether the Mongolian People's
Republic is a State, but the intention to keep the
peoples' .democracies, which have .applied for
membership, out of the United Nations.

These obstacles which are being placed in their
path arise from the political schemes to which I
referred in my previous speech. Thatis the only
way in which they can be explained, as none of
the speeches we have heard in the Council from
members opposed to the admission of those countries has shown that these countries do not qualify
for membership in, the United Nations. On the
contrary, they are peoples' democracies. These
c01111fries-for examPle, Albania and the Mongolian People's Republic-took part on the side {)f
the. Allies m their struggle against the common
enemy in the Second World War. Such countries
as Bulgaria. Hungary and Romania cast off the
yoke of fascist regimes in their countries, became
democracies and played an active part in the fight
for peace and democracy. That is a true descrip-

~ of th~ events. I J

11";;

Ces' obstaCles qu'on leur oppose sont dus· a des
ca1culs politiques dont j'ai dejapade dans ma
declaration precedente. C'est seulem{::ntainsi qu'on
peut les expliquer; en .dfet. at~cune des dec1arations qu'ont faites au Consen ceux qui s'opposent a l'admission de ces pays n'a etabli qu'ils
n'etaient pas qualifies pour etre adtnis dans 1'01'ganisation. Bien au contrai,e, ces Etats sont des
pays de la democratie populaire. Pendant la derniere guerre mondiale, l'Albanie et la. Republique
populaire de Mongolie ont combattu, aux. cotes
des Allies, contre l'ennemi commun. Quant a la
Bulgarie, la Hongrie et la Roumanie, elles ont
secoue le joug des regimes fasdstes et sontdevenues des pays democratiques qui ont lutte activement pour la paix et la democratie. Void quelle
est la situation veritable.

m!lIJU_""!IIIt!_AfJ!U.kLAJ.~~!M!!!'~!!f~U1iQtgilllllllllll

7
The objections raised here against these coun- I Quant aux objections artificielles qu'on a fait
tries are artificial and are mere~y a cover for the I valoir au Conseil eontre ces pays, eUes visent
unwillingness of the United States and other coun- • simplement a camoufler le desir qU'ont les Etatstries which support it to admit Albania, Bulgaria, Unis, et certains autres pays qui les soutiennent,
Hungary, the Mongolian People's Republic and de s'opposer aux candidatures de l'Albanie, de la
Romania to membership in the Organization, as Bulgarie, -de la Hongrie, de la Republique poputhe admission of those countries would not fit in laire de Mongolie et de la. Roumanie. dont.l'admission dans l'Org:..nisation ne serait pas conwith their political calculations.
forme a. leurs caleuls. politiques.
In the. circumstances it is obvious that a policy
Cela montre c1airement que 1'on continue a
of discrimination is being practised against the pratique!" une politique de discrimination a.1'egard
peoples' democracies, and as long as this policy des pays de la democratie populaire. Bien entendu,
continues, it will naturally be impossible to reach i1 est impossible, dans ces conditions, d'arriver
agreement on this subject. Thus the admission of a. un accord sur cette question. Ainsi, la questhe twelve countries to the United Nations has tion de l'admission de douze paysdans 1'0rgaagain been blocked. I should like to emphasize nisation des Nations Unies en est une fois de plus
that, in the view of the delegation of the Soviet aupoint mort. Je dois souligner que, selon la
Union, the responsibility for this state of affairs delegation de 1'Union sovietique, la responsabilite
falls on the United States, the United Kingdom, de cette situation incombe aux Etats-Unis, au
France and the other countries which support Royaume-Uni et a. la France, ainsi qu'aux autres
Etats qui les soutiennent
them.
The PRESIDENT (translated fro'm Russian):
Le PRESIDENT (tradttit du 1"z£sse) : It n'y a plus
Are there no more speakers on the list?
d'orateur inscrit?
As representative of the UKRAINIAN SOVIET
Je me permettrai, en tant que representant de la
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, I should like to comment REPUBLIQUE SOCIALISTE SOVItTIQUE D'UKRAINE,
briefly on the French representative's speech. I . de faire une breve observation a. propos de la
shall .speak in French as I am anxious .that dec1arationdu representant de la France. Je parMr. de la Tournelle should under.stand me.
lerai en fran<;ais, car je voudrais que M. de la
.
Tournelle me comprenne.
The 'representative of the Ukrainian Soviet
Le representant de la· Republique socialiste
Socialist Republic continued in French.
sovietique d'Ukraine poursuit en franfais.
If we take the road to amendment of the proviSi nous nousengageons dans la voie qui consissions of the Charter in accordance with the Uni- terait a. modifier les dispositions de la Charte
versal Declaration of Human Rights, I am afraid d'apres la Declaration universelle des droits de'
that we might open a debate in which therepre.. i'hoinme, je trains que nous n'ouvrions une dissentative of France would be completely in the cussion dont le representant de la France va
wrong and would suffer all the injury.
supporter tous les torts et tout le dolti!nage.
In the first place, in view of the French repreOn peut d'abord se demander si, en raison de
sentative's proposal, the quest?()O arises whether la proposition que le representant de la France
it would not be permissible to ask certain ques- nous a faite, i1 ne serait pas loisible de poser certions which have not hitherto been raised.
taines questions qui n'ont pas ete soulevees jusqu'a present.
. For instance, is the Charter applicable or not
Par exemple, e~t-ce que la Charte est applicable
to Viet Nam, in the relations between that coun- ou non au Viet-Nam, dans les rapports entre la
try and France? In view of Mr. de la Tournelle's France et ce pays? Je crois que, apres 1'interintervention I think that we can well ask that vention de M. de la TourneUe, nous pouvons tres
question and discuss whether elementary human bien poser cette question et diseuter du point de
rights are being respected in Viet Nam..
savoir si les droits elementaires de l'hoinme sont
. observes au Viet-Nam.
Moreover, by ignoring the provisions of
D'aut,e put, avec cette methode. qui consisArticle 40f the Charter and giving first place to . terait. a. passer outre aux· dispositions de l'Arthe Universal Declaration of Human Rights, I ticle 4 de la Charte et a. mettre maintenant en
fear that we may again be involved in discussions premiere ligne la Declaration universel1e des
which might 'appear sterile to some, but which droits de 1'homme, je crains que nous n'engagions
would be of considerable significance. For in- encore des discussions qui pourront peut-etre
stance, do· we' not know of· certain great countries sembler steriles a certains, mais qui auront
where the rights of certain populations are -Vio- beaucoupde sens. Par exemple, est-ce que nous
lated and where certain opinions considered dan- ne connaissons. pas certains grands pays ou ·les
gerous. are being fought, as was formerly the case droits de certaines populations sont violes et ou
in Japan? Can it be said that such a situation is la lutte est engageecontrecertaines formes de
in conformity with the spirit of human rights? pensee considerees comtnedangereuses,· eomme
c'etait autrefois le cas au Japon? Est-eequ'on
peut dire que cela reponde a. 1'esprit des droits de
l'homme?
..
That·· is the kind of argument and the kind of
Voila. .a. que1s raisonnements, a. quels resultats
result at which we may arrive if we take the nous pouvons arriver, si nous nous pla«;ons sur
position which Mr. de la Tournelle has taken i le terrain ou M. de la Toumelle s'est place luiand Ido not think that those who wish to invoke meme, et je ne crois pas que, dans cette discussion,
Universal Declaration of Human Rights in eeux qui veulent invoquer la Declaration univer-

;
teethe

8
this discussion can do so to their advantage.
Indeed, we can bring many clear proofs of the
fact that, in spite of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, those human rights
are not respected in many countries.
In order not to prolong the discussion, I shall
make only this observation in my capacity as
representative of the Ukrainian SSR.

selle des droits de l'homme puissent en tirer UiJ
avantage; nous pouvonsen effet, apporter id
de nombreuses preuves evidentes du fait que;
malgre l'adoption de la Declaration universelle
des droits de l'homme, ces droits de l'homme ne
sont pas observes dans beaucoup de pays.
Pour ne pas engager plus loin la discussion, je
me borne, en ma qualite de representant de la
RSS d'Ukraine, a cette remarque.

Mr. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) (translated
from French) : I must apologize to the President
for not being able to reply to him in his language,
and I thank him for having spoken in French.
He has referred to the situation in Viet N"am.
To my knowledge, journalists and foreign diplomats may at this time move about Viet Nam and
observe what is happening there, but I do not
think that those same joumalists and diplomats
can travel in certain parts of Russia and let us
know whether or not human rights are being
:respected there.

M. DE LA TOURNELLE (France): Je m'excuse
aupres du President de ne pas pouvoir lui repondre dans sa langue et je le remercie de s'etre
exprime en franc;ais.
Il a bien voulu faire allusion a la situation
qui regne au Viet-Nam. A ma connaissance, les
journalistes et les diplomates etrangers .peuvent
en ce moment circuler clans le Viet-Nam et rendre
compte de ce qui s'y passe mais je ne crois pas
que ces memes journalistes et diplomates puissent
circuler dans certaines parties de la Russie et nous
faire savoir si les droits de l'homme y sont ou
non respectes.
.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I should not like to prolong this little discussion
with Mr. de la Toumelle, and consider his statement an invitation for me to visit Viet Nam. I
am closing the discussion and going on to the
agenda.

Le PREsIDENT: Je ne voudrais pas prolonger
ce petit debat avec M. de la T9urnelle et considerer sa declaration comme urie invitation a me
rendre au Viet-Nam. J e"cesse cette discussion
et passe a l'ordre du jour.

The 'Presid~nt continued in Russian.
The Council has two proposals before it.
The Argentinian proposal4 calls for the admission of seven countries, namely Austria, Ceylon,
Finland, Ireland, Italy, Jordan and Portugal; at
the same time this draft resc1ution excludes the
othe.r five countries, namely Albania, Bulgaria,
Hungary, the Mongolian People's Republic and
Romania.
.
On the other hand, the Security Council has
before it the USSR proposal set forth in the draft
resolution [5/1340] which calls for the acceptance
of all twelve States, namely Albania, Austria,
Bulgaria, Ceylon, Finland, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Jordan, the Mongolian People's Republic,
Portugal and Romania.
These are the two proposals which are now
before the Council. The Argentinianproposal has
been presented not as one draft resolution, but as
seven draft resolut~\.'1S, one for each State. .
Before proceeding to the vote I should like to
point out to the Security Council that at our last
meeting, on 24 June, my predecessor, Mr. Sunde,
raised the question whether a resolution on this
subject should. be adopted at all at this time. It
was not his view as President, and was, besides,
a "suggestion" and not a "proposal". Following
this statement, if I remember rightly, Mr. Austin
said that he would not insist on a vote if no other
representative did so..

Le President poursuit en rwsse:
Le Conseil de securite est saisi de deux propositions:
. I1 y a d'abord la proposition soumise par la
delegation de l'Argentine 4 qui demande d'admettre
a 1'0rganisation les sept Etats suivants: l'Autriche, Ceylan,' la Finlande, l'IrIande, l'Italie, la
Jordanie et le Portugal; par la meme ce projet
exc1utcinq autres Etats, a savoir: l'Albanie, la
Bulgarie, la Hongrie, la Republique populaire
de Mongolie et la Roumanie.
:c 'autre part, le Conseil est saisi· de la proposition de 1'URSS contenue dans un projet de
resolution [5/1340] qui demande d'<cdmettre en
bloc les douze Etats suivants, a savoir: l'Abanie,
1'Autriche, la Bulgarie, Ceylan, la Finlande, la
Hongrie, l'IrIande, l'Italie, la Jordanie, la Republique populaire de Mongolie, le Portugal et la
Roumanie.
Tels sont les deux propositions que le Conseil
doit examiner maintenant. Je precise que l' Argentine a presente sa proposition, non pas sous forme
d'un seul projet de resolution, mais sous forme
de sept projets de resolution distincts, un pour
chaque pays.
Avant de faire proceder au vote, je tiens a rappeler au Conseil de securite que, lors de la df'rniere seance qui s'est tenue le 24 juin, mon predecesseur, M. Sunde, s'est demande s'il fal1ait:~
vraiment adopter maintenant une resolution a ce
sujet.' Ce n'etait pas une proposition qu'it emettait en tant que President, mais Ut:ie simple suggestion; il a annoncequ'il n'insisterait pas p01;1r
que ces projets de resolution soient mis aux VOIX
si "aucun autre representant n'en faisait la
demande.

9
Such is the situation which has developed.
Before voting on the draft resolutions I should
therefore like to settle first the question whether
the Council should take a vote on the two drafts
or as was suggested by the Norwegian representative and apparently supported by the Argentine
representative and the representatives of certain
other countries, not vote at all. "

Telle est la situation qui s'est creee. Aussi,
avant de mettre aux voix ces projets de resolution,
je voudrais regIe!', au prealable, la question suivante: Le Conseil doit-il voter sur ces deux projets, ou bien doit-it s'en abstenir, conformement
aux considerations exposees par le representant
de h Norvege, considerations que les representants de l' Argentine et de certains autres pays
semblent avoir soutenues.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt) : The President
has just posed the question of whether it is
necessary for the Security Council to vote on this
matter. It has been clear for some time that it
would be futile and, in the view of my delegation,
even unwise to press for a vote under circumstances known to all of us and regarding which,
on behalf of my delegation, I have previot!sly
spoken at great length [429th meeting].

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l'anglais): Le President vient de demander s'il
est necessaire que le Conseilde securite emetteun
vote sur cettc question. Il est evident,' depuis un
certain temps deja, qu'il serait vain et meme,
du point de vue de ma delegation, peu sage d'insister pour qu'un vote ait lieu, vu les circonstances que nous connaissons tous et au sujet desquelles fai deja longuement p::;,rle au nom de ma
delegation [42geme seance].
Je ne voudrais pas abuser du temps du Conseil
en repetant les raisons pour lesquelles nous
avons. estime qu'il serait peu sage et inutile de
proceder a un vote. Nous continuons a croire
qu'iI n'esf ni necessaire, ni sage, ni utile que ce
vote ait lieu maintenant. Ce n'est pas la consideration d'un interet particulier a 1'Egypte qui
me fait parter ainsi; je n'ai en vue que le prestige,
l'efficacite et la dignite de notre tache au Conseil
de securite.
Je crois done conforme au sentiment du Conseil,
exprime non seulement par la delegation egyptienne mais egalement par celles de plusieurs
autres pays, de ne pas voter, dans la phase actuelIe des debats, et vu les circonstances, s1,1r les
projets de resolution dont nous sommes saisis..

I do not want to take too much of the Council's
time to repeat the reasons for which we considered it unwise and useless to press for a vote.
We still believe that it is not necessary, wise or
usefcl to press for a vote now. I am not saying
this on the basis of any particular Egyptian interest: I am speaking with regard to the prestige,
the usefulness and the dignity of our work in the
Security Council.
I therefore believe that it is in conformity with
the sense of the Council, as expressed not only
by the Egyptian delegation but by several others,
that we do not, at the present stage and under the
present circumstances, vote on the draft resolutions now before us.
Mr. MUNOZ (Argentina) (translated from
Spa.nish): In the first place, I wish to explain
that the seven draft resolutions submitted by my
delegation were not intended to prevent the five
States not mentioned in those resolutions from
being admitted; the purpose the Argentine delegation had in mind was directly' connected with
our thesis, which can be summed up by saying
that the veto is not applicable in cases of admission of new Members. Unfortunately, our view
has not so far been supported by the majority of
members of the Council. Therefore, alth9ugh we
accept the opinion of the maj ority, we must
reserve our position for the future, and as we
believe that our view is well founded, we shall
continue to fight for it, In doing so, we are not
guided by any personal interest nor by the desire
to disturb anyone, but merely by the desire to see
established what we believe to be a correct interpretation of the Charter, and one necessary to the
smooth functioning of the Organization.

M. MUNOZ (Argentine) (trlLduit de l'espagnol) :

Je tiens a expliquer tout d'abord qu~ les sept

projets de resolution presentes par ma delegation
ne visent pas a faire obstacle a 1'admission des
cinq Etats qui ne s'y trouvent pas mentionnes;
l'intention qui a inspire la delegation de l'Argentine se rattache directement a notre these dont
l'idee directrice est que le veto n'est pas applicable lorsqu'il s'agit de 1'admission de nouveaux
Membres. Malheureilsement, la majorite des
membres du Conseil de securite ne s'est pas, jusqu'a present, ralIie it. notre these; c'est pourquoi,
bi~n que nous nous soumettions a l'opinionde la
majorite, nous devons reserver. notre position
pour 1'avenir. Nous estimons, en dIet, que notre
these est solidement fondee; aussi continueronsnous a lutter pour la faire triompher, sans etre
guides en. cela par aucun interet personnel ni par
le desir d'importuner qui que ce soit, mais sUn"'
plement par ceque nOtls voulons que soit bien
etablie ce que nom; croyons etre une interpretation
correcte de la Charte, necessaire au bon fonction.;.
nernent de I'Organisation.
In regard to the question of procedure which
Ence qui concerne la question de procedure qui
was raised at the end of the debate on the matter s'est posee ala fin des debats portant silr ce sujet
[429th meeting], I must repeat what I said on a [42gemcseance], je dois repeter ce que fai deja
former oc<:asion [429th meeting] to the effect that dit a une occasion precedente [42geme seance],
we shall not oppose a postponement of the vote a savoir que nous ne nous opposerons pas a 'un
on the draft resolutions before the Council, in ajournement du vote sur les projets de resolution
order to see whether in the meantime some agree- soumis a l'examen du Conseil, afin de voir s'il
ment can be reached which will enable us to make. est possible d'artiver, dans l'intervalle, a quelque
SOme progress and not to remain deadlocked, as accord qui permettrait au Conseil de faire un
we have been for a long time. in the matter of the pas en avant, .en ce qui c0tlcerne la question de
admission of various countries, many of which l'admission de divers pays, au lieu de marquer le

~~:~:'=~:::.:=~;~:.~.~::~~o~~ .I:,~:::;/~~;r~a:m:=~r=~; .c~;tL~~s

10
that reason that I agree with what my Egyptian de ces pays peuvent faire valoir, en faveur de lenr
colleague has just said, provided that it be under~ admission, nombre d'arguments favorables. C'est
stood that the matter shall not be considered as pourquoi, j'accepte la proposition que vient ~~
settled at this time, but shall be taken up again faire mon collegue de l'Egypte, etant bien entendu
later, possibly when the General Assembly begins que la question ne s~ra pas consideree comme
ts session in September, or shortly before the reglee, mais sera reexaminee a une date ulterieure
session begins, in order to see whether the Council si possible en septewbre, un peu avant le debut
has been able to reach some solution which will de la session de l'Assemblee generale, afin de voir
make some progress possible in the matter. If si dans l'intervalle, les debats du Conseil lui
such is not the Council's intention and if it is auront permis de faire tout au moins un pas en
decided that the matter shall be settled today, I avant dans cette affaire. Si telle n'est pas l'intenmust make it clear that I shall insist that each of tion du Conseil de securite, je dois dire sans
the draft resolutions submitted shall be. voted equivoque que, si 1'0n desire en terminer avec
upon. \Ve believe that that is the only way to cette question auj ourd'hui meme, j'insisterai pour
comply with the Assembly's recommendation to que chacun des projets de resolution presentes
the Security Council,li and the Assembly deserves sait mis awe v0ix, car notre delegation estime que
full consideration from this organ of the United c'est la la seule
niere de donner effet a la recornmandation faite par l'Assemblee au Conseil de
Nations.
securiteli ; or, les decisions de l'Assemblee doivent
recevoir de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
toute l'attention qu'elles meritent.
j

The PRESIDENT (t-ranslated from Russia,,):
It must now be ascertained whether any member
of the Security Council insists on a vote being
taken todav on the two draft resolutions which
are before th( Council. I should point out
here that if no decision is reached before the
General Assembly meets, the report will so indicate; it will set forth the two points of view and
will state that those representing the two tenden~
cies within th~ Security Council have not reached
an agreement, and that each of the groups main~
tains its position.
W<:lUld any membe:; of the Security Council
like a vote to be taken now on the two draft
resolutions?

Le PRESIDENT (trtuluit du russe) : It s'agitde
determiner maintenant si l'ut< des membres du
Conseil de securite insiste pour que les deux projets de resolution dont le Conseit est saisi soient
aux voix aujourd'hui. Je dois preciser que, si le
Conseil ne prend pas de decision avant la prochaine
session de l'Assemblee generate, le rapport er:
fera mention; il exposera les deux points de vue
et constatera que les representants des deux tendances qui se sont manifestees au Conseil ne se
scnt pas mis d'accord, et que chacun des deux
groupes maintient sa position.
L'un des memhres du Conseil de securite desiret-it que les deux projets de resolution soient mis
aux voix?

MT. MUNOZ (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish) : Am I to understand that the Council's
draft report to the Assembly will not be decided
upon today but will be left for consideration at a
meeting which will take place at t.t,.e beginning
of September? Is that ~he President's decision?

M. MUNOZ (Argentine) (traduit de l'espagnol):
Dois-je comprendre que le projet de rapport du
Conseil de securite a l'Assemblee ne fera pas
I'ohjet,d'une decision aujourd'hui, mais que cette
decision sera prise au cours d'une seance qui se
tiendrait au debut de septembre? Est-ce bien lii
la position adoptee par le President?

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
That obviously depends on the time when the
q~estion is settled. If it is settle~_ before the
drafting of the· report, the report WIll of course
mention it. But if it is not settled, the report will
also mention that.

Le PRESIDENT: Cela depend evidemment du
moment auquella question sera reglee. Si eUe est
reglee avant la redaction du rapport, ce1ui-ci en
fera evidemrnent mention: mais si e1le n'est pas
reglee, il le mentionnera egalement.

Mr. MUNOZ (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish) : In that case, as' I have some doubt in
regard to the preparation and final presentation
of the report to the Assembly, I formally propose
that the decision concerning this step be postponed
until a dat~ to be fix:.'~ later, in the month of
September.

M. MUNOZ (Argentine) (traduit de l'espagnol):
En ce cas, l'opinion n'etant pas unanime en ce qui
concerne la redaction et la presentation definitive
du rapport a I'Assemblee, je propose formellement que la decision correspondante soit remise
.a une date du mois de septembre qui sera fixee
ulterieurement.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
I should like to ask a question, on the answer to
which will depend my attitude on whether or not
I shall insist'on a. vote. Why should the vote be
postponed until the beginning of September?
Why has this date been chosen? Cou1d that be
explained? Is it being done so that the vote may
be taken immediately before the General Assembly's se.ssion opens, thus leading to another veto
• See Official Records of· the third session 01 the
Gmeral Assembly, Parll, Resolutions, No. 197 (Ill).

Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : Je voudrais,

a. mon tour, poser une question; la reponse qui lui

sera donnee determinera mon attitude et me permettra de decider s'il y a lieu ou non de faire
proceder a un vote. Pourquoi veut-on ajourner
le vote jusqu'au debut de septembre? Pourquoi
choisit-on cette date? Je voudrais qu'on me
l'explique. Est-ce pour proceder a UIl vote a
la veille de l'ouverture de la session de l'As'Voir Ies Documents officiels de la troisieme se~siOlI
de l'AssemblCe generale, Prem.;re partie, ResolutIons,
No 197 (HI).

' ~mblee generale et recommenc.er ainsi la maprocedure, or is it to achieve a pf>?jti.; "JhA.i.
of the question as suggested by the J SS);; JIf!e~ { noouvre du veto, ou bien est-ce pour donuer
gation? I should like an answer ~, thi~ ,')elore au probleme une solution positive, comme le
propose la delegation de l'URSS? Avant de
taking a decision.
prendre une decision, je voudrais qu'll soit repondu a. cette question.

Mr. MUNOZ (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish): As I am to some extent responsible
for this discussion, I must explain that the purpose of my suggestion was not to propose any
solution, but merely to postpone the vote until a
date nearer that of the opening of the Geneml
Assembly session. If a solution has been reached
long before that date, or if the Council decides
to vote on the matter before that time, uf course
thJ Council has the right to do so. The sole purpose of my proposal is that the Council should
wait a certain time in order to show that, be"fore
replying to the Assembly that the situation has
not chavged, it has waited as long as possible
before the date of the next session of the
Assembly; however, it is understood that the
Council may meet before then, to vote or to take
some other decision,

M. MUNOZ (Argentine) (traduit de 1'espagnol}:
Etant donne que j'ai, dans une certaine mesure,
provoque cette discussion, je dois preciser que ma
suggestion ne visait nullement a. proposer une
solution quelconque, mais seulement a. faire reporter le vote it une date plus rapprochee de celle de
l'ouverture de la session de l'Assemblee. Si, bien
avant cette derniere date, on parvient a une solution, ou si le Conseil decide de proceder cl ce vote
auparavant, il a, bien entendu, qualite pour le
faire. Le but de ma proposition etait uniquement
d'attendre un certain temps pour montrer que,
avant de repondre it I'Assemblee que la situation
n'a subi aucun changement, le Conseil a pris tout
le temps dont il pouvait disposer jusqu'au moment de la reunionde I'Assemblee; cependant,
le Conseil de securite peut, bien entendu, se reunir avant pour voter ou adopter que1que autre
solution.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypt): I think that,
in order to be practical, we must look at this
matter from anothtr angle. It is customary that,
about this time of th~ year, the Security Council
begins to consider the report it intends to present
to the General Assembly. Possibly we may have
the draft report within a few days. This report
usually includes an item concerning applications
for membership in the United Nations.

Mahmoud FAWZI Bey (Egypte) (traduit de
l' anglais) : Je pense que, pour nous placer sw.: un
terrain pratique, nous devrions envisager cette
question sous un angle tout different. C' est generalement vers cette epoque de l'annee que le Conseil de securite commence a. examiner le rapport
qu'il doit soumettre a. l'Assemblee generale. I1
est possible que le projet de rapport nous soit
distribue dans quelques jours. Ce rapport comporte habitue1lement un chapitre relatif aux. demandes d'admission a. l'Organisation des Nations
Unies.
Je me permets de suggerer que nous suivions la
procedure normale, c'est-a.-dire que, quand le moment sera venu pour le Conseil de securite cl'examiner le projet de rapport, nous nous acquittions
de notre tache de la falSO;;l habituelle, sans retard
injustifie, que nous ne fassions,rien pour entraver
la marche normale de nos trnvaux et que nous
laissions le rapport refIeter la situation reeUe du
moment, Si un accord quelconque intervient posterieurement ul'examen da rapport du Conseil de
securite, un rappOlt additionne1 pourra etre etabii
sous forme de document separe et soumis a. l'Asseinblee generule. Le Secretariat est peut-etreen
mesure de nous indiquer a, quelle date le projet
de rapport it l'Assembtee generale serapret.

May I' suggest that we follow the normal
course, namely: that at the proper time, when the
draft report is being considered by the Security
Council, we go ahead as usual and not delay unduly, that we do not hamper the normal progress
of our business, but let the report go through as
the situation stands at the moment. If anything
is agreed upon after considering the report of
the Security Councit an additional report can be
made as a separate document to be presented to
the General Assembly. Perhaps the Secretariat
can indicate to us at what date the draft report
to the General Assembly will be ready.

The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
Le PRESIDENT (traduit du russe) : Le SecretaI have just been informed by the Secretariat that riat vient de m'informer que le rapport annuel sera
the annual report will be circulated in a week's distribue dans une huitahie de· j ours. Certes, le
time. The Security Council may, of course, submit Conseil de securite a le droit de soumettre egaleanother special report on this question-that will ment un rapport special surcette question; cela
depend on the decision of the Security Council- dependra de la decision qu'il prendra ce sujet.
but it is clear that at the present time we can only I1 est clair toutefois que, pour le moment, nous
decide that when the report is distributed in a ne pouvons adopter qu'une settle decision :10rsqt1e,
week's time and comes up for dtscussion and dans une semaine, le rapport nous aura ete distriapproval by us, the two points of view expressed bue aux fins d'examen et d'adoption, il contiendra
here in the Security Council will be recorded, l' expose des deux points de vue qui se sont fait
and that it will be stated that, owing to the jour auConseil de securite et mentiorinera que,
divergency of views on this question, the Security en raison des divergences de vues qUi se sont
CC1.1ncil considered that to take a vote would serve manifestees, le Cons-eil-de-securite a esthne qu'il
no useful p:urpose.
etait inopportun de proceder a un vote.
If 'the members of the Security Council agree
Si les membres du c::onseil de securite acceptent
to this suggestion I think we could close this cette fac;on de voir, je pourrai faire iever la
meeting. If, however, the Argentinian represe;:\- j Beance des maintenant. Si, par contre, le repre-'

a

,..

''1.

M

12
tative wishes to make the question wholly dependent on whether any member of the Security
Council might wish to raise the question again,
I should prefer to continue the discussion and
come to a decision.
Are there any more speakers?
Mr. TSIANG (China): It s~s to me that at
this moment all we need to decide is to postpone
voting on the draft resolutions before us. That
is the only decision that needs to be taken at
present. If, a week from now, or two weeks or a
month from now, some member of the Council
believes that a useful purpose could be served by
holding another discussion on these draft resolutions or by taking a vote on them, every member
has the right to ask for a meeting. There seems
to be no necessity of deciding to postpone the
question to any definite date.

As to the report of the Security Council to the
General Assembly, it is also unnecessary for this
body today to suggest a formula to cover this
question. In the course of time the Secretariat
will undoubtedly study the verbatim records of
our discussions and will draft a report; that draft
report will be placed before the Security Council.
Every member of the Council has the right to
mdicate whether it agrees with the draft report or
whether there should be changes in it.
I think we should be going too far at this time
if we issued instructions to the Secretariat as to
how to rep()rt on ehis discussion. Any formt1la
suggested at the moment would lead to considerable debate. I myself am not ready at the
moment to accept any formula. Therefore, I
humbly suggest that we decide simply on this
one point, namely, that voting on these draft
resolutions be postponed.

sentant de l'Argentine desire subordonner le
reglement de la question tout entiere au desir que
pourrait manifester l'un des membres du ConseiI
de securite de soulever a nouveau cette question,
je pre£ererais que le Conseil poursuive la discussion afin d'arriver a une decision.
Quelqu'un desire-t-il prendre la parole?
M. TSIANG (Chine) (tradttit de I'anglais) :
I1 me semble que la seule decision que nous devions prendre en ce moment est d'ajourner le
vote sur les projets de resolution dont nous sommes saisis. C'est la seule decision a laquelle il
convienne de s'arreter pour I'instant. Si, dans une
ou deux semaines, ou dans un mois, un membre
quelconque du Conseil estime qu'il serait de que!.,-'
que utilite de reprendre la discussion sur ces projets de resolution ou de se prononcer sur eux par
un vote, it aura le :droit, comme chacun de nous
peut le faire, de demander la convocation du
ConseiI. n n'y a aucune necessite, semble-t-it, de
decider l'ajournement de la question a une date
determinee. ,
En ce qui concerne le rapport du Conseil de '
securite a l'Assemblee generale, it n'est pas non
plus necessaire que nous proposions des maint('
nant une formule pour traiter cette question dans
le document. En temps voulu, le Secretariat ne
manquera certainemeI:: pas d'etudier les comptes
rendus stenographiques de nos debats, d'etabIir
un projet de rapport et de le distribuer aux membres du Conseil de securite. Chaque membre du
Conseil sera alors en droit de dire s'il accepte le
texte de ce projet de rapport ou s'il demande que
des modifications y soient apportees.
, J'estime que ce serait aller trop loin que de
donner des' a present des instructions au 'Secretariat sur la forme sous laqueIle le debat actue!
devra figurer dans le rapport. It suf'firait de proposer une formule en ce moment pour provoquer
une longue discussion. En ce qui me concerne, je
ne suis actueIlement e~ mesure d'accepter aucune
'formule de ce genre. En consequence, je me permets de suggerer quenous decidions l'ajournement pur et simple du vote sur les projets de
resolution en cause.

The PRESIDENT (translated lTom Russian):
Since there are no further speakers on my list,
the meeting is adjourned. As no agreement has
been reached on the question of the admission of
twelve States to membership in the United
Nations, this question will not be put to a vote
in the Security Council. '

Le PRESIDENT (tradzeit dll russe) : Puisque aucun autre representant n'a demande a prendre la
parole, la seance est levee. Etant donne qu'aucun
accord n'est intervenu en ce qui: concerne la question de l'admission des douze Etats dans I'Organisation des Nations Dnies, cette question ne sera
pas mise aux voixau GonseiI de SeCtlrite. '.

The meeting rwe at S.10 p.m.

La seance est levee a17 h. 10.

---SALES AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATI1L..MI'5"
DEPOSrrAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINJ:
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Alsina 500
BUENOS .AmEs
AUSTRALlA-AUSTRAlIE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNJ"Y, N. S. W.
BELG~UM-BELGIQUE

Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue du Perm
BRUXELLES
BOLlVIA-BOLlVIE
Libreria Cientifica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ
CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO
CHILE-CHill
Edmundo -Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTU.G~

CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI
\
C:OLOMBIA-COLOMBIE
Libreria Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA
COSTA RICA-COSTA·RICA
Trejos He:rman~
Apartado 1313
SAN JosE
CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA
CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQU!E
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

DENMARK-DANEMARI<
Einar MtDiksgaard
N~:rregade6
K~BENHAVN

DOMINICAN REPUBLICREPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Librerfa Dominicana
Calle MeJ:cedes No. 49
Apartado 656
CIUDAD TRUJILLO
ECUAOOR-EQUATEUR
Mufioz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10-24
GUAYAQUIL
EGYPT-EGYPTE
Librame "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. AdlyPasha
CAIRO

ETHIOPIA-ETHIOPIE
Agence&moprennedepublicue
P.O.Box8 ..- ADDIS·AB~A

Printed in the 'U.S.A.

FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI
FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Souffiot
P..uus, ye
GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie intemationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHEriES
GUATEMALA
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA.
HAITI
Max Bouchcrcau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
BOlte postale l11-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE
ICELAND-ISLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJAVIK
INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Seindia House
NEW DELHI
IRAN
_ Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avemle
TEHERAN
IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD
LEBANON-L1BAN
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH
LUXEMBOURG
LibraIDc- J. Sehummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG
Nl:lHERLANDS-PAYS·BAS
N. Y. Martinus NijhofI
Lange Yoorhout 9
'S-GRAVE:NHAGE
NEW ZEALAND";""
NOUVELlE·ZElANDE
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON
United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. O. 1011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON
NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agencia de Publicaciones
MANAGTJA, D. N.
NORWAY-NORVEGE
JohanGrundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO
Price in the United States: 10 cents

PERU-PEROU
Libreria internacional del Peru,
S.A.
Casilla 1417
LIMA
PHILIPPINES
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZAL
POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzielna Wydawnieza
"CzyteInik"
38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA

SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.-B. C. E. Fritzes Kungl.
Hofbokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM
SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Librairie Payol S. A.
LAUSANNE, GENEVE, YEVET,
MONTREux, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I
SYRIA-SYRIE
Librairie universelle
DAMAS
TURKEY.-TURQUIE
Librairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU-IsTANBUL
I

UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA- i:
UNION SUD·AFRICAINE
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPETOWN
and DURBAN
.UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME·UNI
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. I
and at H.M.S.O.Shops in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHESTE
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BmMINGHAM
and BRISTOL
UNITED 'STATES OF AMERICAETATS·UNIS D'AMER.QUE
futemational Documents Service
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y.

URUGUAY
Oficina de Representacion de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Ese. 1
MONTEVIDEO
VENEZUELA
Escritoria P6rez Machado
Conde a Piiiango 11
CARACAS
YUGOSLAVIA__YOUGOSlAVIE
Drzavno Preduzece
Jugoslovenska J(njiga
Moskovska Ul. 36
BEOGRAD
[41
4~st 1949-2,900
