General Assembly -

48

under General Assembly resolution 788 (VIII) of 9
December 1953, provided that, should such advance
paid by any Member to the Working Capital Fund for
the financial yea1 1954 exceed the amount of that
Member's advance under the provision of paragraph 2
hereof, the excess shall be set off against the amount
of contributions payable .by that Member in respect
of the tenth annual budget, or any previous budget;
4. The Secretary-General is authorized to advance
from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance budgetary appropriations pending receipt of contributions;
sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon as
receipts from contributions are available for the
purpose;
( b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments which may be duly authorized under the
provisions of the resolution 34 relating to unforeseen
and extraordinary expenses. The Secretary-General
!>hall make provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing the Working Capital Fund;
(c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding for the same purposes, do not exceed $125,000,
to continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities. Advances in
excess of the total of $125,000 may be made with the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. The SecretaryGeneral shall submit, with the annual accounts, an
explanation of the outstanding balance of the revolving fund at the end of each year;
( d) Loans to specialized agencies and preparatory
commissions of agencies to be established by inter-governmental agreement under the auspices ot the United
Nations to finance their work, pending receipt by
the agencies concerned of sufficient contributions under
their own budgets. In making such loans, which shall
normally be repayable within two years, the SecretaryGeneral shall have regard to the proposed financial
resources of the agency concerned, and shall obtain the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for any cash
issues which would increase the aggregate balance outstanding (including amounts previously advanced and
outstanding) at any one time to an amount in excess
of $1,500,000 and for any issue which would increase
the balance outstanding (including amounts previously
advanced and outstanding) in respect of any one
agency to an amount in excess of $500,000;
(e) Such sums not exceeding $35,000 as may be
required to finance payments of advance insurance
premiums where the period of insurance extends beyond the end of the financial year in which payment is
made. This amount may be increased with the prior
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. The Secretary-General shall make provision in the budget estimates of
each year, during the life of the related policies, to
cover the charges applicable to each such year.
515th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954.
H

See resolution 891 (IX), p. 47.

Ninth SeBBion

893 (IX). Use of income derived from the Staff
Assessment Plan

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 85 of the SecretaryGeneral entitled "Use of income derived from the
Staff Assessment Plan" and the report 38 of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon,
Having regard to the deliberations of the Fifth Committee on this subject during the ninth session of the
General Assembly,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
negotiations with those Member States which have
not yet become Parties to the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations or
adopted alternative measures under which appropriate
rtlief would be granted to all United Nations officials
in so far as national income taxation is concerned, and
to submit a report thereon as soon as possible before
the opening of the tenth session of the General Assembly, together with the comments of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
on that report;
2. Decides to postpone to the tenth session of the
General Assembly further consideration of measures
to be taken by the Assembly towards a solution of
the problem.
515th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954.
894 (IX). Increase in the dependency credit un•
der the Staff Assessment Plan for the staff
at Headquarters

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that an inequity of treatment exists
under the Staff Assessment Plan between staff members with dependants and those without dependants,
Resolves that, as a temporary measure, notwithstanding article 4 of General Assembly resolution 359
(IV) of 10 December 1949, the following dependency
credits shall be given between 1 January 1955 and
31 December 1955 to staff members stationed at Headquarters or at Washington, D.C.:
(a) A credit at the rate of $200 per annum shall be
granted for a wife, or a dependent husba'1d, or a
dependent parent, brother or sister, or a dependent
child, or a mentally or physically incapacitated child
over 16 years of age;
( b) An additional credit at the rate of $100 per
annum shall be granted for each dependent child for
whom credit has not been granted under paragraph (a)
above.
515th plenary meeting,
17 December 1954.
81 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth
Susion, Annexes, agenda item 38, document A/C.5/584.
38 Ibid., document A/2799.
