UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3278
17 September 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-EIGHTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Friday, 17 September 1993, at 12.50 p.m.

President:

(Venezuela)

Brazil
Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. JESUS
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. DORANI
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. MARUYAMA
Mr. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI
Mr. BOHEMEN
Mr. NIAZ
Mr. LOZINSKIY
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. Taylhardat

Sir David HANNAY
Mr. WALKER

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

93-86551 (E)

S/PV.3278
2

The meeting was called to order at 12.50 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE QUESTION CONCERNING HAITI
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

The Security Council

will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Following consultations among members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council deplores the recent upsurge in violence in
Haiti, particularly the events of 11 and 12 September, when at least a
dozen people were assassinated, including a prominent supporter of
President Aristide during a church service.
"The Council is deeply concerned at these developments as well as at
the existence of organized armed civilian groups in the capital which are
attempting to interfere with the new Constitutional Government’s proper
assumption of its functions.
"The Security Council considers it imperative that the Constitutional
Government of Haiti assume control over the security forces of the country,
and that those responsible for the activities of the organized armed
civilian groups throughout the country, and particularly in Port-au-Prince,
be held personally accountable for their actions and removed from their
functions.

The Council also urges the Haitian authorities to take

immediate measures with a view to disarming these groups.
"The Council strongly calls on the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed
Forces, also in his capacity as signatory to the Governors Island
Agreement, to carry out his responsibilities to the fullest by ensuring
immediate compliance with the letter and the spirit of the Governors Island
Agreement.
"The Council will hold the Haitian military and security authorities
personally responsible for the safety of all United Nations personnel in
Haiti.

S/PV.3278
3
(The President)
"Unless there is a clear and immediate effort by the security forces
to put an end to the present levels of violence and intimidation and unless
the above requirements are met, the Security Council will have no
alternative but to consider that the authorities responsible for public
order in Haiti are not complying in good faith with the Governors Island
Agreement.
"Therefore, should the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 861 (1993) and having received
the views of the Secretary-General of the Organization of American States
(OAS), inform the Security Council that, in his opinion, there is a serious
and consistent non-compliance with the Governors Island Agreement, the
Council will immediately reinstate those measures provided for in its
resolution 841 (1993) appropriate to the situation, with particular
emphasis on those measures aimed at those deemed responsible for the
non-compliance with the Agreement.
"The Council reaffirms that all the parties in Haiti are bound to
comply with their obligations under the Governors Island Agreement, as well
as with those embodied in the relevant international treaties to which
Haiti is party and in all relevant Security Council resolutions.
"The Council will closely monitor the situation in Haiti in the coming
days."
This statement will be issued as a document of the Security Council under
the symbol S/26460.
The Security Council has concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.
