A/58/49 (Vol. III)

Resolutions
and
Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its fifty-eighth session
Volume III

24 December 2003 – 13 September 2004

General Assembly
Official Records  Fifty-eighth Session
Supplement No. 49 (A/58/49)

United Nations  New York, 2004

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses
indicating the session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several
resolutions were adopted under the same number, each of them was identified by a
capital letter placed between the two numerals (for example: resolution
3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A and B (XXX), resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)).
The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of
General Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an
arabic numeral, indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another
arabic numeral (for example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several
resolutions or decisions were adopted under the same number, each of them has been
identified by a capital letter placed after the two numerals (for example: resolution
31/16 A, resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions 31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a
roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The
decisions were not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified
by the letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique
stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General
Assembly were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the
letters “ES” and a roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution
2252 (ES-V)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed
by an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1,
decision ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions and decisions adopted by the General
Assembly from 24 December 2003 to 13 September 2004. Resolutions adopted by the
Assembly from 16 September to 23 December 2003 appear in volume I. Volume II
contains the decisions adopted by the Assembly during that period.

ISSN 0252-7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee...........................................................1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee).........................................................................................................................17
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee ............................................................19
IV. Decisions .........................................................................................................................................57
A. Elections and appointments.......................................................................................................58
B. Other decisions .........................................................................................................................61
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee........................................................... 61

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee............................................................... 64
Annexes

I. Allocation of agenda items..............................................................................................................67
II. Checklist of resolutions and decisions ............................................................................................69

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
No.

58/213.

Title

Page

Further implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States..................................................................................................................................................... 2
Resolution B ............................................................................................................................................................ 2

58/281.

Sixth International Conference of New or Restored Democracies, to be held in Doha in 2006 ....................................... 2

58/282.

Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on children ........................................................................................ 2

58/289.

Improving global road safety..................................................................................................................................... 3

58/290.

The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds
and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts............................................................... 4

58/291.

Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit and integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social
fields........................................................................................................................................................................ 6

58/292.

Status of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem......................................................................... 6

58/293.

International Year of Physics, 2005............................................................................................................................ 7

58/313.

Organizational arrangements for the high-level meeting to review the progress achieved in realizing the
commitments set out in the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS ....................................................................... 7

58/314.

Participation of the Holy See in the work of the United Nations................................................................................... 9

58/316.

Further measures for the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly .............................................................. 10

58/317.

Reaffirming the central role of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security and the
promotion of international cooperation..................................................................................................................... 13

58/318.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the International Criminal Court........................................................... 15

1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 58/213 B
Adopted at the 90th plenary meeting, on 10 June 2004, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/58/L.63, sponsored by Qatar, on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China

58/213. Further implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States
B1
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/213 A of 23 December 2003, in
which it decided to convene the International Meeting to
Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States
from 30 August to 3 September 2004,
Recalling also the offer of the Government of Mauritius to
host the International Meeting,
Taking note of the request by the Government of Mauritius
to reschedule the International Meeting due to logistical
considerations,
1. Decides to convene the International Meeting to
Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States
from 10 to 14 January 2005;
2. Also decides to hold, if deemed necessary and taking
into account paragraph 7 of its resolution 58/213 A, two days of
informal consultations in Mauritius, on 8 and 9 January 2005, to
facilitate the effective preparation of the International Meeting;
3. Takes note of the appointment of a Facilitator for the
process of informal consultations, who will report progress
thereon to the Bureau of the International Meeting, when
constituted.

58/281. Sixth International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies, to be held in Doha in 2006
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the indissoluble links between the
principles enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights2 and the foundations of any democratic society,
Recognizing that the United Nations has an important role
to play in providing timely, appropriate and coherent support to
the efforts of Governments to achieve democratization within
the context of their development efforts,
Recalling the offer by the Government of Qatar to host the
Sixth International Conference of New or Restored Democracies
in 2006,3
Expressing once again its deep appreciation for the
support provided by Member States, the United Nations system,
including the specialized agencies, and other intergovernmental
organizations to the Government of Mongolia for the holding of
the Fifth International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies in Ulaanbaatar,
1. Welcomes the proposal of the Government of Qatar
to hold the Sixth International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies from 13 to 15 November 2006 in Doha;
2. Invites the Secretary-General, Member States, the
relevant specialized agencies and bodies of the United Nations
system, as well as other intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, to support and collaborate in the holding of
the Sixth International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies;
3. Encourages the intergovernmental follow-up
mechanism of the Ulaanbaatar Conference to cooperate actively
in the preparatory process for the Sixth International Conference
of New or Restored Democracies.
RESOLUTION 58/282

RESOLUTION 58/281
Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 9 February 2004, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/58/L.57 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Guatemala, Iceland, India, Israel, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Seychelles, South
Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Thailand, Ukraine, Yemen

_______________
1

Consequently, resolution 58/213, in section IV of the Official Records of
the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/58/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 58/213 A.

2

Adopted at the 80th plenary meeting, on 9 February 2004, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/58/L.58, submitted by the President of the General
Assembly

58/282. Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on
children
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration and the Plan of Action
contained in the final document of the special session of the
General Assembly on children, entitled “A world fit for
_______________
2
3

Resolution 217 A (III).
See A/58/392, para. 7.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

children”,4 and recognizing that their implementation is a major
contribution to protecting the rights and promoting the wellbeing of children,
Recalling the Convention on the Rights of the Child,5 the
most universally embraced human rights treaty in history, and
the Optional Protocols thereto,6
Recalling also its resolutions on the special session on
children, including resolution 57/190 of 18 December 2002, in
which, inter alia, it decided to include in the agenda of its fiftyeighth session the item entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of
the special session on children”, and allocated its consideration
to the plenary,
Recalling further its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003
on the integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic and social fields,
Bearing in mind that, by 2007, several of the time-bound
and quantified commitments set out in the Declaration and the
Plan of Action should have been met, and that other targets are
to be met by 2010 and 2015,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;7

2. Takes note of the initial progress made in the
implementation of the Declaration and the Plan of Action4 by
Governments, as well as by intergovernmental organizations
and non-governmental organizations, and the support provided
to them by relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes;
3. Calls upon Member States that have not yet done so
to prepare or strengthen national action plans and, where
appropriate, regional action plans, with a set of specific timebound and measurable goals and targets, and in this context
encourages cooperation with civil society actors, including nongovernmental organizations working for and with children, as
well as children themselves, in order to implement the
commitments made at the special session on children and at
other relevant major United Nations conferences and summits,
in particular the Millennium Summit;
4. Urges all relevant specialized agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system, and invites
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations
and civil society, to lend their full support to implementing the
commitments made in the final document of the twenty-seventh
special session, entitled “A world fit for children”, and to keep
the Secretary-General informed of their actions;

_______________

5. Requests the United Nations Children’s Fund to
continue to prepare and disseminate, in close collaboration with
Governments, relevant specialized agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nation system and all other relevant
actors, as appropriate, information on the progress made in the
implementation of the Plan of Action;
6. Requests the governing bodies of the relevant
specialized agencies to ensure that, within their mandates, the
agencies give their fullest possible support for the achievement
of the goals outlined in the Plan of Action and to keep the
General Assembly fully informed, through the Economic and
Social Council, of progress and additional action required using
existing reporting frameworks and procedures;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report
regularly to the General Assembly on the progress made in
implementing the Declaration and the Plan of Action;
8. Decides to convene a commemorative plenary
meeting in 2007, on a date to be decided at its sixtieth session,
devoted to the follow-up to the outcome of its twenty-seventh
special session and the progress made in implementing the
Declaration and the Plan of Action, based on a report to be
prepared by the Secretary-General, and invites the President of
the General Assembly to finalize organizational matters in
consultation with Member States;
9. Decides also to include in the provisional agenda of
its fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Follow-up to the
outcome of the special session on children”.
RESOLUTION 58/289
Adopted at the 84th plenary meeting, on 14 April 2004, without a vote, on the basis
of draft resolution A/58/L.60/Rev.1 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Algeria,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei
Darussalam, China, Costa Rica, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji, France, Germany,
Guatemala, Guyana, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Monaco,
Morocco, Nauru, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovenia, South Africa, Sudan, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia

58/289.

Improving global road safety

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 57/309 of 22 May 2003 and 58/9
of 5 November 2003,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the global road safety crisis,8

4

Resolution S-27/2, annex.
Resolution 44/25, annex.
6
Resolution 54/263, annexes I and II.
7
A/58/333.
5

_______________
8

A/58/228.

3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the recommendation contained in the report of the
Secretary-General that a coordinating body be identified within
the United Nations system to provide support in this field9 and
the recommendation that the United Nations regional
commissions undertake certain activities,10
Convinced that responsibility for road safety rests at the
local, municipal and national levels,
Recognizing that many developing countries and countries
with economies in transition have limited capacities to address
these issues, and underlining, in this context, the importance of
international cooperation towards further supporting the efforts
of developing countries, in particular, to build capacities in the
field of road safety, and of providing financial and technical
support for their efforts,
Commending the initiative of the Government of France,
the World Health Organization and the World Bank in
launching the World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention
in Paris on 7 April 2004, in observance of World Health Day,
with the theme “Road safety is no accident”, which contains a
number of recommendations,
Also commending the United Nations regional commissions
and their subsidiary bodies for responding to the abovementioned resolutions and to the report of the SecretaryGeneral,
1. Takes note of the recommendations contained in the
World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention;
2. Invites the World Health Organization, working in
close cooperation with the United Nations regional commissions,
to act as a coordinator on road safety issues within the United
Nations system;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in submitting his
report to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session in
accordance with resolution 58/9, to draw upon the expertise of
the United Nations regional commissions, as well as the World
Health Organization and the World Bank;
4. Underlines the need for the further strengthening of
international cooperation, taking into account the needs of
developing countries, to deal with issues of road safety.
RESOLUTION 58/290
Adopted at the 85th plenary meeting, on 14 April 2004, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/58/L.59 and Add.1, sponsored by: Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Central African Republic, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Estonia,

_______________
9
10

4

Ibid., para. 44 (a).
Ibid., para. 44 (k).

Finland, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lesotho, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Sierra
Leone, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States
of America, Venezuela, Zimbabwe

58/290. The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking
the link between the illicit transaction of rough
diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution to
prevention and settlement of conflicts
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the trade in conflict diamonds is a matter
of serious international concern, which can be directly linked to
the fuelling of armed conflict, the activities of rebel movements
aimed at undermining or overthrowing legitimate Governments
and the illicit traffic in and proliferation of armaments,
especially small arms and light weapons,
Recognizing also the devastating impact of conflicts
fuelled by the trade in conflict diamonds on the peace, safety
and security of people in affected countries, and the systematic
and gross human rights violations that have been perpetrated in
such conflicts,
Noting the negative impact of such conflicts on regional
stability and the obligations placed upon States by the Charter of
the United Nations regarding the maintenance of international
peace and security,
Recognizing, therefore, that continued action to curb the
trade in conflict diamonds is imperative,
Recognizing also the positive benefits of the legitimate
diamond trade to producing countries, and underlining the need
for continued international action to prevent the problem of
conflict diamonds from negatively affecting the trade in
legitimate diamonds, which makes a critical contribution to the
economies of many of the producing, exporting and importing
States, especially developing States,
Noting that the vast majority of rough diamonds produced
in the world are from legitimate sources,
Recalling the Charter and all the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council related to conflict diamonds, and
determined to contribute to and support the implementation of
the measures provided for in those resolutions,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1459 (2003) of
28 January 2003, in which the Council strongly supported

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme11 as a valuable
contribution against trafficking in conflict diamonds,
Welcoming the important contribution of the Kimberley
Process, which was initiated by African diamond-producing
countries,
Believing that the implementation of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme should substantially reduce the
opportunity for conflict diamonds to play a role in fuelling
armed conflict and should help to protect legitimate trade and
ensure the effective implementation of the relevant resolutions
on trade in conflict diamonds,
Recalling its resolutions 55/56 of 1 December 2000,
56/263 of 13 March 2002 and 57/302 of 15 April 2003, in
which it called for the development and implementation of
proposals for a simple, effective and pragmatic international
certification scheme for rough diamonds,
Welcoming, in this regard, the implementation of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme in such a way that it
does not impede the legitimate trade in diamonds or impose an
undue burden on Governments or industry, particularly smaller
producers, and does not hinder the development of the diamond
industry,
Welcoming also the decision of countries and one regional
economic integration organization to address the problem of
conflict diamonds by participating in the Kimberley Process and
to implement the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme,
Welcoming further the important contribution made by the
diamond industry, in particular the World Diamond Council, as
well as civil society, to assist international efforts to stop the
trade in conflict diamonds,
Welcoming the voluntary self-regulation initiatives for the
diamond industry announced by the World Diamond Council,
and recognizing that a system of such voluntary self-regulation
will contribute, as described in the Interlaken Declaration of
5 November 2002 on the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme for Rough Diamonds,12 to ensuring the effectiveness of
national systems of internal control for rough diamonds,
Noting with appreciation that the Kimberley Process has
pursued its deliberations on an inclusive basis, involving
concerned stakeholders, including producing, exporting and
importing States, the diamond industry and civil society,

Recognizing also that the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme, which came into effect on 1 January 2003, will be
credible only if all participants have established internal systems
of control designed to eliminate the presence of conflict
diamonds in the chain of producing, exporting and importing
rough diamonds within their own territories, while taking into
account that differences in production methods and trading
practices, as well as differences in institutional controls thereof,
may require different approaches to meet minimum standards,
1. Reaffirms its strong support for the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme;11
2. Recognizes that the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme can help to ensure the effective implementation of
relevant resolutions of the Security Council containing sanctions
on the trade in conflict diamonds, and calls for the full
implementation of existing Council measures targeting the illicit
trade in rough diamonds that play a role in fuelling conflict;
3. Stresses that the widest possible participation in the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme is essential and should
be encouraged, urges all Member States to participate actively
in the Certification Scheme by complying with its undertakings,
and welcomes the establishment at the plenary meeting of the
Kimberley Process, held in Johannesburg, South Africa, from
28 to 30 April 2003, of a Participation Committee to ensure that
participants and applicants willing to join the Certification
Scheme meet the minimum standards;
4. Notes with appreciation the report of the Chair of
the Kimberley Process13 submitted pursuant to resolution 57/302,
and congratulates the Governments, regional economic
integration organization representatives, the organized diamond
industry and civil society participating in the Kimberley Process
for contributing to the development and implementation of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme;
5. Takes note of the decision of the General Council of
the World Trade Organization of 15 May 2003 granting a waiver
with respect to the measures taken to implement the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme;14
6. Welcomes the progress achieved at the plenary
meeting of the Kimberley Process held in Sun City, South Africa,
from 29 to 31 October 2003 by the adoption of a decision on a
peer review system for the effective implementation of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme;

Recognizing that State sovereignty should be fully
respected and that the principles of equality, mutual benefits and
consensus should be adhered to,

7. Encourages participants in the Kimberley Process to
allow voluntary review visits in accordance with the decision
mentioned in paragraph 6 above, and welcomes the readiness of
some participants to host such visits;

_______________

_______________

11

13

12

See A/57/489.
Ibid., annex 2.

14

A/58/623, annex.
See WT/L/518. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.

5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. Also encourages participants in the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme to submit annual reports on the
implementation of the Certification Scheme to the Chair of the
Kimberley Process;
9. Further encourages all participants in the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme to collate and submit relevant
statistical data on the production of and international trade in
rough diamonds as a tool for effective implementation and as
envisaged by the Certification Scheme;
10. Acknowledges with great appreciation the important
contribution that the Government of South Africa has made to
the efforts to curb the trade in conflict diamonds in its capacity
as the Chair of the Kimberley Process from May 2000 to
December 2003, and welcomes the selection of Canada as the
Chair and the Russian Federation as the Vice-Chair of the
Process for 2004;
11. Requests the Chair of the Kimberley Process to
submit a report on the implementation of the Process to the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict”.
RESOLUTION 58/291
Adopted at the 86th plenary meeting, on 6 May 2004, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/58/L.8/Rev.1, submitted by the President of the
General Assembly

58/291. Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit and integrated and coordinated
implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences and summits
in the economic and social fields
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 57/144 of 16 December 2002 on
follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit and
57/270 A of 20 December 2002 and 57/270 B of 23 June 2003
on integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up
to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic and social fields,
1. Decides to convene in New York in 2005, at the
commencement of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly,
a high-level plenary meeting of the Assembly with the
participation of heads of State and Government, on dates to be
decided by the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
2. Also decides that this major event will undertake a
comprehensive review of the progress made in the fulfilment of

all the commitments contained in the United Nations
Millennium Declaration,15 including the internationally agreed
development goals and the global partnership required for their
achievement, and of the progress made in the integrated and
coordinated implementation, at the national, regional and
international levels, of the outcomes and commitments of the
major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields, on the basis of a comprehensive report
to be submitted by the Secretary-General;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session a report on suggested
modalities, format and organization of this major event for
consideration and a final decision by the Assembly, taking into
account the open-ended consultations to be carried out by the
President of the Assembly.
RESOLUTION 58/292
Adopted at the 87th plenary meeting, on 6 May 2004, by a recorded vote of 140
to 6, with 11 abstentions,* on the basis of draft resolution A/58/L.61/Rev.1,
sponsored by: Algeria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam, Comoros,
Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Indonesia, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Palestine
* In favour: Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia
Against: Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru,
Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: Australia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Guatemala,
Honduras, Nicaragua, Peru, Serbia and Montenegro, Solomon Islands, Tonga,
Tuvalu

_______________
15

6

See resolution 55/2.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

58/292. Status of the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November
1974, 43/177 of 15 December 1988 and 52/250 of 7 July 1998,
Recalling also Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967, 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973, 1397 (2002)
of 12 March 2002 and 1515 (2003) of 19 November 2003,
Recalling further the relevant provisions of international
law, as well as relevant United Nations resolutions, with regard
to Israeli settlements and to Occupied East Jerusalem,
Reaffirming the principle of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force,
Noting that Palestine, in its capacity as observer and
pending its attainment of full membership in the United
Nations, does not present credentials to the General Assembly,
Affirming the need to enable the Palestinian people to
exercise sovereignty and to achieve independence in their State,
Palestine,
1. Affirms that the status of the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, remains one of
military occupation, and affirms, in accordance with the rules
and principles of international law and relevant resolutions of
the United Nations, including Security Council resolutions, that
the Palestinian people have the right to self-determination and to
sovereignty over their territory and that Israel, the occupying
Power, has only the duties and obligations of an occupying
Power under the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of Wa, of 12 August 194916 and the
Regulations annexed to the Hague Convention respecting the
Laws and Customs of War on Land of 1907;17
2. Expresses its determination to contribute to the
achievement of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
and the attainment of a just and comprehensive negotiated
peace settlement in the Middle East resulting in two viable,
sovereign and independent States, Israel and Palestine, based on
the pre-1967 borders and living side by side in peace and
security.
RESOLUTION 58/293
Adopted at the 90th plenary meeting, on 10 June 2004, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/58/L.62 and Add.1, sponsored by: Brazil, Croatia,

_______________
16

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
17
See Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague Conventions
and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford University Press,
1915).

France, Lesotho, Monaco, Portugal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Singapore, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

58/293. International Year of Physics, 2005
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that physics provides a significant basis for
the development of the understanding of nature,
Noting that physics and its applications are the basis of
many of today’s technological advances,
Convinced that education in physics provides men and
women with the tools to build the scientific infrastructure
essential for development,
Being aware that the year 2005 is the centenary of seminal
scientific discoveries by Albert Einstein which are the basis of
modern physics,
1. Welcomes the proclamation of 2005 as the
International Year of Physics by the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization;
2. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization to organize activities celebrating the
International Year of Physics, in collaboration with physics
societies and other groups throughout the world, including in
the developing countries;
3.

Proclaims 2005 the International Year of Physics.
RESOLUTION 58/313

Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 1 July 2004, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/58/L.65, submitted by the President of the General
Assembly

58/313. Organizational arrangements for the high-level
meeting to review the progress achieved in realizing
the commitments set out in the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution S-26/2 of 27 June 2001, entitled
“Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS”, in which it
decided to devote sufficient time and at least one full day of the
annual session of the General Assembly to review and debate a
report of the Secretary-General,
Bearing in mind that the Declaration of Commitment
contains time-bound commitments to be met by 2005, and
noting that more complete data on fulfilment of the 2005 targets
will be available for comprehensive review in 2006,
Recalling that in its resolution 58/236 of 23 December
2003, entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of the twenty-sixth
special session: implementation of the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS”, the General Assembly decided to
7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

hold a high-level meeting in 2005 to review the progress
achieved in realizing the commitments set out in the Declaration
of Commitment, and decided also that the scheduling, format,
participation, including civil society participation, and other
organizational details would be further considered during the
fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly,
Recalling also its resolution 58/291 of 6 May 2004
entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
and integrated and coordinated implementation of and followup to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences
and summits in the economic and social fields”,
1. Decides that the high-level meeting to review the
progress achieved in realizing the commitments set out in the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS will be convened on
2 June 2005 and will have a technical focus with the aim of
identifying the level of progress achieved, problems and
constraints facing the full realization of those commitments and
the prospects for achieving them and for sharing best practices;
2. Decides also that the review will, inter alia, contribute
to the high-level plenary meeting, to be held in New York at the
commencement of the sixtieth session of the General Assembly
in 2005, to undertake a comprehensive review of the progress
made in the fulfilment of all the commitments contained in
the United Nations Millennium Declaration,18 including the
internationally agreed development goals and the global
partnership required for their achievement, and of the progress
made in the integrated and coordinated implementation of the
major United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields;
3. Decides further that the organizational arrangements
for the high-level meeting will be as follows:
(a) The high-level meeting will comprise opening and
closing plenary meetings and interactive round tables covering
areas related to the implementation of the Declaration of
Commitment, particularly prevention, treatment, care and
support, human rights including gender, orphans and resources;
(b) The opening plenary meeting will set the stage for
the subsequent discussions and feature statements by the
President of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General and
the Executive Director of the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS;
(c) A representative nominated by each of the five
regional groups will chair each round table, with the support of
the executive heads of the co-sponsoring agencies of the Joint
Programme;
(d) In addition to Member States, observers,
representatives of the entities of the United Nations system,
_______________
18

8

See resolution 55/2.

non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council and non-governmental members
of the Programme Coordinating Board of the Joint Programme,
invitations to the round tables will be extended to the Global
Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and not more
than fifteen civil society representatives of international,
national or community organizations, including those
representing and working for people living with HIV/AIDS,
and the private sector, including pharmaceutical companies. The
President of the General Assembly, following appropriate
consultations with Member States, will draw up a list of those
civil society representatives, on the basis of the recommendations
of the Joint Programme and taking into account the principle of
geographical representation, and will submit the list to Member
States for consideration on a no-objection basis for a final
decision by the Assembly on participation;
(e) In order to ensure interactive and substantive
discussions of high quality, participation in each round table will
be limited to a maximum of forty to forty-five participants;
(f) Every effort will be made to ensure equitable
geographical representation in each round table, while taking
into account the importance of ensuring a mix of countries in
terms of size, HIV prevalence rates and levels of development;
(g) Participation of Member States and observers will
be limited to one round table, and each Member State
representative may be accompanied by two advisers;
(h) Participation by accredited and invited civil society
representatives will be limited to one round table, and
participation will not exceed five representatives in each round
table;
(i) The Chairmen of the round tables will submit
summaries to the President of the General Assembly reflecting
the views expressed during the discussions;
(j) The President of the General Assembly will present
the summaries of the round-table discussions to the closing
plenary meeting, and they will be submitted to the 2005 highlevel event planned in pursuance of resolution 58/291;
4. Decides that the arrangements outlined in
paragraph 3 (d) above shall in no way create a precedent for
other similar events;
5. Decides also that the President of the General
Assembly, with support from the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS and in consultation with Member
States, will finalize the details and scheduling of the round
tables, several of which are expected to take place concurrently,
and any outstanding organizational matters.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 58/314
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 1 July 2004, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/58/L.64, submitted by the President of the General
Assembly

58/314. Participation of the Holy See in the work of the
United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Holy See became a Permanent
Observer State at the United Nations on 6 April 1964, and since
then has always been invited to participate in the meetings of all
the sessions of the General Assembly,
Recalling also that the Holy See is a party to diverse
international instruments, including the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations,19 the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties,20 the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees21
and the Protocol thereto,22 the Convention on the Rights of the
Child 23 and the Optional Protocols thereto, 24 the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment,25 the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 26 the
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event
of Armed Conflict,27 the Paris Convention for the Protection of
Industrial Property, 28 the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, 29 the main disarmament treaties and the
Geneva Conventions30 and the Additional Protocols thereto,31
Recalling further that the Holy See enjoys membership in
various United Nations subsidiary bodies, specialized agencies
and international intergovernmental organizations, including the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the World Intellectual
Property Organization, the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive

_______________
19

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310.
Ibid., vol. 1155, No. 18232.
21
Ibid., vol. 189, No. 2545.
22
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
23
Resolution 44/25, annex.
24
Resolution 54/263, annexes I and II.
25
Resolution 39/46, annex.
26
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
27
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 249, No. 3511.
28
Ibid., vol. 828, No. 11851.
29
Ibid., vol. 729, No. 10485.
30
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
31
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
20

Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization and the International
Committee of Military Medicine,
Aware that the Holy See actively participates as an
observer in many of the specialized agencies, such as the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the
International Labour Organization, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, the International Fund for
Agricultural Development and the World Tourism Organization,
as well as in the World Trade Organization, that it is a full
member of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and a Guest of Honour in its Parliamentary Assembly,
and that it participates as an observer in various other regional
intergovernmental organizations, including the Council of
Europe, the Organization of American States and the African
Union, and is regularly invited to take part in the main meetings
of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization,
Aware also that the Economic and Social Council, by its
decision 244 (LXIII) of 22 July 1977, recommended that the
Holy See attend sessions of the regional commissions on a basis
similar to that provided for in the relevant terms of reference
applicable to States Members of the United Nations not
members of the regional commissions,
Recalling that the Holy See contributes financially to the
general administration of the United Nations in accordance with
the rate of assessment for the Holy See as a non-member State,
as adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 58/1 B of
23 December 2003,
Considering that it is in the interest of the United Nations
that all States be invited to participate in its work,
Desirous of contributing to the appropriate participation
of the Holy See in the work of the General Assembly in the
context of the revitalization of the work of the Assembly,
1. Acknowledges that the Holy See, in its capacity as
an Observer State, shall be accorded the rights and privileges of
participation in the sessions and work of the General Assembly
and the international conferences convened under the auspices
of the Assembly or other organs of the United Nations, as well
as in United Nations conferences as set out in the annex to the
present resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
General Assembly during the current session about the
implementation of the modalities annexed to the present
resolution.
Annex
The rights and privileges of participation of the Holy See
shall be effected through the following modalities, without
prejudice to the existing rights and privileges:
9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1. The right to participate in the general debate of the
General Assembly;

1. Decides to adopt the text contained in the annex to
the present resolution;

2. Without prejudice to the priority of Member States, the
Holy See shall have the right of inscription on the list of
speakers under agenda items at any plenary meeting of the
General Assembly, after the last Member State inscribed on the
list;

2. Determines to continue with efforts for the
revitalization of its work;

3. The right to make interventions, with a precursory
explanation or the recall of relevant General Assembly
resolutions being made only once by the President of the
General Assembly at the start of each session of the Assembly;
4.

The right of reply;

5. The right to have its communications relating to the
sessions and work of the General Assembly issued and
circulated directly, and without intermediary, as official
documents of the Assembly;
6. The right to have its communications relating to the
sessions and work of all international conferences convened
under the auspices of the General Assembly issued and
circulated directly, and without intermediary, as official
documents of those conferences;
7. The right to raise points of order relating to any
proceedings involving the Holy See, provided that the right to
raise such a point of order shall not include the right to
challenge the decision of the presiding officer;
8. The right to co-sponsor draft resolutions and decisions
that make reference to the Holy See; such draft resolutions and
decisions shall be put to a vote only upon request from a
Member State;
9. Seating for the Holy See shall be arranged immediately
after Member States and before the other observers when it
participates as a non-member State observer, with the allocation
of six seats in the General Assembly Hall;
10. The Holy See shall not have the right to vote or to put
forward candidates in the General Assembly.
RESOLUTION 58/316
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 1 July 2004, without a vote, on the
basis of draft resolution A/58/L.66, as orally revised, submitted by the President
of the General Assembly

58/316. Further measures for the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/126 of 19 December 2003 on
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly,
Recalling also its previous resolutions relating to the
revitalization of its work,
10

3. Requests the Secretary-General to report on all
aspects of the implementation of resolution 58/126 and the
present resolution to the General Assembly at its sixtieth
session.
Annex
A.

Reordering the work of the General Assembly

1. Recalling section B, paragraph 2, of the annex to General
Assembly resolution 58/126 of 19 December 2003, and having
reviewed the note by the Secretariat entitled “Options for the
rescheduling of the Main Committees of the General
Assembly”,32 it is decided that:
(a) The consideration of the implementation of
paragraph 2 of section B of the annex to resolution 58/126 shall
be deferred until its fifty-ninth session, taking into account the
views expressed as well as the suggestions made by Member
States in the context of the deliberations of the open-ended
meetings of the General Committee during the fifty-eighth
session;
(b) With effect from the fifty-ninth session of the
General Assembly, the meetings of the plenary Assembly shall
normally be held on Mondays and Thursdays.
B.

Organization of the agenda of the General Assembly

2. Recalling section B, paragraph 4, of the annex to resolution
58/126, and having reviewed the note by the Secretariat entitled
“Illustrative agenda of the General Assembly”,33 and taking into
account the views expressed by Member States on the matter, it
is decided that:
(a) Pursuant to paragraph 4 of section B of the annex to
resolution 58/126, the agenda of the General Assembly shall be
organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the
Organization, as contained in the medium-term plan for the
period 2002–2005 34 (or in the strategic framework, as
appropriate), with an additional heading for “Organizational,
administrative and other matters” for the purpose of giving a
sense of structure to the work of the Assembly, achieving a
better presentation of the issues and challenges with which the
Assembly deals and making the work of the Assembly more
accessible, with the understanding that the new arrangement
_______________
32

A/58/CRP.3.
A/58/CRP.4.
34
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement
No. 6 (A/55/6/Rev.1).
33

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

will not prejudge the way in which the work of the Assembly is
organized and carried out;
(b)

The headings of the agenda shall consequently be:

(i)

Maintenance of international peace and security;

(ii) Promotion of sustained economic growth and
sustainable development in accordance with the resolutions
of the General Assembly and recent United Nations
conferences;
(iii) Development of Africa;
(iv) Promotion of human rights;
(v) Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance
efforts;
(vi) Promotion of justice and international law;
(vii) Disarmament;
(viii) Drug control, crime prevention and combating
international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations;
(ix) Organizational, administrative and other matters;
(c) The
General
Committee
shall
make
recommendations, after consultation with Member States, to the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session on the placement of
the agenda items for the fifty-ninth session under the headings
set out above, with a view to making the new arrangement
effective;
(d) The provisions of the present section shall be
reviewed by the General Assembly at its sixty-first session with
a view to making further improvements, as appropriate.
C.

Practices and working methods of the Main
Committees

3. Recalling section B, paragraph 8, of the annex to
resolution 58/126, and having reviewed the note by the
Secretariat entitled “Historical and analytical note on the
practices and working methods of the Main Committees”, 35
recalling that the Main Committees are bound by the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, and taking into account the
views expressed by Member States on the matter, it is decided
that:
(a) Main Committees shall give specific attention to the
rationalization of their future agendas by the biennialization,
triennialization, clustering and elimination of items, and make
recommendations to the plenary Assembly for its decision by
1 April 2005;

to help them better to plan, prepare and organize and, in this
context, review the related documentation requirements;
(c) The practice of interactive debates and panel
discussions shall be utilized or expanded, as appropriate, by all
Main Committees so as to enhance informal, in-depth discussions
and to bring together experts from various fields without
prejudicing the progress of the substantive work of the Main
Committees;
(d) The practice of “question time” shall be introduced,
as appropriate, in all Main Committees to enable a dynamic and
candid exchange with heads of departments and offices,
representatives of the Secretary-General and special rapporteurs;
(e) The web sites of the Main Committees shall be
enhanced and thereafter regularly updated and their content
maintained by the secretariats of the Main Committees;
(f) The bureaux-elect of the Main Committees shall
meet immediately after their election in order to discuss the
organization and division of their work;
(g) With a view to ensuring the continuity and the
effective organization of their work, the incoming bureaux of
the Main Committees shall, no later than two weeks after their
election, meet with the outgoing bureaux in order to consult on
and review issues relating to the efficient functioning of the
Main Committees;
(h) Prior to the opening of each session, informal
briefings of each Main Committee shall be convened to discuss
the organization of work.
D.

Review of the agenda of the General Assembly

4. Recalling section B, paragraph 5, of the annex to
resolution 58/126, having reviewed the note by the Secretariat
entitled “Analysis of the agenda of the General Assembly”,36
which provides factual information on the frequency of
consideration, origin and history of action on the 333 items and
sub-items on the agenda, taking into account the views
expressed by Member States, and following consultations with
concerned Member States, it is decided that:
(a) The items entitled “Launching of global negotiations
on international economic cooperation for development” and
“Restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations in the
economic, social and related fields” shall be eliminated from the
agenda;

(b) Main Committees shall adopt a provisional
programme of work at the end of the session for the next session

(b) The items entitled “Question of Cyprus”, “Armed
aggression against the Democratic Republic of the Congo”,
“Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)”, “The situation of
democracy and human rights in Haiti”, “Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave

_______________

_______________

35

36

A/58/CRP.5.

A/58/CRP.6.

11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

consequences for the established international system
concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security”, “Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait”, and “Declaration of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity on the aerial and naval military attack against the
Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya by the present
United States Administration in April 1986” shall remain on the
agenda for consideration upon notification by a Member State;
(c) The item entitled “Report of the Economic and
Social Council” shall be considered in its entirety in plenary;
(d) While remaining on the agenda of the plenary, the
sub-item entitled “Sport for peace and development: building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”
shall be considered every other year and the items entitled
“Return or restitution of cultural property to the countries of
origin” and “Elimination of unilateral extraterritorial coercive
economic measures as a means of political and economic
compulsion” shall be considered every three years;
(e) The item entitled “Information and communication
technologies for development” and the sub-item entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster
relief assistance of the United Nations, including special
economic assistance: special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions” shall be allocated for annual consideration
in the Second Committee;
(f) The item entitled “Towards global partnerships”
shall be allocated for consideration every other year in the
Second Committee;
(g) The sub-item entitled “Strengthening of the
coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of
the United Nations, including special economic assistance:
participation of volunteers, ‘White Helmets’, in the activities
of the United Nations in the field of humanitarian relief,
rehabilitation and technical cooperation for development” shall
be allocated for consideration every three years in the Second
Committee;
(h) The item entitled “Global road safety crisis” shall be
allocated for consideration every other year in the Third
Committee;
(i) The item entitled “Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples” shall be allocated for annual
consideration in the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee);
(j) The item entitled “Assistance in mine action” shall
be allocated for consideration every other year in the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee);

12

(k) The item entitled “University for Peace” shall be
allocated for consideration every three years in the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee);
(l) Bearing in mind that the General Assembly decided
in resolution 55/285 of 7 September 2001 to cluster all
cooperation items under one item, to make individual cooperation
items sub-items and to hold a joint debate for all sub-items, the
Secretary-General shall submit a single consolidated report under
the item entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations”;
(m) The adjustments outlined in the paragraphs above
shall take effect beginning with the fifty-ninth session of the
General Assembly;
(n) The General Assembly shall monitor the effects of
the adjustments outlined in the paragraphs above and continue
to make efforts, as appropriate, to further streamline the agenda
of the plenary.
E.

General Committee

5. Recalling section B, paragraph 1, of the annex to
resolution 58/126, having conducted a review of the work of the
General Committee, and taking into account the views
expressed by Member States on the matter, it is decided that:
(a) The work of the General Committee shall be carried
out in accordance with section VI of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly;
(b) The General Committee shall continue to meet
throughout the session and to play the leading role in advising
the General Assembly on the efficient organization, coordination
and management of its work;
(c) To ensure the effective implementation of rule 42 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the General
Committee shall meet regularly throughout the session with the
bureaux of the Main Committees to review the progress of the
work of the Main Committees and to make recommendations
for furthering such progress;
(d) In July of each year, the General Committee shall
conduct a review of the proposed programme of work for the
forthcoming session of the General Assembly, on the basis of a
report to be submitted by the Secretary-General, and submit
recommendations on the matter to the forthcoming Assembly.
The report of the Secretary-General shall include information on
the status of documentation to be issued during the forthcoming
session;
(e) The General Committee, meeting in open-ended
consultations, shall continue to consider the further
biennialization, triennialization, clustering and elimination of
items on the customary agenda of the General Assembly and
make recommendations thereon to the Assembly during its
fifty-ninth session;

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(f) On the basis of proposals from the President of the
General Assembly, and in the light of the positive experience
during the fifty-eighth session, the General Committee shall be
encouraged, as appropriate, to continue to schedule informal
briefings on topical issues;
(g) At the beginning of each session, the General
Committee, following recommendations from the President of
the General Assembly, shall recommend to the Assembly a
programme of, and format for, interactive debates on the items
on its agenda;
(h) The General Committee shall continue to consider
ways and means to further improve its working methods to
increase its efficiency and effectiveness in all aspects, and make
recommendations on the matter to the General Assembly for its
decision by 1 April 2005.
F.

Documentation

6. In the light of its decision in section B, paragraph 7, of the
annex to resolution 58/126 that the heavy volume of
documentation that is submitted to the General Assembly for its
consideration should be reduced, the Secretary-General is
requested:
(a) To update the note by the Secretariat entitled
“Control and limitation of documentation”,37 in the light of the
provisions of the present resolution;
(b) To submit the updated version of the note by the
Secretariat for the consideration of the General Committee,
meeting in open-ended consultations, so that it may make
recommendations to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth
session;
(c) To take the necessary action to initiate the
implementation of the provisions of paragraph 20 of resolution
57/300 of 20 December 2002, in which the General Assembly
requested the Secretary-General to start, on a trial basis, a
consultative process with the President of the General Assembly
and the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the Assembly at
the end of the main part of each session of the Assembly, with a
view to consolidating reports on related subjects, if decided by
the Main Committees.
RESOLUTION 58/317
Adopted at the 93rd plenary meeting, on 5 August 2004, by a recorded vote of
93 to 2, with 47 abstentions,* on the basis of draft resolution A/58/L.67/Rev.1,
sponsored by Malaysia, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations
that are members of the Non-Aligned Movement

Darussalam, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

58/317. Reaffirming the central role of the United Nations
in the maintenance of international peace and
security and the promotion of international
cooperation
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Charter of the United Nations,
including the purposes and principles contained therein, and
especially the determination to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, and emphasizing its paramount
importance for the maintenance of international peace and
security and the development of friendly relations and
cooperation among States,
Considering that the promotion of respect for the
obligations arising from the Charter and other instruments and
rules of international law is among the basic purposes and
principles of the United Nations, and in this context recalling the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, annexed to its resolution
2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration,
adopted by heads of State and Government at the Millennium
Summit of the United Nations on 8 September 2000,38

* In favour: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei

Reaffirming its determination to establish and maintain a
just and lasting international peace and security in accordance
with the Charter and relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
upholding the need to abide strictly by the relevant provisions of

_______________

_______________

37

38

A/58/CRP.7.

See resolution 55/2.

13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the Charter on the sovereign equality of all Member States,
respect for their territorial integrity and political independence
and non-interference in their internal affairs, the non-use of
force or threat of force, resolution of disputes by peaceful means
in conformity with the principles of justice and international
law, the right to self-determination of peoples remaining under
colonial or other forms of alien domination or foreign
occupation, respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, respect for the equal rights of all without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion, and international
cooperation in solving international problems of an economic,
social, cultural or humanitarian character, and convinced that
development can be achieved only in a climate of peace,
security and mutual confidence both within and among Member
States,
Reiterating that the responsibility for managing and
achieving worldwide economic and social development, as well
as responding to threats to international peace and security, must
be shared among all nations of the world and exercised
multilaterally and that, in this context, as the most universal and
most representative intergovernmental organization, the United
Nations must play the central role,
1. Reiterates the need for full observance of the
Charter of the United Nations and the unrestricted application of
all the principles and the achievement of the purposes that it
enshrines, including, inter alia, the principles regarding the
sovereign equality of Member States and the necessity of
respecting the political independence of nations, and reaffirms
the central role of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security and the strengthening of
international cooperation in conformity with the Charter;
2. Reaffirms the irreplaceable role of the United
Nations and the necessity of ensuring the equal participation of
all Member States, in a transparent manner, in a multilateral
system, guided by the Charter and founded on universally
recognized values and norms;
3. Also reaffirms its commitment to multilateralism,
which entails, inter alia, respect for the Charter and the
principles and norms of international law and the adoption of
measures to prevent the use or the threat of use of force and the
exercise of pressure and coercion as a means for obtaining
certain political objectives, and in this context underlines the
fact that Member States have committed themselves to
refraining in their international relations from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations, and to upholding the principle
of settlement of international disputes by peaceful means in
such a manner as not to endanger international peace and
security and justice, bearing in mind the need to allay the
legitimate concern of Member States with regard to ensuring
lasting safety and security for their peoples;

4. Re-emphasizes the respective prerogatives and
functions of the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council as defined in the Charter, and the
need to enhance the coordination among these organs, which
constitute the framework for the achievement of the purposes of
the United Nations, and underlines its conviction regarding the
need to sustain as a priority in the process of reform of the
United Nations, the revitalization and strengthening of the
Assembly and the reforms of the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, with a view to strengthening
further the capacity of the United Nations so as to enable it to
improve its performance in undertaking its functions and
responsibilities, mindful, in this context, of the need to involve
all Member States in these processes in order to ensure that their
perspectives, concerns and interests will be taken fully into
account;
5. Welcomes the establishment by the SecretaryGeneral of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change, and takes note of its terms of reference;39
6. Calls upon all States to cooperate fully through
constructive dialogue in order to ensure the full enjoyment,
promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, as well as in the promotion of the peaceful
resolution of international problems, including those of a
humanitarian character, the prevention and end of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes and the prosecution of
those responsible for such crimes, and, in their actions towards
that purpose, calls upon them to comply strictly with the
principles and norms of international law, inter alia, by fully
respecting their obligations under international human rights
instruments and humanitarian law;
7. Reaffirms the right to self-determination of peoples
that remain under colonial or other forms of alien domination or
foreign occupation, in conformity with the Charter and the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
8. Expresses its deep concern over any act or threat of
foreign intervention or occupation of any State or territory in
contravention of the Charter;
9. Underlines the need to strengthen the capacity of the
United Nations in the areas of prevention and resolution of
armed conflict, including relevant peace-building and
development activities, as well as in the areas of peacemaking
and peacekeeping, in accordance with the Charter, and calls for
the building up of consensus among Member States in defining
the scope, orientation and needs of such capacity in the light of
current and evolving challenges and threats to international
peace and security, taking into consideration, in this context, the
need for partnership between the United Nations and relevant

_______________
39

14

A/58/612, annex I.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

regional and subregional intergovernmental organizations in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter;
10. Reaffirms the important role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peace-building, and
stresses the importance of their full and equal participation in all
efforts to maintain and promote peace and security and the need
to increase their role in decision-making with regard to conflict
prevention and resolution and the rebuilding of post-conflict
societies;
11. Condemns acts of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever committed,
reiterates its call upon all States to adopt and implement further
measures to prevent terrorism and to strengthen international
cooperation in combating terrorism, and reaffirms that measures
taken by States must be in accordance with the Charter and
must comply with their obligations under international law and
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
12. Reaffirms the importance of achieving the total
elimination of all weapons of mass destruction globally, in
particular nuclear weapons, which pose the greatest danger to
mankind and the survival of civilization, reiterates in this
context its deep concern over the slow pace of progress towards
nuclear disarmament, emphasizes that the achievement of
genuine peace and security demands that the policies of States
be directed towards the elimination of the threat of war, in
particular nuclear war, bearing also in mind all the resulting
predictable consequences of the resurgence of a new arms race
among States, also reaffirms the need for all Member States to
fulfil their obligations in relation to arms control and
disarmament and to prevent the proliferation in all its aspects of
weapons of mass destruction, and further reaffirms that the
ultimate objective of the efforts of States in the disarmament
process is general and complete disarmament;
13. Reiterates its call upon all States urging them, as
well as the relevant United Nations bodies, to take appropriate
measures to fully implement the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects;40
14. Emphasizes that the United Nations has a central
role in promoting and coordinating international cooperation for
development, as well as in the follow-up to international
economic affairs and the outcome of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic and social fields and
in promoting policy coherence on global economic, social and
development issues, in consonance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter, and expresses its commitment to work for the
strengthening of its role as coordinator of the efforts carried out
_______________
40

See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001
(A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.

by the international community in this regard, with a view to
ensuring the achievement of a fair, democratic, transparent and
equitable international economic environment, in which the
opportunities offered by globalization are to the advantage of all
countries, in particular the developing countries.
RESOLUTION 58/318
Adopted at the 95th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2004, without a vote, on
the basis of draft resolution A/58/L.68, sponsored by the Netherlands

58/318. Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/79 of 9 December 2003, in
which it invited the Secretary-General to take steps to conclude
a relationship agreement between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court and to submit the negotiated draft
relationship agreement to the General Assembly for approval,
Noting the initialling of the negotiated draft Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court41 on 7 June 2004 in The Hague,
Taking note of the decision of 7 September 2004 taken by
the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court at its third session to approve the
negotiated draft Relationship Agreement, as noted by the
Secretary-General,42
Having considered the negotiated draft Relationship
Agreement,
1. Approves the draft Relationship Agreement between
the United Nations and the International Criminal Court;41
2. Decides to apply the Relationship Agreement
provisionally pending its formal entry into force;
3. Also decides that all expenses resulting from the
provision of services, facilities, cooperation and any other
support rendered to the International Criminal Court or the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, including under any arrangements
that may be otherwise agreed under article 10 of the
Relationship Agreement, that may accrue to the United Nations
as a result of the implementation of the Relationship Agreement
shall be paid in full to the Organization.

_______________
41
42

A/58/874, annex.
See A/58/874/Add.1.

15

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents
Resolution
No.

58/315.

Title

Page

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects ................................... 18

17

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 58/315
Adopted at the 92nd plenary meeting, on 1 July 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/474/Add.1, para. 8)1

58/315. Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965
and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling also, in particular, its resolutions 57/336 of
18 June 2003 and 57/129 of 11 December 2002,
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, including through its
peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue
to improve its capabilities in the field of peacekeeping and
to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its
peacekeeping operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of
the United Nations make to peacekeeping,
Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations expressed
by Member States, in particular troop-contributing countries,

1. Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations;2
2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and
conclusions of the Special Committee, contained in
paragraphs 29 to 177 of its report;
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant
organs of the United Nations to take all necessary steps to
implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of
the Special Committee;
4. Reiterates that those Member States that become
personnel contributors to the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in years to come or participate in the future in the
Special Committee for three consecutive years as observers
shall, upon request in writing to the Chairman of the Special
Committee, become members at the following session of the
Special Committee;
5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance
with its mandate, shall continue its efforts for a comprehensive
review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all
their aspects and shall review the implementation of its previous
proposals and consider any new proposals so as to enhance the
capacity of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this
field;
6. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report
on its work to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;

Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving
the efficiency and strengthening the effectiveness of the work of
the Special Committee,

7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Comprehensive review of
the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects”.

_______________

_______________

1

2

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the
Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt, Japan, Nigeria and Poland.

18

A/58/19. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly,
Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 19.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Contents
Resolution
No.

58/249.

Title

Page

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors.............................................. 21
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 21

58/259.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo................................ 21
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 21

58/260.

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor............................................................................ 23
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 23

58/261.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia .................................................................................................. 24
Resolution B .......................................................................................................................................................... 24

58/283.

Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on support costs related to extrabudgetary activities in organizations of the
United Nations system ............................................................................................................................................ 26

58/284.

Special Court for Sierra Leone................................................................................................................................. 27

58/285.

Human resources management................................................................................................................................ 27

58/286.

Joint Inspection Unit............................................................................................................................................... 28

58/287.

Review of the Office of the Prosecutor at the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia......................................................................................................................... 28

58/288.

Implementation of paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 57/323..................................................................... 29

58/294.

Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the
General Assembly and/or the Security Council......................................................................................................... 29

58/295.

Strengthening the security and safety of United Nations operations, staff and premises ............................................... 30

58/296.

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations ........................ 31

58/297.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy ............................................................................... 31

58/298.

Support account for peacekeeping operations ........................................................................................................... 33

58/299.

Reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services.................................................................................................. 34

58/300.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina......................................................................... 35

58/301.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus ................................................................................ 36

58/302.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea ............................................................................... 38

58/303.

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia................................................................................... 39

58/304.

Financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission............................................................................ 41

58/305.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo .............................................................. 42

58/306.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force............................................................................... 44

58/307.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon........................................................................................ 46

58/308.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone.......................................................................................... 48

58/309.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara........................................................ 50

19

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Resolution
No.

Title

Page

58/310.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire ...................................................................................... 52

58/311.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti .................................................................................. 54

58/312.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi.............................................................................................. 55

20

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/570/Add.1, para. 6)1

7. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the
full implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors and the related recommendations of the Advisory
Committee in a prompt and timely manner.

58/249. Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors

RESOLUTION 58/259 B

RESOLUTION 58/249 B

B2

Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/583/Add.1, para. 6)8

Having considered the financial report and audited
financial statements for the twelve-month period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003 and the report of the Board of Auditors on
United Nations peacekeeping operations,3 the related section of
the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions4 and the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations in
respect of that period,5

58/259. Financing of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The General Assembly,

1. Accepts the audited financial statements on the
United Nations peacekeeping operations for the period from
1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;6
2. Takes note of the observations and endorses the
recommendations contained in the report of the Board of
Auditors;7
3. Also takes note of the observations and endorses the
recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions4 related
to the report of the Board of Auditors;
4. Commends the Board of Auditors for the quality of
its report and the streamlined format thereof;
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of
Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2003;5
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure
that internal control in peacekeeping missions is improved with
respect to the optimum use of audit resources;
_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
2
Consequently, resolution 58/249, in section VI of the Official Records of
the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/58/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 58/249 A.
3
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement
No. 5 (A/58/5), vol. II.
4
A/58/759, sect. II.
5
A/58/737.
6
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement
No. 5 (A/58/5), vol. II, chap. V.
7
Ibid., chap. II.

B9
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General
and his note on the financing of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo10 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,11
Recalling Security Council resolutions 1258 (1999) of
6 August 1999 and 1279 (1999) of 30 November 1999 regarding,
respectively, the deployment to the Congo region of military
liaison personnel, and the establishment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1493 (2003) of 28 July 2003, by which the Council also
authorized increasing the military strength of the Mission,
Recalling also its resolution 54/260 A of 7 April 2000 on
the financing of the Mission, and its subsequent resolutions
thereon, the latest of which was resolution 58/259 A of
23 December 2003,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
_______________
8

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Vice-Chairman of the Committee.
9
Consequently, resolution 58/259, in section VI of the Official Records of
the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/58/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 58/259 A.
10
A/58/684, A/58/701, A/58/705 and A/58/772.
11
A/58/759 and Add.10 and A/58/794.

21

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as at 15 April 2004, including the
contributions outstanding in the amount of 111.1 million United
States dollars, representing some 6 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only thirty-six Member
States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
4. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 12 subject to the
provisions of the present resolution, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
measures in order to improve the distribution of food rations in
the Mission;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General, in the context
of the comprehensive review of the organizational structure of
the Mission, to consider the posts required for the election
process;

11. Authorizes the Secretary-General to employ, if
necessary, 17 additional staff, up to a total of 34, in the Office of
Public Information for the purposes of the election process,
within the approved budget level for 2004–2005, and to report
thereon in the context of the next performance report of the
Mission;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to present in his next
budget proposal workload indicators for the international staff in
the Office of Public Information;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary action to ensure that the Mission is administered with
a maximum of efficiency and economy, particularly with regard
to air transport;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;13
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo the amount of 746,072,500 dollars for
the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005, inclusive of
709,123,200 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission,
30,207,700 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping
operations and 6,741,600 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
17. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 746,072,500 dollars at a monthly rate of 62,172,708
dollars, in accordance with the levels set out in General
Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its
resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and updated in its
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2004 and 2005, as set out in
its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject to a decision
of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
18. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there

_______________

_______________

12

13

A/58/759/Add.10 and A/58/794.

22

A/58/684.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 17 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 22,311,400 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of
17,523,300 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share
of 4,408,300 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of
379,800 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Decides that for Member States that have fulfilled
their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be set off
against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 17
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the total amount of 133,437,500 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2003, in
accordance with the levels set out in General Assembly
resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution
55/236 and its resolution 57/290 A of 20 December 2002, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2003 as set out in its
resolutions 55/5 B of 23 December 2000 and 57/4 B of
20 December 2002;
20. Decides also that for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 133,437,500 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2003, in accordance with the scheme set
out in paragraph 19 above;
21. Decides further that the increase in the estimated
staff assessment income of 393,400 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2003 shall be added to the
credits from the amount referred to in paragraphs 19 and 20
above and that the respective shares of Member States therein
shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of those
paragraphs, as appropriate;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July
2003 to 30 June 2004
22. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on
the financing arrangements for the Mission for the period from
1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004;14
23. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 59,038,300 dollars already appropriated for the
maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2003 to
30 June 2004 under the terms of General Assembly resolution
58/259 A, in accordance with the levels set out in Assembly
resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its resolutions
55/236 and 57/290 A and updated in its resolution 58/256,
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2003, as set out
_______________
14

A/58/772.

in its resolutions 55/5 B and 57/4 B, and the scale of
assessments for 2004, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
24. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 23 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization
Fund of the estimated additional staff assessment income of
1,936,764 dollars approved for the Mission;
25. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
26. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission;
27. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
28. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo”.
RESOLUTION 58/260 B
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/584/Add.1, para. 6)15

58/260. Financing of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor
B16
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor17 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,18
Recalling Security Council resolution 1272 (1999) of
25 October 1999 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor and the
_______________
15

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
16
Consequently, resolution 58/260, in section VI of the Official Records of
the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/58/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 58/260 A.
17
A/58/795.
18
A/58/809.

23

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Transitional Administration, the last of which
was resolution 1392 (2002) of 31 January 2002, by which the
mandate was extended until 20 May 2002,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1410 (2002) of
17 May 2002, by which the Council established the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor as from 20 May 2002
for an initial period of twelve months, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1543 (2004) of
14 May 2004, by which the Council extended the Mission for a
period of six months, with a view to subsequently extending the
mandate for a further and final period of six months, until
20 May 2005,
Recalling further its resolution 54/246 A of 23 December
1999 on the financing of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor and its subsequent resolutions on
the financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor, the latest of which was resolution 58/260 A of
23 December 2003,

5. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set
off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided
for in paragraph 4 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 2,086,400 dollars, representing the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Mission for
the period from 1 July to 31 October 2004;
6. Decides further to include in the provisional agenda
of its fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor”.
RESOLUTION 58/261 B
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/589/Add.1, para. 6)19

58/261. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
B20
The General Assembly,

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,

Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General
and his note on the financing of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia21 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,22

1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,18 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;

Recalling Security Council resolution 1497 (2003) of
1 August 2003, by which the Council declared its readiness to
establish a United Nations stabilization force to support the
transitional government and to assist in the implementation of a
comprehensive peace agreement in Liberia,

2. Emphasizes that it will consider the number and
level of posts, the administrative structure, lines of accountability
and reporting in support of the substantive mandate in the
context of the full budget proposal to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July to 31 October
2004

Recalling also Security Council resolution 1509 (2003) of
19 September 2003, by which the Council decided to establish
the United Nations Mission in Liberia for a period of twelve
months,
Recalling further its resolution 58/261 A of 23 December
2003 on the financing of the Mission,

3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into
commitments in the amount of 30,485,600 United States dollars
for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July to
31 October 2004;

Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,

Financing of the commitment authority

Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission,

4. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 30,485,600 dollars for the Mission for the period
from 1 July to 31 October 2004 in accordance with the levels
set out in General Assembly resolution 55/235 of 23 December
2000, as adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution 55/236 of
23 December 2000 and updated in its resolution 58/256 of
23 December 2003, taking into account the scale of assessments
for 2004 as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December
2003;
24

_______________
19

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
20
Consequently, resolution 58/261, in section VI of the Official Records of
the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/58/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 58/261 A.
21
A/58/705, A/58/744 and A/58/792.
22
A/58/759 and A/58/798.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolution of the
Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United
Nations Mission in Liberia as at 15 April 2004, including the
contributions outstanding in the amount of 139.3 million United
States dollars, representing some 31 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only thirty-eight Member
States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
4. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 23 subject to the
provisions of the present resolution, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to review the
projects that may require the services of consultants, in order to
ensure the implementation of those projects that are required for
the successful implementation of the mandate, and to report
thereon in the performance report;

10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary action to ensure that the Mission is administered with
a maximum of efficiency and economy;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Mission in Liberia the amount of
864,815,900 dollars for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005, inclusive of 821,986,000 dollars for the maintenance of
the Mission, 35,015,300 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 7,814,600 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
13. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 864,815,900 dollars at a monthly rate of 72,067,991
dollars, in accordance with the levels set out in General
Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its
resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and updated in its
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking into account the
scale of assessments for 2004 and 2005 as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject to a decision of
the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
14. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 15,634,600 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of
10,084,900 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share
of 5,109,600 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of
440,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 August
2003 to 30 June 2004
15. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on
the financing arrangements of the Mission for the period from
1 August 2003 to 30 June 2004;24
16. Decides to apportion among Member States the
additional amount of 114,494,300 dollars already appropriated

_______________

_______________

23

24

A/58/798.

A/58/792.

25

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 August
2003 to 30 June 2004 under the terms of General Assembly
resolution 58/261 A, at a monthly rate of 10,408,600 dollars, in
accordance with the levels set out in Assembly resolution
55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution 55/236 and
its resolution 57/290 A of 20 December 2002 and updated in its
resolution 58/256, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2003, as set out in its resolutions 55/5 B of
23 December 2000 and 57/4 B of 20 December 2002 and the
scale of assessments for 2004 as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
17. Approves the reduction in the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the Mission in the amount of
1,449,100 dollars, from 5,210,000 dollars to 3,760,900 dollars;
18. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
19. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission;
20. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia”.
RESOLUTION 58/283
Adopted at the 83rd plenary meeting, on 8 April 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/572/Add.2, para. 6)25

58/283. Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on support
costs related to extrabudgetary activities in
organizations of the United Nations system
The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 58/560 of 23 December 2003,

thereon27 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,28 as well as the note
by the Joint Inspection Unit29 submitted in response to General
Assembly decision 58/560, clarifying further some of the
recommendations contained in its report,
1. Concurs with the observations and recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions contained in its report,28 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
2. Takes note of the comments of the SecretaryGeneral and those of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination;27
3. Endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Joint Inspection Unit on support costs related to
extrabudgetary activities in organizations of the United Nations
system26 to the extent that they apply to the United Nations,
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
4. Recognizes that recommendations 2, 3, 5, 6, 8 and
10 are directed to executive heads, and invites executive heads
to consider those recommendations;
5. Takes note of recommendation 1, and agrees with
the Joint Inspection Unit that governing bodies should take the
steps they consider necessary to ensure that extrabudgetary
resources are accepted for purposes that are consistent with
programme priorities and approved mandates;
6. Also takes note of recommendation 4, and draws the
attention of legislative organs to the practice of the United
Nations Children’s Fund under which interest earned on some
extrabudgetary contributions is retained by the organization, and
invites legislative organs to consider the applicability or
relevance of this practice to them;
7. Further takes note of recommendation 9, and agrees
with the Joint Inspection Unit that legislative organs should
enact support cost policies to ensure that extrabudgetary
resources continue to be mobilized and deployed effectively so
as to further the mandated activities in developmental,
humanitarian and other substantive areas, and also agrees that
those policies should be straightforward, transparent, easy to
administer and must provide for a consistent and equitable
approach to special arrangements.

Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
on support costs related to extrabudgetary activities in
organizations of the United Nations system,26 the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination

_______________
25

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
26
See A/57/442.

26

_______________
27

A/57/442/Add.1.
A/57/434, paras. 5 and 6.
29
A/58/714.
28

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 58/284
Adopted at the 83rd plenary meeting, on 8 April 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/573/Add.1, para. 10)30

58/284. Special Court for Sierra Leone

7. Invites the Management Committee to review the
structure of the Court with a view to minimizing the cost of
completing the Court’s work, without adversely affecting the
implementation of the legal agreement between the United
Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone.34

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the request for a subvention to the Special Court for Sierra
Leone 31 submitted in response to the exchange of letters
between the Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council32 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,33
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions contained in its report,33 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and in this regard requests the SecretaryGeneral to provide the necessary report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General, as an exceptional
measure, to enter into commitments in an amount not to exceed
16.7 million United States dollars to supplement the financial
resources of the Special Court for Sierra Leone for the period
from 1 July to 31 December 2004, on the understanding that
any regular budget funds appropriated for the Court would be
refunded to the United Nations at the time of liquidation of the
Court should sufficient voluntary contributions be received;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in concert with the
Management Committee, to redouble efforts to raise voluntary
contributions to support the work of the Court, and to report to
the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session on progress
made;
4. Appeals to Member States, as a matter of urgency, to
contribute voluntary funds in support of the Court and to honour
existing pledges;
5. Notes that the Court is expected to complete its
work by 31 December 2005;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the Court to
adopt a completion strategy, and also requests the SecretaryGeneral to inform the Security Council and the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session about this matter;

_______________
30

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
31
A/58/733.
32
S/2004/182 and S/2004/183.
33
A/58/7/Add.30. For the final text, see Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 7A.

RESOLUTION 58/285
Adopted at the 83rd plenary meeting, on 8 April 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/750, para. 9)35

58/285. Human resources management
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations, in particular
Articles 101 and 97,
Reaffirming also the Staff Regulations and Rules of the
United Nations,
Reaffirming further the prerogative of Member States to
supplement or amend the Staff Regulations, in accordance with
regulation 12.1,
Reaffirming that the Secretary-General, as the Chief
Administrative Officer of the Organization, shall provide and
enforce staff rules consistent with the broad principles of
personnel policy for the staffing and administration of the
Secretariat,
Reaffirming also that all provisional rules and/or
amendments to the Staff Rules should be consistent with the
intent and purposes of the Staff Regulations and should be
reported to the General Assembly in accordance with
regulation 12.3,
1. Notes the practice in the Organization of
determining personal status for the purpose of entitlements as
are set out in the Staff Regulations and Rules of the United
Nations by reference to the law of nationality of the staff
member concerned;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to reissue SecretaryGeneral’s bulletin ST/SGB/2004/4 after reviewing its contents,
taking into account the views and concerns expressed by
Member States thereon;36
3. Notes the absence of the terms referred to in
paragraph 4 of the bulletin in the context of the existing Staff
Regulations and Rules, and decides that the inclusion of those
terms shall require the consideration of and necessary action by
the General Assembly.
_______________
34

S/2002/246 and Corr.2 and 3, appendix II.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
36
See A/C.5/58/SR.32, 35, 38 and 39; and A/58/PV.83.
35

27

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 58/286
Adopted at the 83rd plenary meeting, on 8 April 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/751, para. 6)37

58/286. Joint Inspection Unit
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the Joint
Inspection Unit, in particular resolutions 50/233 of 7 June 1996,
54/16 of 29 October 1999, 55/230 of 23 December 2000,
56/245 of 24 December 2001 and 57/284 A and B of
20 December 2002,
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
for 2002,38 the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
programme of work of the Unit for 2003,39 the note by the
Secretary-General transmitting the preliminary listing of reports
for potential inclusion in the programme of work of the Unit for
2004 and beyond,40 the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Unit,41 the note
by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Unit on
the preliminary review of its statute and working methods42 and
notes by the Secretary-General transmitting the reports of the
Unit on the in-depth review of its statute and working methods,43
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Joint Inspection Unit for 2002;38
2. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the programme of work of the Unit for 2003;39
3. Also takes note of the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting the preliminary listing of reports for potential
inclusion in the programme of work of the Unit for 2004 and
beyond;40
4. Further takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Unit;41
5. Takes note with appreciation of the active
contribution of the Unit to the review of its statute and working
methods;44

6. Welcomes the internal reform process undertaken by
the Unit, including its strategic framework and its internal
working procedures, and urges the Unit to continue these
efforts;
7. Requests the secretariats of the United Nations and
all participating organizations to facilitate the work of the Unit,
including in particular by offering full access to all information,
as required by the Unit;
8. Reiterates once again its request to the executive
heads of the participating organizations that have not yet done
so to take the steps necessary to facilitate the consideration of
and action on the system of follow-up to the reports of the Unit,
and invites the legislative organs concerned to consider the
system and take action in that regard;
9. Decides to revert to the issue of the reform of the
Unit at its fifty-ninth session.
RESOLUTION 58/287
Adopted at the 83rd plenary meeting, on 8 April 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/752, para. 6)45

58/287. Review of the Office of the Prosecutor at the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994 and
54/244 of 23 December 1999,
Recalling also its resolutions 57/289 of 20 December
2002 and 58/253 and 58/255 of 23 December 2003,
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the review of the Office of the Prosecutor
at the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,46
Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services on the review of the Office of the Prosecutor at the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.46

_______________
37

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
38
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement
No. 34 (A/58/34).
39
A/58/64.
40
A/58/291.
41
A/58/220.
42
A/58/343.
43
A/58/343/Add.1 and 2.
44
See A/58/343 and Add.1 and 2.

28

_______________
45

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
46
See A/58/677.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 58/288

RESOLUTION 58/294

Adopted at the 83rd plenary meeting, on 8 April 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/582/Add.1, para. 8)47

Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/573/Add.2, para. 8)51

58/288. Implementation of paragraph 3 of General
Assembly resolution 57/323

58/294. Estimates in respect of special political missions,
good offices and other political initiatives
authorized by the General Assembly and/or the
Security Council

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/323 of 18 June 2003,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on
the implementation of paragraph 3 of General Assembly
resolution 57/323 48 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,49
1. Takes note of the proposal by the SecretaryGeneral50 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;49
2. Decides to postpone to 30 June 2004 the return of
the remaining 50 per cent of the net cash available for credit to
Member States as at 30 June 2002, in the amount of 84,446,000
United States dollars, in respect of the fund balances of the
United Nations Mission in Haiti; the United Nations Observer
Group in Central America and the United Nations Observer
Mission in El Salvador; the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force; the United Nations Protection Force, the
United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia,
the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force and the
United Nations Peace Forces headquarters; the United Nations
Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium and the Civilian Police Support Group; the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission and the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola; the United Nations
Observer Mission Uganda-Rwanda and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda; the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan; the United Nations Transition
Assistance Group; and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia;
3. Also decides that credits or disbursements to
Member States may be made at the discretion of the Member
State concerned as from 1 July 2004;
4. Encourages Member States that are owed credits for
the closed peacekeeping mission accounts to apply those credits
to any accounts where the Member State concerned has
outstanding assessed contributions.

_______________
47

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
48
A/58/723.
49
A/58/732.
50
See A/58/723, para. 6.

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the estimates in respect of special political missions, good
offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General
Assembly and/or the Security Council52 and the oral statement
made by the Chairman of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,53
1. Emphasizes the importance of the work of the good
offices of the Secretary-General in support of the work of
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices
and other political initiatives authorized by the General
Assembly and/or the Security Council;52
3. Notes with concern the late submission of the report
of the Secretary-General;
4. Endorses the observations and recommendations as
orally presented by the Chairman of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,53 subject to the
provisions of the present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, by the end of its fifty-eighth session, a
comprehensive financial report on the requirements for United
Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission,
including clearly defined requirements to be provided from the
regular budget and elements being financed from other sources,
for its consideration at the early part of its fifty-ninth session;
6. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into
commitments in the amount of 6 million United States dollars
for United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed
Commission until 30 November 2004, on the understanding
that any decision on further financing must be taken by
31 October 2004;

_______________
51

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
52
A/C.5/58/20/Add.1.
53
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Fifth
Committee, 49th meeting (A/C.5/58/SR.49), and corrigendum.

29

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Urges the Secretary-General to seek further
voluntary contributions for United Nations support to the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission.

5. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into
commitments not to exceed 38,033,200 dollars for the financing
of infrastructure projects;

Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/820, para. 8)54

6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to it at
its fifty-ninth session a comprehensive report on further
strengthening the safety and security of United Nations
operations, staff and premises, which should contain, inter alia,
the following elements:

58/295. Strengthening the security and safety of United
Nations operations, staff and premises

(a) Clearly established criteria for determining longterm needs;

RESOLUTION 58/295

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/255 of 24 December 2001,
56/286 of 27 June 2002, 57/305 of 15 April 2003, 58/270 of
23 December 2003 and all relevant resolutions regarding the
security and safety of United Nations operations, staff and
premises,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
strengthening the security and safety of United Nations
operations, staff and premises,55
Having also considered the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,56
1. Endorses the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
contained in its report,56 subject to the provisions of the present
resolution;
2. Stresses the need, for the purposes of objective
analyses, for a dedicated functional staff at Headquarters to
review the recommendations on country risk assessments made
by security officers in the field with the assistance of and input
from national authorities of the host country;
3. Approves the establishment of 58 new field security
posts for the Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator,
and decides, without prejudice to such decisions as may be
arrived at regarding cost-sharing arrangements, to appropriate
2,583,000 United States dollars, being the portion of costs
normally attributable to the United Nations using current
formulas, and to revert to the required residual funding of
8,162,100 dollars at the fifty-ninth session when determining
cost-sharing arrangements;
4. Decides to revert to the possible conversion of the
58 extrabudgetary field security posts for the Office of the
United Nations Security Coordinator in the context of the
comprehensive report at its fifty-ninth session;
_______________
54

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
55
A/58/756.
56
A/58/758.

30

(b) A rational framework for the enhancement of
system-wide security arrangements, based on the completion of
all ongoing reviews, including the change management study;
(c) Time frames for the completion of the various
projects proposed in the report of the Secretary-General,55 as
well as determinations as to which organizational units are
responsible for their completion;
(d) Clearly established lines of accountability and
responsibility and a clear chain of command for all participants
in field security and at duty stations, including clarification of
the relationship between all relevant United Nations entities and
the Secretariat;
(e) Information on United Nations cooperation with and
the role and responsibilities of host countries;
(f) Information on the need to ensure an enhanced
professional capacity in the United Nations to conduct threat
and risk assessment on a worldwide basis in order to address the
issue raised in paragraph 18 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral;55
(g) Information on the utilization and cost of expertise
sought on safety and security;
(h) Information on the need for adequate securityrelated training for all United Nations staff;
(i) Analysis of and recommendations on long-term
funding arrangements for the Office of the United Nations
Security Coordinator and related resource requirements;
7. Decides that the resource requirements in the
requested report should be based on and justified in terms of
the Secretary-General’s comprehensive review of safety and
security;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office
of Internal Oversight Services with the conduct of an audit
review of the utilization and management of the funds
appropriated by the General Assembly in its resolution 56/286
for the implementation of measures to strengthen the security
and safety of United Nations premises, including the causes for
cost escalation and compliance with procurement procedures,
and to report to the Assembly at its fifty-ninth session in

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

conjunction with the comprehensive report on strengthening the
security and safety of United Nations operations, staff and
premises;
9. Decides to approve an additional appropriation
under the regular budget in the amount of 18,287,100 dollars,
broken down by budget section as follows:
Section 3. Political affairs

2 866 100

Section 4. Disarmament

70 200

Section 5. Peacekeeping operations

3 774 100

Section 7. International Court of Justice

84 000

Section 18. Economic and social development in Africa

55 700

Section 19. Economic and social development in Asia
and the Pacific

592 900

Section 21. Economic and social development in Latin
America and the Caribbean

80 900

Section 22. Economic and social development in
Western Asia

233 400

Section 28. Public information

186 200

Section 29A. Office of the Under-Secretary-General for
Management

500 000

Section 29C. Office of Human Resources Management

326 800

Section 29D. Office of Central Support Services

1 672 100

Section 29E. Administration, Geneva

2 683 500

Section 29F. Administration, Vienna

1 931 900

Section 29G. Administration, Nairobi

646 300

Section 31. Jointly financed administrative activities

2 583 000

Total

58/296. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Overview of the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations: budget performance for the period
from 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003 and budget for the period
from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005” 58 and the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,59
1. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at the main part of its fifty-ninth session a
comprehensive report on the use, including the conversion, of
300 series contracts, addressing in particular the strategy of the
Organization for meeting current and future human resources
requirements for peacekeeping missions, taking into account the
observations and recommendations of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
2. Endorses the observations and recommendations of
the Advisory Committee contained in paragraphs 35 to 39 of its
report,59 concerning the wholesale conversion, bearing in mind
the fact that the General Assembly has taken no decision to
support the replacement of the 300 series contracts as a
mechanism for the employment of staff in peacekeeping
missions;
3. Decides to suspend the application of the four-year
maximum limit for appointments of limited duration under the
300 series of the staff rules in peacekeeping operations,60 until
31 December 2004, pending a decision by the General
Assembly on this matter at its fifty-ninth session.

18 287 100

RESOLUTION 58/297
10. Also decides to approve an additional appropriation
in the amount of 48,700 dollars under section 34, Staff
assessment, to be offset by an equivalent amount of income
under income section 1, Income from staff assessment.
RESOLUTION 58/296
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/821, para. 9)57

Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/582/Add.2, para. 10)61

58/297. Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 49/233 A of
23 December 1994,

_______________
58

A/58/705.
A/58/759.
60
See resolution 52/216 and ST/SGB/2004/3 and Corr.1, Scope and purpose
of the 300 series of the Staff Rules, staff rules 301.1 (a) (ii) and 304.4 (b).
61
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Vice-Chairman of the Committee.
59

_______________
57

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.

31

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling also its decision 50/500 of 17 September 1996
on the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi,
Italy, and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the
latest of which was decision 58/557 of 23 December 2003,
Recalling further its resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002
concerning the establishment of the strategic deployment stocks
and its subsequent resolution 57/315 of 18 June 2003 on the
status of the implementation of the strategic deployment stocks,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base,62 the status
of the implementation of strategic deployment stocks, 63
progress in the implementation of the field assets control
system64 and the analysis of establishing a global procurement
hub for all peacekeeping missions in Brindisi65 and the related
reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,66
Reiterating the importance of establishing an accurate
inventory of assets,
1. Notes with appreciation the facilities provided by
the Government of Italy to the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi;
2. Endorses the observations and recommendations
contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,67 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Reiterates the need to implement, as a matter of
priority, an effective inventory management standard, especially
in respect of peacekeeping operations involving high inventory
value;
4. Also reiterates paragraph 2 of its resolution 56/292,
and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon
expeditiously;
Field assets control system
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
progress in the implementation of the field assets control
system;64

_______________
62

A/58/702, A/58/705 and A/58/706.
A/58/707.
64
A/57/765.
65
A/58/762.
66
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement
No. 7 and corrigendum (A/58/7 and Corr.1), paras. II.36 and II.37; A/58/759;
A/58/759/Add.9; and A/58/796.
67
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement
No. 7 and corrigendum (A/58/7 and Corr.1), paras. II.36 and II.37 and
A/58/759/Add.9.
63

32

Strategic deployment stocks
6. Also takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the status of the implementation of the strategic
deployment stocks;63
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session on the functioning of
existing mechanisms of the strategic deployment stocks, in the
light of lessons learned from experiences with mission start-ups;
Global procurement hub
8. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the analysis of establishing a global procurement hub for all
peacekeeping missions in Brindisi;65
9. Endorses the observations and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,68 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003
10. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the United Nations Logistics Base
at Brindisi for the period from 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;69
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005
11. Approves the cost estimates for the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi amounting to 28,422,000 United
States dollars for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;
Financing of the budget estimates
12. Decides to apply the balance of other income and
adjustments in the total amount of 3,173,700 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2003 to the resources
required for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;
13. Also decides that the increase of 9,900 dollars in the
estimated staff assessment income in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2003 shall be added to the credits from
the amount referred to in paragraph 12 above;
14. Further decides to prorate the balance of 25,248,300
dollars among the individual active peacekeeping operation
budgets to meet the financing requirements of the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi for the period from 1 July
2004 to 30 June 2005;

_______________
68
69

A/58/796.
A/58/702.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

15. Decides to set off against the balance referred to in
paragraph 14 above the estimated staff assessment income of
1,412,500 dollars for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005, representing the difference between the estimated staff
assessment income of 1,560,600 dollars for the period from
1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005 and the adjustment in the staff
assessment income of 148,100 dollars related to the period
ended 30 June 2001, to be prorated among the individual active
peacekeeping operation budgets;
16. Also decides to consider at its fifty-ninth session the
question of the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base
at Brindisi.
RESOLUTION 58/298
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/582/Add.2, para. 10)70

58/298. Support account for peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/258 of 3 May 1991, 47/218 A
of 23 December 1992, 48/226 A of 23 December 1993, 56/241
of 24 December 2001, 56/293 of 27 June 2002 and 57/318 of
18 June 2003, its decisions 48/489 of 8 July 1994, 49/469 of
23 December 1994 and 50/473 of 23 December 1995 and other
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the support account for peacekeeping
operations71 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,72
Recognizing the importance of the United Nations being
able to respond and deploy rapidly to a peacekeeping operation
upon adoption of a relevant resolution of the Security Council,
within thirty days for traditional peacekeeping operations and
ninety days for complex peacekeeping operations,
Recognizing also the need for adequate support during all
phases of peacekeeping operations, including the liquidation
and termination phases,
Mindful that the level of the support account should
broadly correspond to the mandate, number, size and
complexity of peacekeeping missions,

2. Reaffirms the need for effective and efficient
administration and financial management of peacekeeping
operations, and urges the Secretary-General to continue to
identify measures to increase the productivity and efficiency of
the support account;
3. Also reaffirms the need for adequate funding for the
backstopping of peacekeeping operations, as well as the need
for full justification for that funding in support account budget
submissions;
4. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the relevant report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;73
5. Decides to maintain, for the period from 1 July 2004
to 30 June 2005, the funding mechanism for the support account
used in the current period, from 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004, as
approved in paragraph 3 of its resolution 50/221 B of 7 June
1996;
6. Reaffirms the need for the Secretary-General to
ensure that delegation of authority to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat and field missions is
in strict compliance with relevant resolutions and decisions and
the relevant rules and procedures of the General Assembly on
this matter;
7. Also reaffirms paragraph 15 of its resolution 56/293,
regrets that the report requested in paragraph 10 of its resolution
57/318 was not submitted at its fifty-eighth session, and decides
to consider it at its fifty-ninth session;
8. Decides to continue its consideration of the
implementation of the restructuring of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, in the context of the review requested
in paragraph 14 of resolution 57/318, at the second part of its
resumed fifty-ninth session;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session on the status of the
civilian rapid deployment roster, including measures to improve
its utility, taking into account recent experiences with its use;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to review the
level of the support account, including the need for existing
posts, in future budget submissions, taking into consideration
the number, size and complexity of peacekeeping operations;

1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the support account for peacekeeping
operations;71

11. Notes with concern, as observed by the Advisory
Committee in paragraph 21 of its report,73 that the implementation
of paragraph 18 of resolution 57/318 is not consistent with the
requirement of the resolution;

_______________

12. Reiterates paragraph 18 of resolution 57/318, and
requests the Secretary-General to submit, during future

70

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
71
A/58/703 and Add.1, A/58/705 and A/58/715.
72
A/58/759 and A/58/760.

_______________
73

A/58/760.

33

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

considerations of the support account budget, information as
outlined in paragraph 22 of the report of the Advisory
Committee73 with respect to posts that will have been vacant for
at least 12 months by 30 June of a given year on the
understanding that, in the interim, until such consideration by
the General Assembly, the recruitment process will not be
affected;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2002 to
30 June 2003;74
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005
14. Approves the support account requirements in the
amount of 121,610,300 United States dollars for the period from
1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005, including 743 continuing and 18
new temporary posts and their related post and non-post
requirements;
Financing of the budget estimates
15. Decides that the requirements for the support
account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July
2004 to 30 June 2005 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 8,478,600 dollars, comprising 8,350,800 dollars
in respect of the period ended 30 June 2003 and the adjustment
of 127,800 dollars related to the period ended 30 June 2001, to
be applied to the resources required for the period from 1 July
2004 to 30 June 2005;
(b) The increase of 59,000 dollars in the estimated staff
assessment income, representing the difference between
682,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June
2003 and the adjustment of 741,000 dollars related to the period
ended 30 June 2001, to be applied to the amount referred to in
subparagraph (a) above;
(c) The balance of 113,131,700 dollars to be prorated
among the budgets of the active peacekeeping operations for the
period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;
(d) The estimated staff assessment income of
16,509,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005 to be set off against the balance referred to in
subparagraph (c) above, to be prorated among the budgets of
the individual active peacekeeping operations.

_______________
74

A/58/703 and Add.1.

34

RESOLUTION 58/299
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/582/Add.2, para. 10)75

58/299. Reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, 54/244
of 23 December 1999, 56/241 and 56/246 of 24 December 2001
and 57/278 B of 18 June 2003,
Having considered the reports of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the evaluation of the impact of the recent
restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,76
the follow-up review of the status of recommendations of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services on mission liquidation
activities at the United Nations, 77 the administration of
peacekeeping trust funds, 78 and the investigation into the
fraudulent diversion of 4.3 million United States dollars by a
senior staff member of the reconstruction pillar of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,79
1. Takes note of the reports of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the evaluation of the impact of the recent
restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,76
the follow-up review of the status of recommendations of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services on mission liquidation
activities at the United Nations,77 the administration of
peacekeeping trust funds,78 and the investigation into the
fraudulent diversion of 4.3 million dollars by a senior staff
member of the reconstruction pillar of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo;79
2. Decides to revert to the consideration of the report
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of the
policies and procedures for recruiting staff for the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations,80 during its fifty-ninth session, in
the context of its consideration of the items entitled “Human
resources management” and “Administrative and budgetary
aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations”;
3. Notes that the Board of Auditors will act upon
General Assembly resolution 57/318 of 18 June 2003 once it
has considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services and assessed what additional evaluation it might
_______________
75

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
76
See A/58/746.
77
See A/57/622.
78
See A/58/613.
79
See A/58/592 and Corr.1.
80
See A/58/704.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

provide,81 and also notes that the General Assembly may revert
at that time to the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services.
RESOLUTION 58/300
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/822, para. 6)82

58/300. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina 83 and the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,84
Recalling Security Council resolution 1035 (1995) of
21 December 1995 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1423 (2002) of
12 July 2002, by which the Council extended the mandate of
the Mission until 31 December 2002,

1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina as at
15 April 2004, including the contributions outstanding in the
amount of 38 million United States dollars, representing some
4 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern
that only ninety-seven Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
3. Expresses concern at the delay experienced by the
Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate resources
to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
4. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment in
respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
5. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;

Recalling also Security Council resolution 1437 (2002) of
11 October 2002, in which the Council authorized the United
Nations military observers to continue to monitor the
demilitarization of the Prevlaka peninsula until 15 December
2002,

6. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,85 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;

Recalling further its decision 50/481 of 11 April 1996 on
the financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions and
decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 57/334 of
18 June 2003,

Final disposition of assets

Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003

Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission,

9. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their
financial obligations to the Mission shall be credited their
respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income
in the total amount of 16,839,800 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2003, in accordance with the
levels set out in General Assembly resolution 55/235, as
adjusted by the Assembly in its resolutions 55/236 of
23 December 2000 and 57/290 A of 20 December 2002, and

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
meet its outstanding liabilities,
_______________
81
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement
No. 5 (A/58/5), vol. II, chap. II, para. 6.
82
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
83
A/58/632, A/58/705 and A/58/720.
84
A/58/759 and Add.11.

7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the final disposition of the assets of the Mission;86

8. Also takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the financial performance of the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;87

_______________
85

A/58/759/Add.11.
A/58/720.
87
A/58/632.
86

35

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

taking into account the scale of assessments for 2003, as set out
in its resolutions 55/5 B of 23 December 2000 and 57/4 B of
20 December 2002;
10. Decides also that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, their
respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income
in the total amount of 16,839,800 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2003 shall be set off against their
outstanding obligations, in accordance with the scheme set out
in paragraph 9 above;
11. Decides further that the increase of 342,600 dollars
in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2003 shall be added to the
credits from the amount referred to in paragraphs 9 and 10
above, and that the respective shares of Member States therein
shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of those
paragraphs, as appropriate;
12. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina”.
RESOLUTION 58/301
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/823, para. 6)88

58/301. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus89 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,90
Recalling Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964, regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Force, the latest of which was resolution 1548 (2004) of 11 June
2004,
Recalling also its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993
on the financing of the Force for the period beginning 16 June

1993 and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the
latest of which was resolution 57/332 of 18 June 2003,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Force by certain Governments,
Noting that voluntary contributions were insufficient to
cover all the costs of the Force, including those incurred by
troop-contributing Governments prior to 16 June 1993, and
regretting the absence of an adequate response to appeals for
voluntary contributions, including that contained in the letter
dated 17 May 1994 from the Secretary-General to all Member
States,91
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force
with the necessary financial resources to enable it to fulfil its
responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus as at 15 April
2004, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
15.7 million United States dollars, representing some 7 per cent
of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
thirty-eight Member States have paid their assessed contributions
in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
4. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;

_______________
88

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
89
A/58/631, A/58/644 and Corr.1, A/58/705 and A/58/756.
90
A/58/758 and A/58/759 and Add.4.

36

_______________
91

S/1994/647.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,92 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to take all action
necessary to ensure that the Force is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Force for the period 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003;93
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus the amount
of 51,992,200 dollars for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005, inclusive of 47,240,400 dollars for the maintenance of the
Force, 2,176,900 dollars for strengthening the security and
safety of the staff and premises of the Force,94 2,105,100 dollars
for the support account for peacekeeping operations and
469,800 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
13. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of
the net appropriation, equivalent to 16,444,900 dollars, will be
funded through voluntary contributions from the Government
of Cyprus and the amount of 6.5 million dollars from the
Government of Greece;
14. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 29,047,300 dollars at a monthly rate of 2,420,608
dollars, in accordance with the levels set out in General
_______________
92

A/58/759/Add.4.
A/58/631.
94
See resolution 58/295.
93

Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its
resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and updated in its
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking into account the
scale of assessments for 2004 and 2005, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject to a decision of
the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
15. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set
off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 14 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 2,657,500 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 2,323,800 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 307,200 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 26,500 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
16. Decides further that, for Member States that have
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set
off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 14
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 1,005,879 dollars for the
financial period ended 30 June 2003, in accordance with the
levels set out in General Assembly resolution 55/235, as
adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution 55/236 and its
resolution 57/290 A of 20 December 2002, taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2003, as set out in its resolutions
55/5 B of 23 December 2000 and 57/4 B of 20 December 2002;
17. Decides that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set
off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of
the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of
1,005,879 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2003, in accordance with the scheme set out in
paragraph 16 above;
18. Decides also that the increase in the estimated staff
assessment income of 85,500 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2003 shall be added to the credits from
the amount referred to in paragraphs 16 and 17 above, and that
the respective shares of Member States therein shall be applied
in accordance with the provisions of those paragraphs, as
appropriate;
19. Decides further, taking into account its voluntary
contribution for the financial period ended 30 June 2003, that
one third of other income in the amount of 641,666 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2003 shall be
returned to the Government of Cyprus;
20. Decides that, taking into account its voluntary
contribution for the financial period ended 30 June 2003, the
prorated share of other income in the amount of 286,055 dollars
in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2003 shall be
returned to the Government of Greece;
37

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

21. Decides also to continue to maintain as separate the
account established for the Force for the period prior to 16 June
1993, invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to
that account, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts in appealing for voluntary contributions to the account;

Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,

22. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;

Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission,

23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Force;
24. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash
and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”.
RESOLUTION 58/302
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/824, para. 6)95

58/302. Financing of the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea96 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,97
Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 1312 (2000)
of 31 July 2000, by which the Council established the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1531 (2004) of
12 March 2004,
Recalling its resolution 55/237 of 23 December 2000 on
the financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions
thereon, the latest of which was resolution 57/328 of 18 June
2003,

_______________
95

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
96
A/58/633, A/58/658, A/58/705 and A/58/756.
97
A/58/758 and A/58/759 and Add.8.

38

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea as at 15 April
2004, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
24.8 million United States dollars, representing some 4 per cent
of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
thirty-six Member States have paid their assessed contributions
in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
4. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,98 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
_______________
98

A/58/759/Add.8.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Requests the Secretary-General to take all action
necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;99
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea the amount
of 216,030,500 dollars for the period from 1 July 2004 to
30 June 2005, inclusive of 198,331,600 dollars for the
maintenance of the Mission, 7 million dollars for the
strengthening of the safety and security of the staff and
premises of the Mission,100 8,746,800 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 1,952,100 dollars for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
13. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 216,030,500 dollars at a monthly rate of 18,002,541
dollars, in accordance with the levels set out in General
Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its
resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and updated in its
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking into account the
scale of assessments for 2004 and 2005, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject to a decision of
the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
14. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 5,943,800 dollars at a
monthly rate of 495,316 dollars, comprising the estimated staff
assessment income of 4,557,400 dollars approved for the
Mission, the prorated share of 1,276,400 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the support account and
the prorated share of 110,000 dollars of the estimated staff

_______________
99

A/58/633.
100
See resolution 58/295.

assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics
Base;
15. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled
their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be set off
against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 13
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the total amount of 24,505,100 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2003, in
accordance with the levels set out in General Assembly
resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution
55/236 and its resolution 57/290 A of 20 December 2002, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2003 as set out in its
resolutions 55/5 B of 23 December 2000 and 57/4 B of
20 December 2002;
16. Decides also that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 24,505,100 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2003, in accordance with the scheme set
out in paragraph 15 above;
17. Decides further that the decrease of 5,100 dollars in
the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2003 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount referred to in paragraphs 15 and 16 above;
18. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping operation shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
operations;
19. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in peacekeeping operations;
20. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea”.
RESOLUTION 58/303
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/825, para. 7)101

_______________
101

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.

39

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

58/303. Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia102 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,103
Recalling Security Council resolution 854 (1993) of
6 August 1993, by which the Council approved the deployment
of an advance team of up to ten United Nations military
observers for a period of three months and the incorporation of
the advance team into a United Nations observer mission if such
a mission was formally established by the Council,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 858 (1993) of
24 August 1993, by which the Council established the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Observer Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1524 (2004) of 30 January 2004,
Recalling further its decision 48/475 A of 23 December
1993 on the financing of the Observer Mission and its
subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of
which was resolution 57/333 of 18 June 2003,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Observer Mission with the financial resources necessary to
enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia as at 15 April
2004, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
12.4 million United States dollars, representing some 6 per cent
of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
thirty Member States have paid their assessed contributions in
full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Observer Mission
in full;

3. Expresses concern at the delay experienced by the
Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
4. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
5. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
6. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Observer Mission;
7. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,104 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to take all action
necessary to ensure that the Observer Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Observer Mission against
General Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of
the Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003
10. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Observer Mission for the
period from 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;105
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005
11. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia the amount of
33,589,200 dollars for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005, inclusive of 31,925,700 dollars for the maintenance of the
Observer Mission, 1,360,000 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 303,500 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
12. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 33,589,200 dollars at a monthly rate of 2,799,100

_______________

_______________

102

104

103

40

A/58/639, A/58/640 and A/58/705.
A/58/759 and Add.1.

105

A/58/759/Add.1.
A/58/639.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

dollars, in accordance with the levels set out in General
Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its
resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and updated in its
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking into account the
scale of assessments for 2004 and 2005 as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject to a decision of
the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
13. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 12 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,339,800 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,124,200
dollars approved for the Observer Mission, the prorated share of
198,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of
17,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
14. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled
their financial obligations to the Observer Mission, there shall
be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 12 above, their respective share of the unencumbered
balance and other income in the amount of 4,096,100 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2003, in
accordance with the levels set out in General Assembly
resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution
55/236 and its resolution 57/290 A of 20 December 2002, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2003 as set out in its
resolutions 55/5 B of 23 December 2000 and 57/4 B of
20 December 2002;
15. Decides also that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Observer Mission,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their
respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income
in the amount of 4,096,100 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2003, in accordance with the scheme set
out in paragraph 14 above;
16. Decides further that the increase of 142,200 dollars
in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2003 shall be added to the
credits from the amount referred to in paragraphs 14 and 15
above and that the respective shares of Member States therein
shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of those
paragraphs, as appropriate;
17. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
18. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel participating in the Observer Mission under the
auspices of the United Nations;

19. Invites voluntary contributions to the Observer
Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies
acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as
appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia”.
RESOLUTION 58/304
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/585/Add.1, para. 6)106

58/304. Financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission107 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,108
Recalling Security Council resolutions 687 (1991) of
3 April 1991 and 689 (1991) of 9 April 1991, by which the
Council decided to establish the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission and to review the question of its
termination or continuation every six months, and resolution
1490 (2003) of 3 July 2003, by which the Council decided to
continue the mandate of the Observation Mission for a final
period until 6 October 2003,
Recalling also its resolution 45/260 of 3 May 1991 on the
financing of the Observation Mission and its subsequent
resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was
decision 58/559 of 23 December 2003,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Expressing its appreciation for the substantial voluntary
contributions made to the Observation Mission by the
Government of Kuwait and the contributions of other
Governments,

_______________
106

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
107
A/58/630 and A/58/705.
108
A/58/759 and Add.12.

41

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Observation Mission with the necessary resources to enable it to
meet its outstanding liabilities,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission as at 15 April
2004, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
7 million United States dollars, representing some 2 per cent of
the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
eighty-one Member States have paid their assessed contributions
in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in
arrears, to ensure the payment of their outstanding assessed
contributions;
2. Expresses its continued appreciation of the decision
of the Government of Kuwait to defray two thirds of the cost of
the Observation Mission, effective 1 November 1993;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Observation
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,109 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003
9. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Observation Mission for the
period from 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;110

_______________
109

A/58/759/Add.12.
110
A/58/630.

42

10. Decides, taking into account the unencumbered
balance and other income in the total amount of 12,657,400
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2003,
that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Observation Mission shall be credited their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 4,295,733 dollars, in accordance with the levels
set out in General Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by
the Assembly in its resolutions 55/236 of 23 December 2000
and 57/290 A of 20 December 2002, and taking into account the
scale of assessments for 2003, as set out in its resolutions 55/5 B
of 23 December 2000 and 57/4 B of 20 December 2002;
11. Decides also that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Observation Mission,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
income in the total amount of 4,295,733 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2003 shall be set off against their
outstanding obligations, in accordance with the scheme set out
in paragraph 10 above;
12. Decides further that the decrease of 114,900 dollars
in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2003 shall be set off against the
credits from the amount referred to in paragraphs 10 and 11
above, and that the respective shares of Member States therein
shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of those
paragraphs, as appropriate;
13. Decides that, taking into account the voluntary
contribution of the Government of Kuwait in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2003, two thirds of the net
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
8,361,667 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2003 shall be returned to the Government of Kuwait;
14. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Financing of the
activities arising from Security Council resolution 687 (1991)”,
the sub-item entitled “United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission”.
RESOLUTION 58/305
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/826, para. 6)111

_______________
111

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

58/305. Financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo112 and the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,113
Recalling Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of
10 June 1999 regarding the establishment of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Recalling also its resolution 53/241 of 28 July 1999 on the
financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions thereon,
the latest of which was resolution 57/326 of 18 June 2003,
Acknowledging the complexity of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolution of the
Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo as at
15 April 2004, including the contributions outstanding in the
amount of 108.2 million United States dollars, representing
some 6 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only thirty-two Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member
States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
4. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;

5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,114 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation, bearing
in mind the fact that the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral has requested additional police and judicial resources in
response to recent events in Kosovo (Serbia and Montenegro);
9. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Mission is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;115
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
the amount of 278,413,700 dollars for the period from 1 July
2004 to 30 June 2005, inclusive of 264,625,200 dollars for the
maintenance of the Mission, 11,272,700 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 2,515,800 dollars for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
13. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 278,413,700 dollars at a monthly rate of 23,201,142
dollars, in accordance with the levels set out in General

_______________

_______________

112

114

113

A/58/634, A/58/638 and Corr.1 and A/58/705.
A/58/759 and Add.5.

115

A/58/759/Add.5.
A/58/634.

43

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its
resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and updated in its
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking into account the
scale of assessments for 2004 and 2005, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
14. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 20,572,400 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of
18,785,600 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share
of 1,645,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of
141,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
15. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled
their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be set off
against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 13
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the total amount of 10,804,200 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2003, in
accordance with the levels set out in General Assembly
resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution
55/236 and its resolution 57/290 A of 20 December 2002, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2003, as set out in its
resolutions 55/5 B of 23 December 2000 and 57/4 B of
20 December 2002;
16. Decides also that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 10,804,200 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2003, in accordance with the scheme set
out in paragraph 15 above;
17. Decides further that the increase of 2,113,600
dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2003 shall be added to the
credits from the amount referred to in paragraphs 15 and 16
above;
18. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
19. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission;
20. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
44

21. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”.
RESOLUTION 58/306
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/827, para. 6)116

58/306. Financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force117 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,118
Recalling Security Council resolution 350 (1974) of
31 May 1974 regarding the establishment of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force and the subsequent resolutions
by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the
latest of which was resolution 1520 (2003) of 22 December
2003,
Recalling also its resolution 3211 B (XXIX) of
29 November 1974 on the financing of the United Nations
Emergency Force and of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the
latest of which was resolution 57/324 of 18 June 2003,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force
with the necessary financial resources to enable it to fulfil its
responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force as at 15 April
2004, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
17.4 million United States dollars, representing some 1 per cent
of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
thirty-eight Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure the payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
_______________
116

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
117
A/58/641, A/58/662 and Corr.1 and A/58/705.
118
A/58/759 and Add.7.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
4. Urges all Member States to make every possible
effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Force in full;
5. Expresses concern at the delay experienced by the
Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 119 except those in
paragraphs 16 and 20, and requests the Secretary-General to
ensure their full implementation;
10. Authorizes the Secretary-General to fund the 14
contractual posts mentioned in paragraph 10 of his report on the
budget for the Force for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005120 through general temporary assistance, without prejudice
to a future discussion and decision on the proposal, and requests
the Secretary-General to resubmit with full justification this
request in the context of the budget proposal for the period from
1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006, taking into account the
recommendation of the Advisory Committee contained in
paragraph 19 of its report;119
11. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Force is administered with a maximum
of efficiency and economy;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue

efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Force for the period from
1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;121
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force the amount
of 43,033,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005, inclusive of 40,902,100 dollars for the maintenance of the
Force, 1,742,400 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 388,900 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
15. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 43,033,400 dollars at a monthly rate of 3,586,116
dollars, in accordance with the levels set out in General
Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its
resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and updated in its
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2004 and 2005, as set out in
its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject to a decision
of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
16. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,451,700 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,175,400
dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 254,300
dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 22,000 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
17. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled
their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set off
against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 15
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the total amount of 1,891,100 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2003, in accordance with
the levels set out in General Assembly resolution 55/235, as
adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution 55/236 and its
resolution 57/290 A of 20 December 2002, and taking into

_______________
119
120

A/58/759/Add.7.
A/58/662 and Corr.1.

_______________
121

A/58/641.

45

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

account the scale of assessments for 2003, as set out in its
resolutions 55/5 B of 23 December 2000 and 57/4 B of
20 December 2002;
18. Decides also that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 1,891,100 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2003 shall be set off against their
outstanding obligations in accordance with the scheme set out in
paragraph 17 above;
19. Decides further that the increase of 86,600 dollars in
the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2003 shall be added to the credits from
the amount referred to in paragraphs 17 and 18 above and that
the respective shares of Member States therein shall be applied
in accordance with the provisions of those paragraphs, as
appropriate;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Force;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash
and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force”.
RESOLUTION 58/307
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, on the recommendation
of the Committee (A/58/828, para. 13)122 by a recorded vote of 131 to 2, with no
abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,

Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and Montenegro, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: None

58/307. Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon,123 the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions124 and the report of
the Board of Auditors,125
Recalling Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of
19 March 1978 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Force, the latest of which was resolution 1525 (2004) of
30 January 2004,
Recalling also its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April 1978 on the
financing of the Force and its subsequent resolutions thereon,
the latest of which was resolution 57/325 of 18 June 2003,
Reaffirming its resolutions 51/233 of 13 June 1997,
52/237 of 26 June 1998, 53/227 of 8 June 1999, 54/267 of
15 June 2000, 55/180 A of 19 December 2000, 55/180 B of
14 June 2001, 56/214 A of 21 December 2001, 56/214 B of
27 June 2002 and 57/325 of 18 June 2003,
Reaffirming also the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Force,

_______________
_______________
122

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by Qatar
(on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of
the Group of 77 and China).

46

123

A/58/637, A/58/659, A/58/705.
A/58/759 and Add.6.
125
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement
No. 5 (A/58/5), vol. II.
124

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force
with the necessary financial resources to enable it to fulfil its
responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon as at 15 April 2004,
including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
77 million United States dollars, representing some 2 per cent of
the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
twenty-eight Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
3. Expresses deep concern that Israel did not comply
with General Assembly resolutions 51/233, 52/237, 53/227,
54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B and 57/325;
4. Stresses once again that Israel should strictly abide
by General Assembly resolutions 51/233, 52/237, 53/227,
54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B and 57/325;
5. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
6. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
7. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
8. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
9. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Force;
10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 126 requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation, and, with

regard to the recommendation contained in paragraph 16
concerning the Secretary-General’s proposal to convert 45
individual special service agreements into 45 national posts,127
requests the Secretary-General to provide further information in
order to take a decision on this question at its fifty-ninth session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Force is administered with a maximum
of efficiency and economy;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Force against General Service
posts, commensurate with the requirements of the Force;
13. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
take the measures necessary to ensure the full implementation
of paragraph 8 of its resolution 51/233, paragraph 5 of its
resolution 52/237, paragraph 11 of its resolution 53/227,
paragraph 14 of its resolution 54/267, paragraph 14 of its
resolution 55/180 A, paragraph 15 of its resolution 55/180 B,
paragraph 13 of its resolution 56/214 A, paragraph 13 of its
resolution 56/214 B and paragraph 14 of its resolution 57/325,
stresses once again that Israel shall pay the amount of 1,117,005
dollars resulting from the incident at Qana on 18 April 1996,
and requests the Secretary-General to report on this matter to the
General Assembly at its resumed fifty-ninth session;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Force for the period from
1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;128
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon the amount of
97,804,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005, inclusive of 92,960,300 dollars for the maintenance of
the Force, 3,960,000 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 883,800 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Also decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 97,804,100 dollars at a monthly rate of 8,150,341
dollars, in accordance with the levels set out in General
Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its
resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and updated in its
_______________

_______________

127

126

128

A/58/759/Add.6.

See A/58/659, para. 9.
A/58/637.

47

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2004 and 2005, as set out in
its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject to a decision
of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
17. Further decides that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 5,313,100 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 4,685,400
dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 577,900
dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 49,800 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled
their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set off
against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the total amount of 15,788,700 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2003, in
accordance with the levels set out in General Assembly
resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution
55/236 and its resolution 57/290 A of 20 December 2002, and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2003, as set out
in its resolutions 55/5 B of 23 December 2000 and 57/4 B of
20 December 2002;
19. Also decides that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set
off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of
the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount
of 15,788,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2003, in accordance with the scheme set out in
paragraph 18 above;
20. Further decides that the increase of 878,900 dollars
in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2003 shall be added to the
credits from the amount referred to in paragraphs 18 and 19
above, and that the respective shares of Member States therein
shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of those
paragraphs, as appropriate;
21. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled
their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set off
against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16
above, their respective share of the retained surplus in the total
amount of 63,312,709 dollars, representing the net accumulated
surplus in the account of the Force from 1978 to 1993,129 in

accordance with the composition of groups set out in
paragraphs 3 and 4 of General Assembly resolution 43/232 of
1 March 1989, as adjusted by the Assembly in its resolutions
44/192 B of 21 December 1989, 45/244 of 21 December 1990,
46/194 of 20 December 1991, 47/218 A of 23 December 1992
and 51/218 B and C of 18 December 1996, and taking into
account the scale of assessments for 1993 as set out in its
resolution 46/221 A of 20 December 1991, as adjusted by the
Assembly in its decision 47/456 of 23 December 1992 and its
resolution 48/223 A of 23 December 1993;
22. Also decides that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be set
off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of
the retained surplus in the total amount of 63,312,709 dollars, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 21 above;
23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Force;
25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash
and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session, under the item entitled “Financing of the
United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the
sub-item entitled “United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.
RESOLUTION 58/308
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/829, para. 6)130

58/308. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone131
and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,132
_______________

_______________
129

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 5 (A/58/5), vol. II, chap. V, notes 4 (c) and 7 to the financial
statements.

48

130

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Vice-Chairman of the Committee.
131
A/58/660, A/58/661 and A/58/705.
132
A/58/759 and Add.3.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Bearing in mind Security Council resolution 1270 (1999)
of 22 October 1999, by which the Council established the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council revised and extended the
mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1537 (2004) of 30 March 2004,
Recalling its resolution 53/29 of 20 November 1998 on
the financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra
Leone and subsequent resolutions on the financing of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the latest of which was
resolution 57/291 B of 18 June 2003,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone and the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone as at 15 April 2004,
including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
85.5 million United States dollars, representing some
6.5 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only thirty Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;

6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,133 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation, bearing
in mind that the budget may be revised in light of Security
Council resolution 1537 (2004);
9. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Mission is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;134
12. Decides to reduce the appropriation authorized for
the Mission for the period from 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003
under the terms of its resolution 56/251 B of 27 June 2002 from
699,838,300 dollars to 633,447,400 dollars;
13. Decides also, taking into account the amount of
622,469,200 dollars already apportioned for the period from
1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003 in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 56/251 B and its resolution 57/291 A of
20 December 2002, to apportion among Member States the
additional amount of 10,978,200 dollars for the period from
1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003, in accordance with the levels set
out in General Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the
Assembly in its resolutions 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and
57/290 A of 20 December 2002, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2002 and 2003, as set out in its resolutions
55/5 B of 23 December 2000 and 57/4 B of 20 December 2002;

4. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;

14. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member

5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;

_______________
133
134

A/58/759/Add.3.
A/58/660.

49

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

States, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the estimated increase in
the staff assessment income of 230,000 dollars approved for the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;

be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the other income in the amount of 27,223,000 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2003, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 19 above;

15. Decides to approve the decrease in the estimated
staff assessment income for the period from 1 July 2002 to
30 June 2003 from 10,678,500 dollars to 9,560,600 dollars;

21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005

22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission;

16. Decides also to appropriate to the Special Account
for the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone the amount of
207,246,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005, inclusive of 196,982,200 dollars for the maintenance of
the Mission, 8,391,200 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations and 1,872,700 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
17. Decides further to apportion among Member States
the amount of 207,246,100 dollars at a monthly rate of
17,270,508 dollars, in accordance with the levels set out in
General Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the
Assembly in its resolution 55/236 and updated in its resolution
58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2004 and 2005, as set out in its resolution
58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
18. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of
its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 5,610,700 dollars at a monthly rate of
467,558 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment
income of 4,280,600 dollars approved for the Mission, the
prorated share of 1,224,600 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the
prorated share of 105,500 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics
Base;
19. Decides also that, for Member States that have
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 17 above, their respective share of the other income
in the amount of 27,223,000 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2003, in accordance with the levels set out
in General Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the
Assembly in its resolutions 55/236 and 57/290 A, taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2003 as set out in its
resolutions 55/5 B and 57/4 B;
20. Decides further that, for Member States that have
not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall
50

23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone”.
RESOLUTION 58/309
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/830, para. 6)135

58/309. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara136 and the related reports of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,137
Recalling Security Council resolution 690 (1991) of
29 April 1991, by which the Council established the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, and the
subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1541 (2004) of 29 April 2004,
Recalling also its resolution 45/266 of 17 May 1991 on
the financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions and
decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 57/331 of
18 June 2003,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
_______________
135

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
136
A/58/642 and Corr.1, A/58/657 and A/58/705.
137
A/58/759 and Add.2.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,

10. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Mission is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;

Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions
have been made to the Mission,

11. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
as at 15 April 2004, including the contributions outstanding in
the amount of 44.9 million United States dollars, representing
some 8 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only thirty-three Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member
States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have paid their assessed contributions in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
4. Urges all other Member States to make every
possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions
to the Mission in full;
5. Expresses concern at the delay experienced by the
Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Mission;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,138 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2003
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the financial performance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003;139
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June
2005
13. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara the amount of 44,041,200 dollars for the period from
1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005, inclusive of 41,860,000 dollars for
the maintenance of the Mission, 1,783,200 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 398,000
dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base;
Financing of the appropriation
14. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 44,041,200 dollars at a monthly rate of 3,670,100
dollars, in accordance with the levels set out in General
Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the Assembly in its
resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and updated in its
resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking into account the
scale of assessments for 2004 and 2005, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003, subject to a decision of
the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
15. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member
States, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 3,191,600 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,908,900
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 260,200
dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 22,500 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
16. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled
their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be set off

_______________

_______________

138

139

A/58/759/Add.2.

A/58/642 and Corr.1.

51

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 14
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the total amount of 5,953,500 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2003, in accordance with
the levels set out in General Assembly resolution 55/235, as
adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution 55/236 and its
resolution 57/290 A of 20 December 2002, taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2003, as set out in its resolutions
55/5 B of 23 December 2000 and 57/4 B of 20 December 2002;
17. Decides also that, for Member States that have not
fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall be
set off against their outstanding obligations their respective
share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 5,953,500 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2003, in accordance with the scheme set
out in paragraph 16 above;
18. Decides further that the decrease of 444,800 dollars
in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2003 shall be set off against the
credits from the amount referred to in paragraphs 16 and 17
above;
19. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
20. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Mission;
21. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
22. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara”.
RESOLUTION 58/310
Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/831, para. 6)140

58/310. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire141 and the related report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,142
Recalling Security Council resolution 1528 (2004) of
27 February 2004, by which the Council established the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire for an initial period of
twelve months as from 4 April 2004,
Recognizing that the costs of the Operation are expenses
of the Organization to be borne by Member States in
accordance with Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Operation with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolution of the
Security Council,
1. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
2. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;
3. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
4. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
5. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Operation;

_______________
140
The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.

52

_______________
141
142

A/58/788.
A/58/806.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

6. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,142 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation, subject to
the provisions of the present resolution;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to review the
organizational and management structures of the Operation and,
in this regard, to pay particular attention to the level and
functions of the Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral posts and provide detailed information thereon in the
next budget submission;
8. Takes note of paragraphs 26 to 28 of the report of
the Advisory Committee,142 and requests the Secretary-General
to ensure that the functions assigned to the Deputy Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General are performed
consistent with the mandate of the Operation, until such time as
the General Assembly is able to take a decision on the revised
organizational structure;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Operation is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Operation against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Operation;
Budget estimates for the period from 4 April to
31 December 2004
11. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish a
special account for the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire for the purpose of accounting for the income received
and expenditure incurred in respect of the Operation;
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire the amount of
96,368,100 United States dollars for the period from 4 April to
30 June 2004 for the establishment of the Operation, inclusive
of the amount of 49,943,300 dollars previously authorized by
the Advisory Committee under the terms of section IV of
General Assembly resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994;
13. Decides also to appropriate to the Special Account
for the Operation the amount of 211,101,400 dollars, inclusive
of 200,646,600 dollars for the maintenance of the Operation for
the period from 1 July to 31 December 2004, 8,547,300 dollars
for the support account for peacekeeping operations and
1,907,500 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base for the
period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005;

period from 4 April to 30 June 2004, in accordance with the
levels set out in General Assembly resolution 55/235, as
adjusted by the Assembly in its resolution 55/236 of
23 December 2000 and updated in its resolution 58/256 of
23 December 2003, taking into account the scale of assessments
for 2004, as set out in its resolution 58/1 B of 23 December
2003;
15. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its
resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided
for in paragraph 14 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 766,900 dollars, representing the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Operation
for the period from 4 April to 30 June 2004;
16. Decides also to apportion among Member States the
amount of 200,646,600 dollars for the Operation for the period
from 1 July to 31 December 2004, in accordance with the
scheme set out in paragraph 14 above;
17. Decides further that, in accordance with the
provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against
the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization
Fund of 3,588,000 dollars, representing the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the Operation for the period
from 1 July to 31 December 2004;
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 8,547,300 dollars for the support account and the
amount of 1,907,500 dollars for the United Nations Logistics
Base for the period from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005, in
accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 14 above and
taking into account the scale of assessments for 2004 and 2005,
as set out in its resolution 58/1 B;
19. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 1,354,700 dollars for the period from
1 July 2004 to 30 June 2005, comprising the prorated share of
1,247,300 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of
107,400 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;

Financing of the appropriation

21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Operation;

14. Decides further to apportion among Member States
the amount of 96,368,100 dollars for the Operation for the

22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
53

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;

reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;

23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”.

2. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;

RESOLUTION 58/311

3. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;

Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/832, para. 6)143

58/311. Financing of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti144 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,145
Recalling Security Council resolution 1529 (2004) of
29 February 2004, by which the Council declared its readiness
to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support
continuation of a peaceful and constitutional political process
and the maintenance of a secure and stable environment in
Haiti,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1542 (2004) of
30 April 2004, by which the Council decided to establish the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for an initial
period of six months,
Recognizing that the costs of the Mission are expenses of
the Organization to be borne by Member States in accordance
with Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,

4. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make the fullest
possible use of facilities and equipment at the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to minimize the costs
of procurement for the Mission;
6. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,145 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Mission is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to make
efforts to recruit local staff for the Mission against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Mission;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 May to 31 October
2004
9. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish a
special account for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti for the purpose of accounting for income received and
expenditure incurred in respect of the Mission;

1. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the

10. Also authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into
commitments in the amount of 172,480,500 United States
dollars for the period from 1 July to 31 October 2004 for the
maintenance of the Mission, in addition to the amount of
49,259,800 dollars for the period from 1 May to 30 June 2004
authorized by the Advisory Committee for the establishment of
the Mission under the terms of section IV of General Assembly
resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994;

_______________

Financing of the commitment authority

143

11. Decides to apportion among Member States the
amount of 221,740,300 dollars, comprising the amount of
49,259,800 dollars for the period from 1 May to 30 June 2004
and the amount of 172,480,500 dollars for the period from

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Mission with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolution of the
Security Council,

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
144
A/58/800.
145
See A/58/809.

54

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

1 July to 31 October 2004, in accordance with the levels set out
in General Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the
Assembly in its resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and
updated in its resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2004 as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;
12. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set
off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 11 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 2,272,000 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 387,000 dollars approved
for the Mission for the period from 1 May to 30 June 2004 and
the estimated staff assessment income of 1,885,000 dollars
approved for the Mission for the period from 1 July to
31 October 2004;
13. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
14. Encourages the Secretary-General to take additional
measures to ensure the safety and security of all personnel under
the auspices of the United Nations participating in the Mission;
15. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;

Recalling Security Council resolution 1545 (2004) of
21 May 2004, by which the Council authorized, for an initial
period of six months as from 1 June 2004, with the intention to
renew it for further periods, the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation called the United Nations Operation in Burundi,
Recognizing that the costs of the Operation are expenses
of the Organization to be borne by Member States in
accordance with Article 17, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the
Operation with the necessary financial resources to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolution of the
Security Council,
1. Expresses concern at the financial situation with
regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards the
reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional
burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States of their
assessments;
2. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by
the Secretary-General in deploying and providing adequate
resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular
those in Africa;

16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti”.

3. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping
missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory treatment
in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;

RESOLUTION 58/312

4. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions
shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and
efficient discharge of their respective mandates;

Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, without a vote, on the
recommendation of the Committee (A/58/833, para. 6)146

58/312. Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi147 and
the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,148

_______________
146

The draft resolution recommended in the report was submitted by the
Chairman of the Committee.
147
A/58/802.
148
A/58/811.

5. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
make the fullest possible use of facilities and equipment at the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, in order to
minimize the costs of procurement for the Operation;
6. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,148 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
action to ensure that the Operation is administered with a
maximum of efficiency and economy;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General, in order to
reduce the cost of employing General Service staff, to continue
efforts to recruit local staff for the Operation against General
Service posts, commensurate with the requirements of the
Operation;
55

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 21 April to 31 October
2004

into account the scale of assessments for 2004, as set out in its
resolution 58/1 B of 23 December 2003;

9. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish a
special account for the United Nations Operation in Burundi for
the purpose of accounting for the income received and
expenditure incurred in respect of the Operation;

12. Decides also that, in accordance with the provisions
of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall be set
off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 11 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 149,400 dollars, representing the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Operation
for the period from 21 April to 30 June 2004, and 1,187,900
dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Operation for the period from 1 July to
31 October 2004;

10. Also authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into
commitments for the Operation for the period from 21 April to
31 October 2004 in a total amount not exceeding 156,043,900
United States dollars, comprising the amount of 49,709,300
dollars for the period from 21 April to 30 June 2004 for the
establishment of the Operation, inclusive of the amount of
49,491,200 dollars previously authorized by the Advisory
Committee for the period from 21 April to 30 June 2004 under
the terms of section IV of General Assembly resolution
49/233 A of 23 December 1994, and the amount of 106,334,600
dollars for the period from 1 July to 31 October 2004 for the
maintenance of the Operation;
Financing of the commitment authority
11. Decides to apportion among Member States the total
amount of 156,043,900 dollars, comprising the amount of
49,709,300 dollars for the period from 21 April to 30 June 2004
and the amount of 106,334,600 dollars for the period from
1 July to 31 October 2004, in accordance with the levels set out
in General Assembly resolution 55/235, as adjusted by the
Assembly in its resolution 55/236 of 23 December 2000 and
updated in its resolution 58/256 of 23 December 2003, taking

56

13. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be
financed by borrowing funds from other active peacekeeping
missions;
14. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
take additional measures to ensure the safety and security of all
personnel under the auspices of the United Nations participating
in the Operation;
15. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in
cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the
Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedure and practices established by the
General Assembly;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fifty-ninth session the item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Operation in Burundi”.

IV. Decisions
Contents
Decision
No.

Title

Page

A. Elections and appointments
58/411.

Appointment of a member of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples........................................................ 58
Decision B ............................................................................................................................................................. 58

58/417.

Approval of the appointment of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights........................................ 58

58/418.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session................................................................. 58

58/419.

Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session ........................... 58

58/420.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session........................................................ 59

58/421.

Appointment of a member of the International Civil Service Commission.................................................................. 59

58/422.

Appointment of a member of the Joint Inspection Unit.............................................................................................. 59
B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

58/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items ............................................................................................. 61
Decision B ............................................................................................................................................................. 61

58/569.

Report of the World Summit on the Information Society ........................................................................................... 62

58/570.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal.................................................................. 62

58/571.

Multilingualism...................................................................................................................................................... 62

58/572.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and related
matters................................................................................................................................................................... 62

58/573.

Report of the Economic and Social Council: implementation of General Assembly resolution 56/212 of
21 December 2001.................................................................................................................................................. 63

58/574.

Confirmation of the appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development.......................................................................................................................................................... 63

58/575.

Improving the financial situation of the United Nations............................................................................................. 63

58/576.

Administration of justice at the United Nations......................................................................................................... 63

58/577.

Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola................................................................................................................................................................... 63

58/578.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor............................................................................................. 63
2. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

58/564.

Questions deferred for future consideration .............................................................................................................. 64
Decision B ............................................................................................................................................................. 64
Decision C ............................................................................................................................................................. 64

58/566.

Capital master plan ................................................................................................................................................. 65

58/567.

Participation of United Nations Volunteers in peacekeeping operations...................................................................... 65

58/568.

Special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse................................................................. 65
57

IV. Decisions

A. Elections and appointments
58/411. Appointment of a member of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples
B1
At its 80th plenary meeting, on 9 February 2004, the General Assembly took note of the
nomination by its President, after consultations with the regional groups, of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines as a member of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.
As a result, the Special Committee is composed of the following twenty-five Member
States: ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA, BOLIVIA, CHILE, CHINA, CONGO, CÔTE D’IVOIRE, CUBA,
ETHIOPIA, FIJI, GRENADA, INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF), IRAQ, MALI, PAPUA
NEW GUINEA, RUSSIAN FEDERATION, SAINT KITTS AND NEVIS, SAINT LUCIA, SAINT VINCENT
AND THE GRENADINES, SIERRA LEONE, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, TUNISIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF
TANZANIA and VENEZUELA.
58/417. Approval of the appointment of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights
At its 81st plenary meeting, on 25 February 2004, the General Assembly approved the
appointment by the Secretary-General2 of Ms. Louise ARBOUR (Canada) as United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights for a four-year term of office.
Subsequently, the Secretary-General informed the General Assembly that Ms. Arbour’s term
of office would be from 1 July 2004 to 30 June 2008.3
58/418. Election of the President of the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session4
At its 89th plenary meeting, on 10 June 2004, the General Assembly, in accordance with
Article 21 of the Charter of the United Nations and rule 30 of the rules of the procedure of the
Assembly,5 elected by acclamation Mr. Jean Ping, Minister of State, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Cooperation and la Francophonie of Gabon, as President of the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth
session.
58/419. Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session4
On 10 June 2004, the six Main Committees of the General Assembly held meetings in
accordance with rules 99 (a)6 and 103 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly for the purpose of
electing their Chairmen.

_______________
1

Consequently, decision 58/411, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 49 (A/58/49), vol. II, becomes decision 58/411 A.
2
A/58/718.
3
A/58/718/Add.1.
4
In accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the General Committee consists of
the President of the Assembly, the twenty-one Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of the six Main Committees.
5
Rule 30 was amended by resolution 56/509 of 8 July 2002.
6
Rule 99 (a) was amended by resolution 56/509 of 8 July 2002.

58

IV. Decisions

At the 90th plenary meeting, on 10 June 2004, the President of the General Assembly
announced that the following persons had been elected as Chairmen of the Main Committees of
the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session:
First Committee:

Mr. Luis Alfonso DE ALBA (Mexico)

Special Political and
Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee):

Mr. Kyaw Tint SWE (Myanmar)

Second Committee:

Mr. Marco BALAREZO (Peru)

Third Committee:

Mr. Valery KUCHINSKY (Ukraine)

Fifth Committee:

Mr. Don MACKAY (New Zealand)

Sixth Committee:

Mr. Mohamed BENNOUNA (Morocco)

58/420. Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session4
At its 90th plenary meeting, on 10 June 2004, the General Assembly, in accordance with
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978 and rule 30 of the rules
of procedure of the Assembly,5 elected by acclamation the following twenty-one Member States
as Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session: ALGERIA, ANTIGUA AND
BARBUDA, AUSTRALIA, AZERBAIJAN, BANGLADESH, BELGIUM, BURKINA FASO, CHINA, DJIBOUTI,
EL SALVADOR, FRANCE, GHANA, IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF), KAZAKHSTAN, NICARAGUA,
RUSSIAN FEDERATION, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, UZBEKISTAN and ZAMBIA.
58/421. Appointment of a member of the International Civil Service Commission
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,7 appointed Mr. Gilberto Paranhos Velloso (Brazil) as a
member of the International Civil Service Commission for a term of office beginning on 18 June
2004, as a result of the death of Mr. João Augusto de Medicis (Brazil).
As a result, the International Civil Service Commission is composed as follows:
Mr. Mohsen BEL HADJ AMOR (Tunisia),*** Chairman; Mr. Eugeniusz WYZNER (Poland),***
Vice-Chairman; Mr. Mario BETTATI (France),** Mr. Daasebre Oti BOATENG (Ghana),***
Mr. Minoru ENDO (Japan),** Mr. Alexei L. FEDOTOV (Russian Federation),* Mr. Asda
JAYANAMA (Thailand),* Ms. Lucretia MYERS (United States of America),** Mr. Gilberto
PARANHOS VELLOSO (Brazil),** Mr. Ernest RUSITA (Uganda),* Mr. José R. SANCHÍS MUÑOZ
(Argentina),*** Mr. C.M. Shafi SAMI (Bangladesh),* Mr. Alexis STEPHANOU (Greece),**
Ms. Anita SZLAZAK (Canada),*** and Mr. El Hassane ZAHID (Morocco).*
__________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2004.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2005.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2006.

58/422. Appointment of a member of the Joint Inspection Unit
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 5 August 2004, the General Assembly, pursuant to article 3,
paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, contained in the annex to resolution 31/192

_______________
7

A/58/819, para. 5.

59

IV. Decisions

of 22 December 1976, appointed Mr. Tadanori Inomata as a member of the Joint Inspection Unit
for a five-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2005 and expiring on 31 December 2009.8
As a result the Joint Inspection Unit is composed as follows: Ms. Doris BERTRAND-MUCK
(Austria),* Mr. Even Francisco FONTAINE ORTIZ (Cuba),** Mr. Ion GORITA (Romania),*
Mr. Tadanori INOMATA (Japan),**** Mr. Wolfgang MÜNCH (Germany),* Mr. Louis-Dominique
OUEDRAOGO (Burkina Faso),* Mr. TANG Guangting (China),** Mr. Christopher THOMAS
(Trinidad and Tobago),*** Mr. Victor VISLYKH (Russian Federation),** Ms. Deborah WYNES
(United States of America)** and Mr. Muhammad YUSSUF (United Republic of Tanzania).**
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2005.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2007.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2008.

**** Term of office expires on 31 December 2009.

_______________
8

See A/58/111.

60

IV. Decisions

B. Other decisions
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

58/503. Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda
items
B9
At its 80th plenary meeting, on 9 February 2004, the
General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of agenda
item 19 entitled “Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”,
in order to consider expeditiously a request by Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines.10
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to
reopen consideration of agenda item 20 entitled “Support by the
United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate new or restored democracies”, in order
to consider expeditiously a draft resolution.11
At its 82nd plenary meeting, on 7 April 2004, the General
Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 39, entitled “Causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa”, in
order to hold a plenary meeting to commemorate the
International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide in
Rwanda.12
At its 83rd plenary meeting, on 8 April 2004, the General
Assembly, on the proposal of the Secretary-General,13 having
waived the relevant provisions of rule 40 of its rules of
procedure, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-eighth
session an additional item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire” and to allocate it to the
Fifth Committee.
At its 86th plenary meeting, on 6 May 2004, the General
Assembly, on the proposal of the Secretary-General,14 having
waived the relevant provisions of rule 40 of its rules of
procedure, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-eighth
session an additional item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti” and to allocate it to the
Fifth Committee.

At its 88th plenary meeting, on 24 May 2004, the General
Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee as
set forth in its fourth report,15 decided to include in the agenda
of its fifty-eighth session an additional item entitled
“International Year of Physics, 2005” and to consider it directly
in plenary meeting.
At the same meeting, the General Assembly, also on the
recommendation of the General Committee as set forth in its
fourth report,15 decided to include in the agenda of its fiftyeighth session an additional sub-item entitled “Appointment of
a member of the International Civil Service Commission” as
sub-item (j) of agenda item 17 entitled “Appointments to fill
vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments” and to
allocate it to the Fifth Committee.
Also at the same meeting, the General Assembly, on the
proposal of the Secretary-General,16 having waived the relevant
provisions of rule 40 of its rules of procedures, decided to
include in the agenda of its fifty-eighth session an additional
item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi” and to allocate it to the Fifth Committee.
At its 90th plenary meeting, on 10 June 2004, the General
Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (d) of
agenda item 94, entitled “Further implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States” and to consider it directly in plenary
meeting in order to consider expeditiously a draft resolution.17
The Assembly further agreed to proceed immediately to its
consideration.
At its 94th plenary meeting, on 10 September 2004, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General
Committee as set forth in its fifth report,18 decided, in
accordance with paragraph 2 (c) of the annex to resolution
58/316 of 1 July 2004, to submit to the Assembly at its
forthcoming session section II of the report of the SecretaryGeneral,19 entitled “Provisional agenda of the fifty-ninth regular
session of the General Assembly organized under headings
corresponding to the priorities of the Organization, as contained
in the medium-term plan for the period 2002–2005”.

_______________
9

Consequently, decision 58/503, in section B of the Official Records of the
General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/58/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 58/503 A.
10
A/58/692.
11
A/58/L.57.
12
See resolution 58/234.
13
A/58/235.
14
A/58/236.

_______________
15

See A/58/250/Add.3.
A/58/239.
17
A/58/L.63.
18
A/58/250/Add.4.
19
A/58/864.
16

61

IV. Decisions

At the same meeting, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the General Committee as set forth in its
fifth report,18 also decided, in accordance with paragraph 5 (d)
of the annex to resolution 58/316, to submit to the Assembly at
its forthcoming session, annex I to the report of the SecretaryGeneral,19 entitled “Draft programme of work of the plenary of
the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session”, as orally
revised on the proposal of the representative of the Netherlands,
on behalf of the European Union, that item 46 of the draft
agenda, entitled “Integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and related
fields”, should be considered jointly with item 56 of the draft
agenda, entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of the Millenium
Summit”.
At its 95th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2004, the
General Assembly decided to consider agenda item 154, entitled
“International Criminal Court”, directly in plenary meeting in
order to consider expeditiously a draft resolution.20
58/569. Report of the World Summit on the Information
Society
At its 92nd plenary meeting, on 1 July 2004, the General
Assembly, on the proposal of its President, decided to consider
the report of the World Summit on the Information Society21
directly in plenary meeting at its sixtieth session,
notwithstanding the fact that the item entitled “Information and
communication technologies for development” would be
allocated to the Second Committee pursuant to resolution
58/316 of 1 July 2004.
58/570. Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 5 August 2004, the
General Assembly took note of the solemn appeal made by the
President of the General Assembly on 4 August 2004 in
connection with the observance of the Olympic Truce.22
58/571. Multilingualism
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 5 August 2004, the
General Assembly, at the request of France, on behalf of the
States members of the Intergovernmental Agency of La
Francophonie,23 decided to defer consideration of the item
entitled “Multilingualism” and to include it in the draft agenda

of its fifty-ninth session, on the understanding that the biennial
character of the item would not be called into question and the
item would be considered next at the sixty-first session.
58/572. Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council
and related matters
At its 95th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2004, the
General Assembly, recalling its previous relevant resolutions
and decisions, and having considered the report of the Openended Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the
Security Council and Other Matters related to the Security
Council, which was established pursuant to its resolution 48/26
of 3 December 1993, on its deliberations during the fifty-eighth
session of the General Assembly,24 and bearing in mind the
United Nations Millennium Declaration of 8 September 2000,
adopted by heads of State and Government,25 in which they
resolved to intensify their efforts to achieve a comprehensive
reform of the Security Council in all its aspects:
(a) Took note of the report of the Working Group on its
work during the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly;
(b) Noted with appreciation the Chairman’s initiative to
stimulate an active discussion on substantive topics relating to
the comprehensive reform of the Security Council, and in that
regard noted the six topics discussed in informal consultations
of the Working Group;
(c) Urged the Working Group to continue to exert
efforts during the fifty-ninth session, aimed at achieving
progress in the consideration of all issues relevant to the
question of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and other matters related to
the Council;
(d) Decided that the question of equitable representation
on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and
other matters related to the Council should be considered during
the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
(e) Also decided that the Working Group should
continue its work, taking into account the progress achieved
during the forty-eighth to fifty-eighth sessions and drawing on
the experience of the fifty-eighth session as well as the views to
be expressed during the fifty-ninth session, and should submit a
report to the General Assembly before the end of its fifty-ninth
session, including any agreed recommendations.

_______________
20

A/58/L.68.
The first phase of the Summit was held in Geneva from 10 to
12 December 2003; the second phase is to be held in Tunis from 16 to
18 November 2005.
22
A/58/863.
23
A/58/862.
21

62

_______________
24

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement
No. 47 (A/58/47).
25
See resolution 55/2.

IV. Decisions

58/573. Report of the Economic and Social Council:
implementation of General Assembly resolution
56/212 of 21 December 2001
At its 95th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2004, the
General Assembly decided to consider the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 56/212
of 21 December 2001 at its sixtieth session, instead of at its
fifty-ninth session pursuant to the resolution.
58/574. Confirmation of the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development
At its 95th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2004, the
General Assembly decided to defer consideration of the item
entitled “Confirmation of the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development” and to include it in the draft agenda of its fiftyninth session.
58/575. Improving the financial situation of the United
Nations
At its 95th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2004, the
General Assembly decided to defer consideration of the item
entitled “Improving the financial situation of the United
Nations” and to include it in the draft agenda of its fifty-ninth
session.

58/576. Administration of justice at the United Nations
At its 95th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2004, the
General Assembly decided to defer consideration of the item
entitled “Administration of justice at the United Nations” and to
include it in the draft agenda of its fifty-ninth session.
58/577. Financing of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission and the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola
At its 95th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2004, the
General Assembly decided to defer consideration of the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission and the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola”
and to include it in the draft agenda of its fifty-ninth session.
58/578. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor
At its 95th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2004, the
General Assembly decided to defer consideration of the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor” and to include it in the draft agenda of its fifty-ninth
session.

63

IV. Decisions

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Internal Oversight Services on possible discrimination
due to nationality, race, sex, religion and language in
recruitment, promotion and placement35

58/564. Questions deferred for future consideration
26

B

At its 83rd plenary meeting, on 8 April 2004, the General
Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,27
decided to defer until its fifty-ninth session consideration of the
following agenda items and related documents:

Item 130: Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the annual
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services for the
period from 1 July 2002 to 30 June 200336

Item 119: Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations

Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of the
functioning of the Headquarters Committee on Contracts37

Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report
of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
strengthening the investigation functions in the United
Nations28

Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the review of
the structure and operations of United Nations information
centres38

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the recommendations of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services on the Investment Management
Service of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund29
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
system common services at Geneva30
Item 127: Human resources management
Report of the Secretary-General on the composition of the
Secretariat31

C
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, the General
Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,39
decided to defer until its fifty-ninth session consideration of the
following agenda items and related documents:
Item 121: Programme budget for the biennium 2004–2005

Report of the Secretary-General on the list of staff of the
United Nations Secretariat32
Report of the Secretary-General on amendments to the
Staff Rules33
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services on possible
discrimination due to nationality, race, sex, religion and
language in recruitment, promotion and placement34

Report of the Secretary-General on the status of possible
funding arrangements for the capital master plan40
Item 134: Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial
position of closed peacekeeping missions as at 30 June
200341
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions on the updated financial
position of closed peacekeeping missions42

Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the comments
of the Joint Inspection Unit on the report of the Office of

_______________
26
Consequently, decision 58/564, in section B.6 of the Official Records of
the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/58/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 58/564 A.
27
A/58/571/Add.2, para.7.
28
A/58/708.
29
A/58/725.
30
A/58/439.
31
A/58/666.
32
A/C.5/58/L.13.
33
A/58/283.
34
A/56/956.

64

_______________
35

A/56/956/Add.1.
A/58/364.
37
A/58/294.
38
A/57/747 and Corr.1.
39
A/58/571/Add.3, para. 6.
40
A/58/729.
41
A/58/778.
42
A/58/799.
36

IV. Decisions

Report of the Secretary-General on the Peacekeeping
Reserve Fund43
Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions on the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund44
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
procurement of goods and services through letters of
assist.45
58/566. Capital master plan
At its 83rd plenary meeting, on 8 April 2004, the General
Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee:46
(a) Decided to postpone consideration of the issue of
financing the capital master plan to the second part of its
resumed fifty-eighth session, and requested the SecretaryGeneral to update section IV, entitled “Sources of funding,
financing options and commercial borrowing”, of his report on
the capital master plan dated 28 June 200047 and to update his
report on the status of possible funding arrangements for the
capital master plan;40

(b) Requested the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly during the second part of its resumed fiftyeighth session all the outstanding reports requested in its
resolution 57/292 of 20 December 2002.
58/567. Participation of United Nations Volunteers in
peacekeeping operations
At its 83rd plenary meeting, on 8 April 2004, the General
Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,48
decided to defer until its fifty-ninth session consideration of the
report of the Secretary-General on the participation of United
Nations Volunteers in peacekeeping operations49 and the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions thereon.50
58/568. Special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 18 June 2004, the General
Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth Committee,51
took note of the report of the Secretary-General on special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual
abuse.52

_______________

_______________

43

48

44

49

A/58/724.
See A/58/732.
45
A/57/718.
46
A/58/573/Add.1, para.11.
47
A/55/117.

A/58/582/Add.1, para. 9.
A/55/697.
50
A/55/874, paras. 41–45.
51
A/58/821, para. 10.
52
A/58/777.

65

Annex I
Allocation of agenda items
1. The following additional items were included in the agenda of the General Assembly during
its resumed fifty-eighth session:1
Plenary meetings
International Year of Physics, 2005 (item 169).
Fifth Committee
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments (item 17):
(j)

Appointment of a member of the International Civil Service Commission.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (item 167).
Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (item 168).
Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi (item 170).
2. The following item, which had been allocated to the Second Committee, was also
considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed fifty-eighth session:2
Environment and sustainable development (item 94):
(d)

Further implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States.

_______________
1
2

See A/58/252/Add.2–4; see also decision 58/503 B in section IV.B of the present volume.
See A/58/252/Add.5; see also decision 58/503 B in section IV.B of the present volume.

67

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolutions
Resolution
No.

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

8 and 94 (d)

90th

10 June 2004

2

118

91st

18 June 2004

21

138

91st

18 June 2004

21

140

91st

18 June 2004

23

Resolution B ..........................................................................

165

91st

18 June 2004

24

Sixth International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies, to be held in Doha in 2006............................

20

80th

9 February 2004

2

Follow-up to the outcome of the special session on
children...................................................................................

41

80th

9 February 2004

2

Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on support costs
related to extrabudgetary activities in organizations of the
United Nations system ..........................................................

120

83rd

8 April 2004

26

58/284.

Special Court for Sierra Leone.............................................

121

83rd

8 April 2004

27

58/285.

Human resources management ............................................

127

83rd

8 April 2004

27

58/286.

Joint Inspection Unit .............................................................

129

83rd

8 April 2004

28

58/287.

Review of the Office of the Prosecutor at the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia .....................................

131 and 132

83rd

8 April 2004

28

Implementation of paragraph 3 of General Assembly
resolution 57/323...................................................................

134

83rd

8 April 2004

29

58/289.

Improving global road safety................................................

160

84th

14 April 2004

3

58/290.

The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the
link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds and
armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and
settlement of conflicts ...........................................................

21

85th

14 April 2004

4

58/213.

Title

Further implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States
Resolution B ..........................................................................

58/249.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and
reports of the Board of Auditors
Resolution B ..........................................................................

58/259.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Resolution B ..........................................................................

58/260.

Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor
Resolution B ..........................................................................

58/261.
58/281.
58/282.
58/283.

58/288.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia

69

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit and
integrated and coordinated implementation of and followup to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic and social
fields .......................................................................................

50 and 60

86th

6 May 2004

6

Status of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem .......................................................................

38

87th

6 May 2004

6

58/293.

International Year of Physics, 2005......................................

169

90th

10 June 2004

7

58/294.

Estimates in respect of special political missions, good
offices and other political initiatives authorized by the
General Assembly and/or the Security Council ..................

121

91st

18 June 2004

29

91st

18 June 2004

30

91st

18 June 2004

31

58/291.

58/292.

58/295.

58/296.
58/297.

Strengthening the security and safety of United Nations
operations, staff and premises............................................... 121, 131, 134,
137, 138, 140,
141, 142,
145 (a) and (b),
146 and 147
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations ...................... 127 and 134

Page

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy .........................................................................

134

91st

18 June 2004

31

58/298.

Support account for peacekeeping operations.....................

134

91st

18 June 2004

33

58/299.

Reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services..........

134

91st

18 June 2004

34

58/300.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina...........................................................................

136

91st

18 June 2004

35

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus....................................................................................

137

91st

18 June 2004

36

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea.....................................................................................

141

91st

18 June 2004

38

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia...................................................................................

142

91st

18 June 2004

39

Financing of the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission...................................................................................

143 (a)

91st

18 June 2004

41

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo ................................................................

144

91st

18 June 2004

42

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force.......................................................................................

145 (a)

91st

18 June 2004

44

58/307.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

145 (b)

91st

18 June 2004

46

58/308.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone

146

91st

18 June 2004

48

58/309.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara ............................................

147

91st

18 June 2004

50

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire...................................................................................

167

91st

18 June 2004

52

58/301.
58/302.
58/303.
58/304.
58/305.
58/306.

58/310.

70

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
No.

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti........................................................................................

168

91st

18 June 2004

54

58/312.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Burundi......

170

91st

18 June 2004

55

58/313.

Organizational arrangements for the high-level meeting to
review the progress achieved in realizing the
commitments set out in the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS ........................................................................

47

92nd

1 July 2004

7

Participation of the Holy See in the work of the United
Nations ...................................................................................

59

92nd

1 July 2004

9

Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects........................

85

92nd

1 July 2004

18

Further measures for the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly .................................................................

55

92nd

1 July 2004

10

Reaffirming the central role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security and the
promotion of international cooperation................................

59

93rd

5 August 2004

13

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court.................................................

154

95th

13 September 2004

15

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

Decision B..............................................................................

19

80th

9 February 2004

58

Approval of the appointment of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights ........................................

117

81st

25 February 2004

58

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session ..................................................................

4

89th

10 June 2004

58

Election of the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session .........................

5

90th

10 June 2004

58

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly
at its fifty-ninth session .........................................................

6

90th

10 June 2004

59

Appointment of a member of the International Civil
Service Commission .............................................................

17 (j)

91st

18 June 2004

59

Appointment of a member of the Joint Inspection Unit

17 (h)

93rd

5 August 2004

59

58/311.

58/314.
58/315.
58/316.
58/317.

58/318.

Decisions
Decision
No.
58/411.

58/417.
58/418.
58/419.
58/420.
58/421.
58/422.

Title

Appointment of a member of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples

71

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
No.

Title

58/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
Decision B..............................................................................

58/564.

Item

8

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

80th
82nd
83rd
86th
88th
90th
94th
95th

9 February 2004
7 April 2004
8 April 2004,
6 May 2004
24 May 2004
10 June 2004
10 September 2004
13 September 2004

61

Questions deferred for future consideration
Decision B..............................................................................

119

83rd

8 April 2004

64

Decision C..............................................................................

119

91st

18 June 2004

64

58/566.

Capital master plan................................................................

121

83rd

8 April 2004

65

58/567.

Participation of United Nations Volunteers in
peacekeeping operations.......................................................

134

83rd

8 April 2004

65

Special measures for protection from sexual exploitation
and sexual abuse.................................................................... 127 and 134

91st

18 June 2004

65

58/569.

Report of the World Summit on the Information Society

49 and 55

92nd

1 July 2004

62

58/570.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and
the Olympic ideal ..................................................................

23 (a)

93rd

5 August 2004

62

58/571.

Multilingualism .....................................................................

61

93rd

5 August 2004

62

58/572.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in
the membership of the Security Council and related
matters....................................................................................

56

95th

13 September 2004

62

Report of the Economic and Social Council:
implementation of General Assembly resolution 56/212
of 21 December 2001............................................................

12

95th

13 September 2004

63

Confirmation of the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development..........................................................................

17 (i)

95th

13 September 2004

63

58/575.

Improving the financial situation of the United Nations.....

123

95th

13 September 2004

63

58/576.

Administration of justice at the United Nations ..................

128

95th

13 September 2004

63

58/577.

Financing of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola....................................................................................

135

95th

13 September 2004

63

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor

139

95th

13 September 2004

63

58/568.

58/573.

58/574.

58/578.

72
