S/PRST/2005/56

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 November 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5309th meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 November 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council congratulates the people of Afghanistan on the
confirmation of the final results of the parliamentary and provincial council
elections. The successful holding of these elections has demonstrated the broad
commitment of Afghan voters to democracy and freedom in their country, and
the Council welcomes that the completion of the confirmation process has
paved the way toward the timely inauguration of the new parliament and thus
to the conclusion of the Bonn political process.
“The Security Council commends all Afghans for having taken this step
and calls on them, and, in particular, the representatives-elect and other former
candidates, to remain fully committed to peace, the constitution, the rule of
law and democracy in Afghanistan.
“The Security Council, in this connection, reiterates its appreciation to
all those who contributed to the electoral process, and extends special
appreciation to the Joint Electoral Management Body and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for their dedication. The Security Council
also reiterates its endorsement of the efforts of the Afghan Security Forces,
with the support of the International Security Assistance Force and the
Operation Enduring Freedom coalition, within their respective responsibilities,
to improve the safety and stability of the country.
“The Security Council hopes for the prompt appointment of all members
of the House of Elders (Meshrano Jirga).
“The Security Council reaffirms the importance for the international
community to maintain a high level of commitment to assisting Afghanistan in
addressing its remaining challenges, in particular in the fields of security,
including fighting terrorist and narcotics threats, governance and development.
“The Security Council supports the central and impartial role the United
Nations continues to play for the consolidation of peace and stability in
Afghanistan and coordination of the relevant international efforts and
welcomes consultations initiated by the Government of Afghanistan and the
United Nations on the post-Bonn process.
05-61661 (E) 231105

*0561661*

S/PRST/2005/56

“Finally, the Security Council stresses that violence in any form intended
to disrupt the democratic process in Afghanistan will not be tolerated. The
Council unequivocally condemns all recent attacks in Afghanistan, including
the attacks against the International Security Assistance Force, and expresses
its deepest sympathies to the victims, both Afghan and international, and their
families, as well as to the troop contributors of ISAF.”

2
