TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 9/10 JULY 1967

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1366) , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . .

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and ’
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902);
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907);
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/79 IO);
Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action by Israel and
withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts of the territory of the United
Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of an
aggression” (S/7967),

) 1

Letter dated 8 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8043);
Letter dated 8 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8044) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . J

S/PV.1366

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council, The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-SIXTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Sunday, 9 July 1967, at 4.30 pm.
President: Mr. Endalkachew MAKONNEN

(Ethiopia),

Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907);

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/791 0);

Provisional Agenda (S/Agenda/l366)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).

Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action
by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces from those
parts of the territory of the United Arab Republic,
Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of
an aggression” (S/7967);

3. CompIaint of the representative of the United .Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

Letter dated 8 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8043);

4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representativ,e of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/791 0).

Letter dated 8 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8044)

5. Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military
action by >Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces
from those parts of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as
the result of an aggression” (S/7967).

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Security Council, I shall now, with
the consent of the Council, invite the representatives of
Israel, the United Arab Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic,
and Jordan to take places at the Council table, and the
representatives of Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, Tunisia, Libya and Pakistan to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, to
participate without vote in the Council’s discussion.

6. Letter dated 8 July 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to the
President of the Security Coyncil (S/8043).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. I?afael [Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. A. Daoudy
(Syria) and Mr. M. H. El-Farra (Jordan) took places at the
Council table, and Mr. S. Chammas (Lebanon), Mr. K.
Khalaf [Iraq), Mr. A. T. Benhima (Morocco), Mr. J. M.
Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. R. Al-Rashid (Kuwait),
Mr, Mongi Slim (Tunisia) and Mr. W. El Bouri (Libya) took
the places reserved for them.

7. Letter dated 8 July 1967 from the Permanent Repre-

sentative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8044).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

2. The PRESIDENT: I have received a letter dated 8 July
[S/8045/ from the representative of Algeria requesting that
he be allowed to participate in the Council’s discussion
without the right to vote. As there is no objection, I invite

letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902);

1

of the consequences of Israel’s aggression. The immediate
withdrawal of Israel’s forces to the positions which they
occupied prior to 5 June 1967-this is the most vital matter
from the point of view of the interests of peace in the Near
East, and, of world peace. Israel’s aggressive forces are
behaving themselves in the occupied Arab territories like
shameless brigands; they are still extolling the virtues of
arbitrary rule and violence, and they are openly and
arrogantly putting forward territorial and other claims in an
attempt to dictate and to impose their conditions on
others. By constantly organizing criminal acts of military
provocation against the Arab States, Tel-Aviv is once again
for the nth time challenging the United Nations and the
Security Council. Israel’s new aggressive acts, and the
obstinacy with which the forces of aggression are trying to
carry out their designs, indicate that Israel is relying on the
support of certain Western Powers. Is it not perfectly clear
that, if Israel did not have strong protectors and patrons, it
would never dare to act so defiantly and brazenly? Indeed,
the events in the Near East, and the discussions in the
Security Council and at the General Assembly’s fifth
emergency special session, have in themselves demon&&cl
beyond doubt that Tel-Aviv is being supported by
Washington, London, Bon11 and others. It must be said that
Washington and those who follow its line in encouraging
Tel-Aviv’s aggression will bear a heavy responsibility for the
consequences of the events now unfolding in the Near East.

the representative of Algeria to take a place at the side of
the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. T. Bouattoura
(Algeria) took the place reserved for him.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the items inscribed on its
agenda.
4. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (trunslated from Russian): The Security Council
has once again been convened urgently at the request of the
representative of the United Arab Republic to consider the
question of Israel’s flagrant and premeditated violation of
the Security Council’s decisions calling for a cease-fire and
the cessation of military activities in the Suez Canal zone.
5. At our last meeting the representative of the United
Arab Republic provided the Council with information on
further raids by the Israel Air Force during the morning of
8 July on the control stations at El Tina, Ras El’Ish and El
Kap in the Suez Canal area. He also spoke of shelling by
Israel artillery and barbarous air raids by Israel bandits on
densely-populated areas containing a large number of
inhabitants. These piratical raids resulted in the death of
innocent people, and caused further material damage.
0. Thus, Israel is continuing its aggressive acts against the
lJnited Arab Republic. These unceasing acts of provocation
by Israel’s armed forces constitute further evidence of the
danger inherent in the situation, and prove that Israel has
not abandoned its criminal plans and that Tel-Aviv is
ignoring the demands of the Security Council, of the
overwhelming majority of States Members of the General
Assembly and of all peace-loving peoples.

IO. It is clear that the aggressor is becoming more and
more arrogant. After seizing parts of the territory of Arab
countries by force, Israel has now gone to extremes and is
trying to slander others-to slander the Arab countries-in
the Security Council, instead of complying with the
Security Council’s cease-fire decisions and instead of
terminating its illegal occupation of Arab territory iwmediately. These self-justifications sound like sheer
blasphemy here,

7. As you know, the Soviet Union has issued several
warnings that Israel’s continued occupation of part of the
territories of the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan is
fraught with the most serious consequences. The Soviet
delegation has repeatedly emphasized that until Israel
forces leave the foreign territory and foreign soil which
they have occupied, there can be no peace in the Near East,
because no people will put up with a situation in which
interventionists are throwing their weight about and perpetrating crimes on its territory. We should like to
emphasize again that, so long as Israel’s armed forces are
occupying Arab territories, the flames of war may flare up
again at any moment, causing a new further armed conflict
of extensive proportions.

11. As the Council iS aware, the representatives of
Tel-Aviv are even goiilg so far as to. try to accuse the Arab
States. This really is the very height of 11yp0cri~y ~~HI
cynicism. The occupiers, usurpers and aggressors who arc
flouting the rights of the Arab peoples, and have invaded
their territory, still have the impudence to put forward
claims and counter-complaints. But has there ever been ;j
shadow of a doubt that the statements made by rulirlg
circles in Tel-Aviv are false through and through, and that
their counter-arguments are complete fabrications?
12. Members of the Council will recall that, since the WI)
outset of his country’s criminal aggression against the Arab
States, the Israel representative has been trying to resort to
blatant lies and deceit at the Council table and elsewhere,
and has attempted to misinform the Council and the world
public in order to gain time for further aggressive annexations. These unseemly ploys, and the mendacity of 1110
advocatek of Tel-Aviv, have been duly exposed. The whole
world, which has followed the Security Council’s work with
bated breath, is witness to the fact that the seatsbehind the
nameplate “Israel” are occupied by incorrigible liars whose
words are not and cannot be trusted at all.

8. Until the aggressor has been put in his place, the
shadow of war in the Near East will stand relentlessly at
every door, the situation will be aggravated to the very
limits and there may be a military explosion on a scale
which would be dangerous for all mankind. The truth is so
elementary and self-evident that I hardly think anyone will
presume to deny or doubt it.
9. It is precisely for this reason that the most important
and urgent objective, which must be achieved without
delay, is the immediate withdrawal of Israel’s forces from
the Arab territory they have occupied and the elimination

13. Yesterday, too, the speaker for Israel once again
resorted to unseemly manoeuvres in the hope of side2

tracking the United Nations from the main issue-namely,
the immediate withdrawal of the aggressor’s forces and
compliance with the Security Council’s decisions calling for
a cease-fire. Israel’s attempts to pose as the prosecutor are
too ridiculous and absurd. We wish to state this publicly, so
that no one shall have any illusions. The representatives of
Tel-Aviv, whose statements about peace have been merely a
screen for the preparation of armed attack and who have
cynically flouted the Security Council’s decisions, have no
right to speak here in the United Nations about justice and
fair play,

themselves. This danger is very real and serious, particularly
for small countries. The peoples are in Fact at grips with a
united front of aggressiveforces which is increasing military
tension and provoking conflicts in various parts of the
world.
19. All this shows that the forces of imperialism are
intoxicated with the idea of aggression and that they are
becoming more and more active, threatening the freedom
and independence of peoples.
20. The Soviet Government has pointed out that it would
be an irreparable mistake if we were to get used to thinking
that aggression can go unpunished. The policy of conniving
at aggression is creating an extremely dangerous situation
and is an encouragement to aggressors in other parts of the
world.

14. Now the Israel delegate is prevaricating once again and
shamelessly denying the new crimes which are still being
committed by Israel troops, by the armed hordes which
forcibly seized Arab territory. Tel-Aviv is stubbornly
disregarding the Security Council’s decisions calling for an
unconditional cessation OFmilitary activities.

2 1. We all know that there was intervention in the
Dominican Republic only a short time ago. The aggression
in Viet-Nam has been escalating for several years. Now the
peoples of the Near East have become victims of imperialist
aggression.

15. The fact that the Security Council, a body whic1l is
invested with such important powers and responsibilities,
has trad to adopt four resolutions one after the other,
calling upon Tel-Aviv to put an end to its aggressiveacts
against the Arab countries, is surely cause for righteous
indignation. It is a fact, however, that Israel is still to this
very day demonstrating its contempt for the decisions of
Ihe Security Council, treating them as if they were mere
scraps of paper out of one of its own notebooks and
regarding the Security Council as a suitable place for
performing a shameful farce.

22. Before the eyes of the whole world certain imperialist
countries have in the past few days been committing acts of
undisguised international brigandage against the longsuffering African people of the Congo. Can the Security
Council remain indifferent to the fact that the forces of
aggression are grossly violating the sovereignty of independent States Members of the United Nations and are
interfering in their domestic affairs in order to impose on
them rigimes which are acceptable to the forces of
imperialism and colonialism ? The threat of intervention
has been hanging over Cyprus too, and it would be
inexcusable to wait until the world is again faced with yet
another fait accompli of aggression and intervention.

; 6. Such behaviour by Israel is intolerable; it is intolerable
here at this table. The Security Council cannot let its
resolutions be treated in this way, since it is not only the
prestige of the Council, but the authority of the United
Nations as a whole that is being undermined. The highhanded forces of aggression must be called to order and
their crimes must be most severely condemned, in the first
instance here, in the Security Council in the United
Nations.

23. The Soviet Union firmly and resolutely supports the
Arab States in their struggle for freedom and territorial
integrity, and is providing them with assistance of every
kind. This assistance has in particular been provided here in
the Security Council which, owing to opposition by certain
of its members, has been unable to do its duty in
accordance with the United Nations Charter.

17. Israel’s aggression against the Arab States is an attempt
by imperialism, using the ruling circles in Tel-Aviv, to
deliver a blow to the national liberation movement in the
Near East; it is an attempt to halt the Arab pepple’s
advance along the road of social progress. And that is why
all efforts to make out that recent events in the Near East
are merely the result of national discord between Israel and
the Arab countries can be regarded only as an attempt to
deceive the peoples of the world and to conceal the true
causesof Israel’s aggression.

24. It was the Soviet Union, too, which proposed the
emergency session of the General Assembly. As we know
this has not yet completed its work, although we must say
frankly that it is a matter for regret that the General
Assembly was unable to adopt the necessary decision when
the various draft resolutions were put to the vote on 4 July.

18. The continuing United States aggression against the
people of Viet-Nam, Israel’s perfidious attack on the Arab
countries, the recent acts of provocation against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the alarming news of
plans which would violate the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus-all these
are links in the single chain of a conspiracy by imperialism
and colonialism against the national liberation movement.
And all the newly independent countries must draw the
necessary conclusions from this, since connivance at aggression and a weakening of vigilance are fraught with Very
dangerous consequences, particularly for these countries

25. The General Assembly must show that it is equal to
the requirements of the situation. We are, of course, glad to
note that all Members of the Assembly, with the exception
of the aggressor and his direct accomplices, have said that
they are opposed to aggressive territorial annexations, and
to the idea that the aggressor should derive some advantage
from the armed attack which he has perpetrated; and they
have thereby, in fact, expressed their condemnation of
Israel’s policy. This gives grounds for thinking that further
vigorous efforts can and must be made to bring about the
immediate withdrawal of Israel forces from those parts of
3

the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan which they
have occupied, to eliminate the consequences of Israel’s
aggression against the Arab States, and to create conditions
for the maintenance of peace and tranquillity in the Near
East.

speech which surely cannot have assisted us in finding a
way out of the difficulties we face. But I for my part will
speak in a way which will not offend or antagonize anyone,
It is surely our duty not to increase animosities. Rather, 1
suggest that our main purpose should be that stated by
Mr. Brezhnev four days ago, when, speaking formally on
behalf of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, he said
that we must all do everything so that the flames of war do
not break out again.

26. The new aggressive acts by Israel to which the
representative of the United Arab Republic referred in his
statement are intended to undermine United Nations
efforts to restore peace in the Near East, and must not go
unpunished. Israel nlust strictly comply with the Security
Council’s decisions calling for a cease-fire. It is quite clear
that these decisions by the Security Councii are merely the
first step, the very minimum which was required to halt the
aggression, to avert a further dangerous deterioration in the
situation, and to prevent the armed conflict from spreading.

33. Surely, we should all set that as our overriding aim.
But if we are to achieve it, we shall need to avoid saying or
doing anything which fans the flames of hate; and we must
turn our minds-and, if we can, the minds of others-from
past bitterness to future hope, and from recrimination to
reconstruction, reconstruction of confidence and security,
on a basis far firmer than ever before. And, what is more,
we must be content first of all to take small steps in the
right direction.

27. The Soviet Union, which firmly supports the Arab
States, believes that the Security Council must adopt
extreme measures to put an end to the military activities
which Israel has unleashed again and again. The Security
Council, as the representative of the United Arab Republic
has stressed in his letter of 8 July [S/8043], must call upon
Israel promptly and fully to comply with the Council’s
decisions, and to refrain from all military operations. The
Council must in this way prevent a further deterioration in
the situation which-as it is-is already fraught with danger
for peace throughout the world and not only in the Near
East.

34. The first action of this Council when the conflict
started was to call for and establish a cease-fire.We must
see that that cease-fire is obsellred. We must condemn any
and every breach of it. We can make no progressat all until
that first advance on to firm ground has been consolidated.
35. I shall not attempt today to go over all the wider
arguments and controversies which have recently been the
subject of the debate in the General Assembly, but I would
wish to make one general comment.

28. Under the United Nations Charter, as you know,
Members of the Organization have agreed to comply with
the decisions of the Security Council to carry them out in
accordance with Article 25 of the Charter. Therefore, if
Israel does not comply with the decisions which the
Security Council has already adopted and the demands it
has already made concerning the cease-fire and the cessation of military activities, then one must consider the
question of taking further steps in accordance with the
United Nations Charter.

36. Throughout the long debates in this Council and then
in the Assembly, the public speeches might often have led
us to despair. More important still, millions of people who
still put faith in our Organization might have been led to
despair too. I have often remembered, as I listened to the
debates, the words of an English poet-and I remembered
these words again as I listened to the speech by the
representative of the Soviet Union just now:
“Earth is sick;
And heaven is weary of the hollow words
Which States and kingdoms utter
When they speak of truth and justice.”

29. Under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, the
Security Council is empowered to impose sanctions, if the
measures it has taken for the maintenance of international
peace and security prove inadequate. Therefore, if Israel
continues to disregard the decisions and demands of the
Security Council, it will be necessary to apply sanctions
against Israel as an aggressor which has violated the Security
Council’s decisions. If the Security Council decides to take
this step the Soviet Union is ready to participate in
applying the sanctions.

But it is comforting to hope that we shall not be judged by
our public speeches; and I hope this may be of some
comfort to my distinguished friend from the Soviet Union.
We may hope that what we do will speak so loud that the
world will not hear what we say.
37. What has been happening here at the United Nations
while the public debate has dragged on? Make no mistake
about it, a great deal has been happening. Below the rough
surface of words there has been persistent, anxious search
for common ground of agreement. Disagreement on some
essential questions persisted, but there was a wide area of
growing agreement, Withdrawal of forces from occupied
territory: widely agreed; the need not only to preservethe
cease-fire, but to make sure that firing never starts again:
widely agreed; the necessity to deal urgently with all the
other issues: widely agreed; a pressing need to bring succour
to those in distress and to give them not only relief, but
justice too: widely agreed; the need to give freedom of

30. In the situation which has arisen the United Nations
must do its duty in accordance with its Charter, and it must
put an end to Israel’s aggression, safeguard the legitimate
rights of the Arab states and restore peace in the Near East.
31. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
with your permission I should like to turn for a short while
to reflect on the role of the United Nations in the conflict,
turmoil and suffering of the Near East.
32, We have just listened to a speech which, I am sure, has
depressed us all-a speech of violence, an intemperate
4

yorshipto all religions in the Holy City: widely agreed; the
leedto secure freedom of passage on international watervays:widely agreed; the need to prevent the squandering
)f resourcesso desperately needed for development on a
enewedarms race: widely agreed; the need to strengthen
he United Nations presence in the Near East: widely
Igreed.

necessary authority. We should at once authorize the
Secretary-General to send observers to Sinai and to the
Canal, and I trust that we shall do so without delay and
without reservations. I hope that we can also authorize him
to send his Special Representative to the area to make
progress in dealing with all aspects of the situation,
including certainly disengagement and withdrawal. We have
long been pressing that this should be done;indeed, we see
no other practical way of proceeding.

18.I pay my respectful tribute to all those of all
poups-yes, of all groups-who have worked for these
)urposes.
The work they have done in recent weeks will not
telost; it will form the basis of the work now ahead of us
n the Security Council. The weeks of debate here in the
JnitedNations have not been wasted; they have not driven
ISfurther apart; I trust that they have brought us all closer
ogether
.

43: We hope, moreover, that following the action which
the Secretary-General has already taken to deal with the
humanitarian problem, a new international initiative can
soon be started in the whole field of relief and rehabilitation.
44. To all concerned I would say that the only hope for us
all is to back, not one side or the other, but to back the
cause of effective, practical, immediate and impartial
United Nations action. We took the essential first step in
this direction when we in the Council called for and insisted
on a cease-fire. I trust that we shall now take a second
practical step in restoring and maintaining international
order so that, in Mr. Brezhnev’s phrase, “the flames of war
do not break out again.”

19.We are often reminded of the wisdom of those who
Irewup our Charter, and time and again we benefit by
ecotirseto the principles they laid down. All of us, every
meof us, subscribe to the Charter. We subscribed to a
locument which states the principle of the sovereign
Iqualityof all States of this Organizntion. We all subscribe
o a pledge which requires us to settle our international
lisputesby peaceful means, in such a manner that
nternational peace and security and justice are not enlangered.We are pledged, all of us, to refrain from the
h[eat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
roliticalindependence of any State,

45. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): In
spe,,king to the Council today, the delegation of the United
States had hoped to deal exclusively with the complaints
for which this Council was called into urgent session at the
request of the Governments of both the United Arab
Republic and Israel, in order to act promptly with respect
to those complaints. My delegation was indeed prepared to
act on those complaints last night. But today we are faced
once again with provocative, baseless and entireIy irrelevant
charges hurled about by the representative of the Soviet
Union, These charges have but one design: to divert the
Council’s attention from the business at hand. My delegation has no desire to be a party to such an effort, and I shall
try therefore to present my delegation’s views on the
problem we have before us and to refer only brieflybecause I am compelled to reply-to the irrelevant charges
which have been made.

10,1 come back to the immediate question before us, the
pestion of what practical step can be taken now, imnediatelyand effectively. I trust that we shall all heed what
he Secretary-Generalsaid to us yesterday and act at once

rnthe practical suggestion he put to us. From the first, my
;overnmenthas been anxious to concentrate attention not
III accusationsand on generalizations, but on the practical
‘tepsrequired to escape from violence and start out on the
lardroad to a stable and secure settlement; and such steps
:anbetaken, so 1 believe, only in the United Nations.
II. It is fashionable to decry the efforts of the United
Ctions, But as we look back, we should realize that
vhenever
the United Nations has been given half a chance it
lasservedus all very well, The United Nations Emergency
:orcekept the peace on the borders of Israel and the
&ted Arab Republic for ten years. The Secretary-General
llld General Bull and his United Nations staff played an
nvaluablepart in stopping the firing. Mr. Michelmore and
lis United Nations staff have been working day and night
.Orelievesuffering and hardship, We warmly welcome the
i&ion of the Secretary-General to send a special emissary
0 reviewthe whole question of relief and to make practical
)roposals
for dealing with that vast problem, We badly need
lot less but more international involvement and interlationalaction.

46. The attempt of the representative of the Soviet Union
to link this conflict to other named places in the world is
just a piece of “boiler-plate ” which we have heard many
times before, a record played so many times that you can
hear the scratches. Perhaps the most interesting thing about
tonight’s performance was that our colleague Ambassador
Fedorenko was playing solo trumpet. We have not heard
any similar complaints in this Council from the countries in
other areas for which this self-appointed defence attorney
purports to speak. Perhaps that fact speaks more loudly
than what he has said. Ambassador Fedorenko speaks of
aggression with the air of one familiar with the subject, and
when he speaks, also, of boundless hypocrisy and cynicism,
no doubt he knows whereof he speaks.

12. That brings me to the main argument which I wish to
cavein our minds to,day. Those who seek stability and
iecuritycan, so I suggest to them, hope to achieve those
limsonly by international authority; those who seek relief
lnd justice can also achieve those aims only by interlational action. Experience has well shown how effectivdY
:heinternational Organization can act when we give the

47. When the Council met yesterday [1365t?z meeting] we
heard statements by the Secretary-General and the representatives of the United Arab Republic and Israel. We know
from their statements that renewed incidents of fighting
have taken place in the area of the Suez Canal, where Israel
5

being made now to use the outbreak of fighting that we are
considering at this evening’s meeting as an occasion for
once again putting forward certain views on the question of
the withdrawal of Israel troops. The withdrawal of forcessomething which we support-is of course an important and
essential part of any over-all peaceful solution of the
problems of the area. But as the discussions last month in
the Security Council and, more recently, the debates alld
the voting in the General Assembly have shown, a substantial body of world opinion supports the idea that
withdrawal must be accompanied, at the very least, by a
termination of any state of war and of any claims to the
exercise of belligerent rights. In other words, we must have
peace, total peace, in the area.

and United Arab Republic forces are both present, and that
the incidents which are immediately the subject of our
concern took place yesterday, 8 July. While fortunately the
fighting has apparently ceased, the incidents of 8 July
would appear to be the most sefious of several that have
occurred during the past several days. Though the details of
the 8 July incidents are not complete, it is nevertheless
clear from both statements that the cease-fire orders
unanimously adopted by this Council last month have not
been honoured, Such serious breaches of the cease-fire
obviously require the prompt attention of the Council,
which of course is still seized of the problem.
48. Both the United Arab Republic and Israel accepted
the cease-fire after resolutions calling for such a cease-fire
were unanimously adopted by the Council. Both sides are
thus obliged to observe the cease-fire, and observe it
scrupulously. If nations of the Middle East are to be
extricated from the disastrous cycle of recurring conflict
which has plagued their history for the past twenty years,
surely the first necessary step, we must all acknowledge, is
for all fighting-and
this must include all incidents of
fighting, however major or minor-to cease.

53. In this connexion, the President of the General
Assembly, Ambassador Pazhwak, told the fifth emergency
special session on 5 July that, in addition to wide agrecment on the need for withdrawal, there existed in the
Assembly “a broad consensus that the political soverei~lty
and territorial integrity of States allow them a rightful
freedom from threat of belligerency”.’
54. In his statement to the Assembly on 4July, the
representative of Trinidad and Tobago, Ambassador
SoIomon, put the crux of the issue this way:

49. At the moment, as I am sure all members of the
Council are equally aware, we are disadvantaged here in our
consideration of the matter immediately before us because
of a lack of independent and objective information of the
kind which the Secretary-General has been able to provide
in other instances. It is for this reason that we particularly
welcome the Secretary-General’s proposal to the Governments of both the United Arab Republic and Israel that
they accept United Nations observers to report on compliance with the Council’s cease-fire orders. Observers of
the United Nations have been able to report on the
implementation
of the cease-fire and its observance by the
parties in those areas where Syrian or Jordanian forces face
Israel forces. There are, however, no United Nations
observers positioned to report from the area along the Suez
Canal, where Israel and United Arab Republic forces face
each other.

‘1. . * it is enough that a state of belligerency does exist
and has been recognized to exist, and that in order that
there should be peace it is essential-it is one of the
preconditions of peace-that this state of belligerency
should cease to exist. If in fact it were agreed that the
forces that occupy foreign soil today should be asked to
withdraw, what would there be to prevent the further
ofitbreak of hostilities the moment either side should
determine that the time was opportune? What guarantee
is there, without a cessation of the state of belligerency,
that hostilities, active hostilities, will not again result?
“No, it is unrealistic and impractical to ask for the
withdrawal of troops and still to maintain firmly and
irrevocably that a state of belligerency exists.“2

50. My delegation, concurring in the recommendation of
the Secretary-General, believes that it would be most useful
to the Council and to the implementation of the cease-fire
if United Nations observers could be sent to the area to
report to the Secretary-General and, through the SecretaryGeneral, to the Security Council on the implementation of
the cease-fire and compliance therewith by the parties. The
presence of such observers would also, we believe, have a
calming effect on the situation in the area and would make
further incidents of the sort we are considering today less
likely.

55. Surely, the United Nations and all States Members of
the United Nations, particularly the members of the
Security Council itself, will continue to be preoccupied
with the question of how the over-all peaceful solution for
which all of us hope and which all of us fervently seek can
be secured, No matter where the troops are facing each
other, there will continue to be incidents unless there is an
arrangement for a secure settlement. That has been the
history of the past twenty years. That is why my country
has emphasized that an over-all solution to the problems of
the area is essential in the interests of the peace and
security of all the countries concerned.

51. Scrupulous observance of the cease-fire by all the
States concerned is vitally necessaryon oux road to progress
in solving all of the complex problems facing the Middle
East, and I trust that the Council will, without further
delay, call for scrupulous observance by all concerned of
the cease-fire orders of the Council, and endorse the
Secretary-General’s request.

56. Tonight, however, we are charged with a more limited
subject: the immediate question of how to deal with the
incident of fighting which was reported in the area of the
Suez Canal yesterday, and of how best to take steps which
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth EnlWW~
Special Session, Plenary Meetings, 1549th meeting, para. 13.
2 Ibid., 1548th meeting, paras.48 and 49.

52. I had hoped not to enter upon this subject, but
because it has been mentioned, I must refer to the effort
6

will help to prevent further such incidents in the days
ahead.And here we must, in my view and in the view of my
delegation, be clear and unequivocal. We must call upon the
parties scrupulously to observe the cease-fire, and we must
endorse the wise counsel of the Secretary-General to
dispatch observers to the scene to help implement the
cease-fireorders of the Council.

61. I should like to quote a short communiqud of today’s
date from the Ageme France-fiesse. It originates from
Jerusalem, and reads as follows:
“The serious incidents which occurred on Saturday in
the Suez Canal zone are part of a campaign inspired by
the USSR to demonstrate that peace will be threatened as
long as Israel troops remain on the present cease-fire lines.
This is the opinion of political circles in Israel.”

57. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (trarzslated from French): I shall be
brief. On behalf of my delegation I should like first to
mention a few points. Ever since 5 June my delegation has
been insisting that the cease-fire called for by the Security
Council should be accompanied by the immediate withdrawal of Israel’s forces. Unfortunately
this has not
happened and we are now meeting again to discuss the same
problem.

62. This is what Israel says. Israel knows this and I believe
that everyone here knows it too. It is not an idea that can
be attributed to any particular country. If we want peace,
we must try to be logical; we must try to find paths which
will lead us to justice and to a situation in which countries
will be able to live in peaceful coexistence. But manoeuvrings will not help us to achieve any positive results; they
will only make a laughing stock of us. I am sorry to have to
say this to the Council, but it is the truth. The Council
must have sufficient courage since, as I have already said, it
is shameful and humiliating for the Council to remain
inactive and not to be able to make a decision because X or
Y does not want it to take such a decision.

58. I do not think that anyone here has any illusions
about certain aspects of this problem, I should like to begin
by mentioning one word which is habitually used here,
namely, “belligerency”. The fact is that, since the Israel
aggression, some Arab territories have been occupied by
Israel troops, and these troops after all the bargaining and
manoeuvring which have taken place in the United Nations,
both in the Security Council and in the General Assembly,
have not only failed to halt their aggression but are
continuing to annex Arab territories. Therefore I should
like the Security Council to decide what the word
“belligerency” means. In my delegation’s opinion there
cannot be belligerency on the part of an occupied country
which is making every effort to expel the occupier. There is
a tendency to say here that the state of belligerency by the
Arab countries whose territories are occupied must be
terminated. I wonder whether people are thinking about a
utopia or whether there is any kind of logic in this idea. It
is impossible to talk about belligerency to someone whose
territory is occupied. When we demanded, on 5 June, that
the Israel occupation troops should be forced to withdraw
to the positions they were occupying on 4 June, we did so
with the aim of helping to create a peaceful atmosphere in
which the problem could be settled.

63. As I said here earlier, we are waiting for the occupying
Power to assume a position of strength from which it can
impose its will on those whose territory it is occupying. No,
this is not right. But everyone here should think about it
carefully. It is not a question of defending the Arabs or any
one else, though I should like to point out that the United
Arab Republic, which has been attacked, is an African
country. I am here in the Security Council as a representative from the African countries and I should be failing
in my duty if I did not draw attention to each case in which
an African country is deprived of its rights, its privileges
and its sovereignty. This has happened in the present case,
and it is shameful fir us Africans around this table and for
all Africans. People have been trying to treat us like small
children ever since this affair began. Let us therefore be
logical.
64, 712e German .YYibuneof 1 July 1967-that is, before
the emergency session of the General Assembly which was
convened to consider the problem we are now discussing-contained an article stating that it was not yet
possible to foresee what vague resolution-yes, vague
resolution-would emerge from the noble words and oratorical skirmishes of the General Assembly. If the person who
wrote this on 1 July is not a prophet, then at least he is
very intelligent, because indeed we have ‘been going round
in circles; no one has spoken of justice, and it has all been
demoralizing and depressing. Nothing is more depressing
than to see the right patb and not be able to follow it. But
this is what is happening with us.

59. My deleiation would like to point out that the
bargaining to which I have already referred has made a
laughing stock of this Council and of the United Nations;
and, what is more, there is no use thinking-and I do not
imagine that any one at this table really does think-that
vjolations of the cease-fire will stop so long as Arab
territories are occupied by fokeigners. No, they will not. Let
us be logical. How can you imagine that you can come and
occupy my house and that I will stand there with my arms
folded and let you get on with it? If I can, I shall throw
you out; this is called self-defence and justice, not
belligerency.

6.5. I am sorry to say that for us, the African members of
the Council, and for the African-Asians, the Latin
Americans and all the under-developed countries, the
spectacle we have witnessed is shameful, discouraging and
demoralizing. We are not defending anyone, but we do have
a duty to defend justice, or what we regard as justice. But
in spite of all our efforts there are some occult powers
wliicI1 prevent us from achieving anything. We must reach
agreement and make a choice.

60. If the Council wants to be serious and to take
decisions which are worthy of it, my delegation urges once
again that efforts should be made to, bring about the
immediate withdrawal of the Israel troops to their pdsitions
of 4 June. Unless this withdrawal takes place, we shall
continue to come here to discuss violations, and we shall be
told again that the Arab States are belligerent, But no,
becausethe Arab countries are occupied,
7

66. I do not wish to continue these remonstrations but I
should like to tell all the members of the Council that
tomorrow, the day after tomorrow, or at some future date
the Council is bound to have to meet again. I am not saying
this as a prophet: I am merely being logical. This Council
will be convened again for the same reason. And why?
Because there will still be foreign troops on the territory of
other countries.

Pending the arrival of these additional observers, the Chief
of Staff, if called upon to do SO, can dispatch a small team
of observers now on his staff to the Suez Canal area,They
could institute patrols on both the United Arab Republic
and the Israel sides of the front.
74. The observers operating in this area, of course, would
have to have logistical support to be provided by the United
Nations Field Service, including radio operators, transport
and transport mechanics, supply, security and secretariat
personnel. For immediate purposes, this could be provided
from UNTSO’s existing establishment.

67. As long as countries arc occupied by foreigners, the
peoples of these countries are bound to defend themselves
against the occupiers. This is only natural; and in this
connexion we should not speak of the belligerency of
countries which are defending themselves against foreign
occupation. I do not believe that anyone at this table would
allow his territory or his house to be occupied by
foreigners, or would argue that those whose territory is
occupied should do nothing to defend themselves. That is
not the way my delegation sees it, at least. Personally I
slrould do everything in my power to throw out the
occupier, and this would not be belligerency but legitimate
self-defence.

75. United Nations observers have been serving in the Near
East since 1948, when there were well over 700 as against
the 133 now serving in the area. Wherever United Nations
military observers have been employed, it has been established practice to have the approval of the Governments
directly concerned-in the present case the Governments of
Israel and the United Arab Republic-regarding the
countries from which military observers for the particular
operation may be drawn. That practice still continues.

68. I believe that one serious and honourable step which
the Council can take is to recommend the withdrawal of
Israel’s forces to their positions of 4 June 1967 as soon as
possible. This is the first positive and practical step which
the Council can take; otherwise it will have to meet
again-once, twice or even more-to
discuss the same
problem.

76. The financial implications of such an increase can be
made available to the Security Council later. It can be said
now, however, that they would not be excessive.
77. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank the Secretary
General for his statement. I come immediately to the
motion that is before the Council. I should like to add the
suggestion that we suspend for half an hour. If I hear no
objection I shall take it that this is agreeable to members of
the Council. Since there is no objection, the meeting is
suspended for half an hour.

69. If you will allow me, Mr. President, I should like
through you to ask for a suspension of the meeting under
rule 33, sub-paragraph 1, of the provisional rules of
procedure, since I am afraid I have spoken too long on this
subject and I think that a suspension of the meeting might
give us an opportunity to exchange ideas and perhaps arrive
at some useful conclusion a

The meeting was suspended at 7.10 p.m. and resumed at
10.20 p.m.
78. The PRESIDENT: I now call on Ambassador Adib
Daoudy, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs of
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.

70. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the rule of
procedure which the representative of Mali has cited, his
motion should be put to the vote straight away, but I had
arranged with the Secretary-General that he would put
before the Council certain additional information which
would supplement the statement he made yesterday. If the
members of the Council are agreeable, we could first hear
the Secretary-General, and then decide on the motion put
before us by the representative of Mali.

79. Mr. DAOUDY (Syria): The new Israel acts of aggression which have been committed all through this weekartd
which yesterday assumed larger dimensions, are not the
first of their kind since the cease-fire, nor will they be the
last. If any proof is required, it will be found in the events
of 9, 10 and 11 June 1967, which engaged the uniater.
rupted attention of the Security Council and in which Israel
carried through its defiance of the numerous cease-fire
resolutions and persisted in its aggression against Syrian
territory, in spite of Syria’s acceptance of the cease-fire.
The only verbal justification Israel falsely gave to the
Council then was, as today, that the Arab side had vioIated
the cease-fire. Israel’s continued defiance was OCCUI~‘IQ?
during the very time of the meetings of the Security
Council.

71. There being no objection to the proposal I have made,
I now ask the Secretary-General to make his statement,
72. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Members of the
Council will recall that in my statement to the Council at
its 1365th meeting of yesterday, 8 July, I pointed out that
if there should be agreement on the stationing of United
Nations observers to observe the cease-fire in the Suez
sector, additional observers would have to be made available to the Chief of Staff, General Odd Bull.

80. It is pertinent here to emphasize the fact that evfw
inch of Syrian territory that was occupied by Israel forces
was occupied after our acceptance of the cease-fire.It Will
also be recalled that this acceptance was officially cm
municated on the morning of 9 June, and that the Israel
invasion stopped only on 11 June.

73. I have since consulted General Bull and he has
informed me that for the Suez sector his estimated need
would be for an additional twenty,fIve observers who
should be made available to him as soon as possible.
8

81. I am sure that all those who heard the Israel
representative yesterday attempting to hold the United
Arab Republic responsible for the non-observance of the
cease-tire will remember that almost the same terms were
used one month earlier, with this difference: that then it
was Syria which was blamed. When we were informing the
Council about the occupation by Israel forces of El
Kuneitra and the bombardment of the Damascus area, the
Israel representative repeatedly denied what was subsequently proved to be factual. This is not incidental to
Israel conduct: one necessarily acquires the habit of
falsehood after twenty years of contempt for the United
Nations-which created Israel-utter cynicism and the dsleading of world public opinion.

the area is still functioning in accordance with the
appropriate resolutions of the Security Council concerning
the armistice rCgime. We furthermore request the SecretaryGeneral to take note of our stand on this question. Surely,
the Security Council ,must share our concern over Israel’s
rejection of the United Nations machinery.
86. Referring to the proposal regarding the stationing of
United Nations observers, we are of the opinion that their
mission, temporary in nature since the forces of invasion
must be withdrawn immediately, should be exsrcised
within the framework of the General Armistice Agreements.
87. The Israel act of aggression in the Canal area comes in
the wake of a series of acts of defiance of the world
community. The Israel Defence Minister stated that his
Government had decided to annex the Caza Strip to Israel
and that he considered it, as well as the western bank of the
Jordan, to be integral parts of Israel’s territory, How
interesting to note the similarity between these Israel
undertakings and the acts of the Nazi armies in the lands
they occupied. Indeed we should not be surprised to hear
very soon that the Israelis have appointed Gauleiters in
those lands, as their Nazi predecessors did. The analogy
between the acts of the Nazi army and the Zionists does
not stop at such practices as blitz, panzer divisions,
Anschluss,
mass extermination and the installing of
Gauleiters; the analogy extends to the practice of plundering the riches of the occupied countries, especially when it
comes to historical treasures. We all still remember the
plundering of museums by the German Army in occupied
lands. Today history repeats itself, for we are witnessing a
similar episode.

82. Now, what is behind this new aggression; and how
does Israel dare to persist in this policy, which no impartial
party not committed to Zionism can hesitate to describe as
aggressive, expansionistic, and portending the gravest consequences for world peace? III our view, the answerlies in
the impotency inflicted on this Organization, whether in
the Security Council or in the General Assembly, which
paralyses any action on its part in discharging its responsibilities provided for in the Charter, in fulfilling the clear
duty of condemning the aggressor, compelling it to withdraw from the occupied territory, and eliminating the
effects of that aggression. Let us hasten to say that had it
not been for the attitude of the United States, and
necessarily the attitude of those who embrace its policies in
the Council and in the Assembly, the Organization would
not have fallen victim to such paralysis.
83. As a necessary result of these attitudes and policies,
overt or disguised, Israel developed this complex of being
able to do what it wants. The purpose of its new aggressive
action is equally obvious: Israel, with the protection of its
supporters, is endeavouring to achieve, by further acts of
war and invasion, its objectives in the Canal zone, thus,
creating a new situation and attempting to by-pass the
General Armistice Agreements.

88. The Government of Israel is now undertaking excavations in the Syrian city of Banias in order to remove to
Israel memorable archaeological finds whose origins go back
to the first century A.D. We sincerely hope that world
public opinion, especially Christian public opinion, will be
moved by this alarming news, for it is well known to
archaeologists and historians that Banias wasthe site of the
very first Christian church and that its historical and
archaeological treasures are invaluable. To this end the
Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, Mr.
Tomeh, addressed a letter on 7 July 1967 to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, from which I quote as
follows:

84. In this respect I should like to draw the attention of
the members of the Council to an important question
which has a direct bearing on the present situation. On
4 July,
the Secretary-General distributed document
S/7930/Add.20, under the title, “Supplemental information”, in which he reproduced a letter addressed to him by
the representative of Israel, The last paragraph of that letter
reads as follows:

‘L* . . the Israel occupying forcesin Syrian territory have
started excavations in the historic area of Banias searching
for archaeological finds. Israel Radio confirmed this fact
and announced that high Israel officials and archaeologists
went to the Banias area to witness the excavations.
Looting of this historical property has already started.

“It is understood that in the view of the Government of
Israel, the sole function and concern of General Bull and
his staff is with those cease-fire resolutions of the
Security Council and no longer with the General Armistice Agreements and the now obsolete arrangements of
the past.” [See S/793O/Add.20, paru. 3.1

“. ..

Here the attention of the members of the Security Council
is particularly drawn to that specific and revealing phrase,
“obsolete arrangements of the past”.

“I would very much appreciate it if you would kindly
take the necessary measures to prevent this international
robbery contrary to all norms of decency and international law and the appropriate conventions for the
protection of this human heritage, and in order to prevent
this criminal assault on all these historic sites which are

85. We, for our part, categorically reject such a unilateral
interpretation of the task of UNTSO, and shall not
recognize it. In our view, the United Nations machinery in
9

countries-as reported by the French press-illustrates what
that aggressive rCgime considers to be the superiority of the
white men over the coloured peoples. If that is the case,
such an attitude would have dangerous results for mankind.

rightly considered to be among the very first of Christianity in the world. . . ,” [S/8040].
89. Another event of importance was revealed during this
past week which corroborates the point of view put
forward by us in the past. With your permission,
Mr. President, I shall read out to members of the Council
excerpts from a statement made by the Prime Minister of
Israel concerning the deliberations which took place between his Government and President Johnson regarding the
initiation of military hostilities against the Arab countries.
Only yesterday, The New York Times published a very
revealing statement, from which I quote the following
excerpts:

93. It is not repetitious to affirm once more, given the
solemnity of the times, that we are living in a very
dangerous period which compels every Member of the
United Nations to put the interests of world peace based on
justice above everything else. More and more voices arc
being heard, day after day, condemning the Israel aggression against the Arab countries.
94. Thus, speaking as a member of the General Board of
the National Council of Churches, which represents virtually all United States Protestantism and which, in the past,
supported Israel, the Very Reverend Henry P. Van Duscn,
past president of the Union Theological Seminary, wrote in
a letter to The New York Times, published on 7 July, the
following:

“Mr. Eshkol acknowledged that he had put off military
action at the request of President Johnson.
“ ‘But after the President of the United States requested whatever he requested,’ Mr. Eshkol said, ‘it was
decided by an inner Cabinet group after consultation with
leaders of Gahal and Rafi, who were then in opposition,
to give him the requested respite.

“All persons who seek to view the Middle East problem
with honesty and objectivity stand aghast at Israel’s
onslaught, the most violent, ruthless (and successful)
aggression since Hilter’s Blitzkrieg across Western Europe
in the summer of 1940, aiming not at victory but at
annihilation .”

“ ‘After I explained the President’s request, all agreed
that if President Johnson asked us to wait a few days, we
should wait.’

9.5. We believe that this fitting warning to the world
community against the escalation of Israel aggression
should be heeded, and that the Security Council should rise
to the level of this ominous challenge,

“ ‘Many of us thought we would perform a good deed
for him if we acted,’ the Premier went on.”
90. This statement by the Prime Minister of Israel explained the extent of the co-operation between the Governments of Washington and Tel-Aviv before, during and after
the aggression. I wish, in this connexion, to draw the
Council’s attention to what Mr. Eshkol meant when he
said: “Many of us thought we would perform a good deed
for him if we acted.” This is a decisive admission that Israel
started the aggression and is an outright denial of all the
assertions we have heard in this Council from the Israel
representative and others to the effect that the Arab
countries started the hostilities on 5 June. Mr. Eshkol’s
statement affirms unequivocally and without ambiguity the
full co-ordination that existed between the Governments of
the United States and Israel. It is no longer a secret that
while these intrigues were under way, assuranceswere given
to Arab leaders, on the highest diplomatic level, that Israel
would not start a war against the Arab countries.

96. The PRESIDENT: The next and last speaker on my
list is the representative of Israel, on whom I now call.
97. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): We had reason to believe that
Ambassador Fedorenko would be more austere in the use
of invective and personal abuse. The world has watched
Mr. Fedorenko’s exercises in vituperation. We know what is
the judgement of decent men all over the world. It is on
record.
98. Ambassador Fedorenko, the great torch-bearer of the
immaculate truth, had better concern himself with the
impression which his outbursts of invective have left in the
minds and feelings of multitudes of his listeners, According
to Mr. Fedorenko, there is only one truth: the truth of
Cairo and of Moscow. It is the truth that asseited that Israel
aeroplanes had bombed the city of Cairo. It is the trutli
which claimed that Anglo-American forces had participated
in the recent hostilities. It is the truth which the Twentietil
Congress of the Soviet Communist Party exposed as blatant
falsehood.

91. The responsibility for maintaining peace and security
in the world lies with this Council collectively. One month
has already passed since Israel committed its aggression
against Syria, Jordan and the United Arab Republic, and
yet nothing has been done by the Council to condemn the
aggression and order the withdrawal of the occupying
forces. This is because of the attitude of some of the
members of the Council.

99. It is obvious that Ambassador Fedorenko has a certain
difficulty in concealing and controlling his unmitigated
hatred for my nation and my people. His outburst of today,
following his utterances on previous occasions, revealed the
true nature of his thinking and sentiments. They do no
honour either to him or to the great country he represents.
They do no harm to my country, nor are we personally
impressed by these aberrations. We are, however, impressed
by what his colleague Mr. Roschin had to say about

92. We believe that if the Council continues to remain
silent about what has happened, the result will be an open
invitation to aggressive forces the world bver to carry out
their pernicious designs against innocent peoples, Thus the
rejoicing with which the European minority in Rhodesia
received the news of the Israel invasion of the Arab
0

personal abuse in United Nations debates. I quote a
statement made by Ambassador Roschin in the First
Committee of the General Assembly on 25 November
1966. He said:

Assembly at its fifth emergency special session has rejected
them by an overwhelming majority as recently as 4 July.
The Security Council likewise did not adopt the Soviet
thesis. The United Nations has refused to accept the Soviet
contentions that Israel has committed an act of aggression.
It has completeIy refused to endcrse them, no matter how
they were worded or who sponsored them. The General
Assembly has rejected the original Soviet version; it has
defeated the embroidered Cuban formulation; it said a
decisive “no” to the valiant but not particularly inspiring
Albanian attempt to rewrite contemporary history; it
refused to support the Yugoslav-unaligned text, which was
based on an artfully veiled premise that Israel had committed an act of aggression. Only on the basis of such an
assumption can the demand for an immediate withdrawal
of the Israel forces, without the renunciation by the Arab
States of the state of war and without the termination of
belligerency, be sustained.

“We cannot but regret that some representatives of the
West, and especially the representative of the United
Kingdom”-1 apologize for having to say that, but it is
Ambassador Roschin that I am quoting-“have
come
forward with polemical speeches containing personal
attacks upon the representative of the Soviet Union
to the United Nations, Mr. Fedorenko. Such personal
attacks upon the representative of any country are, of
course, quite out of order, and are surely not in keeping
with the traditions that have been established in these
halls in the discussion of substantial questions.“3
In this case I am on the side of Mr. Roschin, and I hope
that upon reflection Ambassador Fedorenko will agree that
there can be only one law in the United Nations, one law in
an Organization based on the sovereign equality of all its
Members.

104. The allegation of Israel aggression is a Soviet-Arab
doctrine. It is not shared by the overwhelming majority of
the United Nations, nor has it found any credibility in
world opinion, including that of eminent personalities and
so-called progressive groups which are usually in sympathy
with the Soviet Union and its viewpoints. It is obvious why
the Soviet representatives cling so stubbornly to their
charges of Israel aggression. All their policy prescriptions
for the Middle East are based on this premise. That premise
having been found unacceptable, the whole structure of
Soviet-Arab policies, which want to perpetuate the state of
war, collapses.

100. Before dealing with the substance of some of the
remarks of the representative of the Soviet Union, I wish to
address myself to the matter for which the Security Council
has been convened, upon the initiative of the United Arab
Republic and of Israel.
101. The subjects under discussion are incidents on the
Israel-Egyptian cease-fire line, and not on the Israel-Syrian
cease-fire line, which fortunately has remained, by and
large, quiet. At our last meeting I gave a detailed account of
the recent incidents at Kantara and Ras El’Ish. The
representative of the United Arab Republic has claimed
that the cause for the Egyptian armed action was Israel’s
alleged intention to move beyond its present positions and
to occupy Port Fuad. Israel has no such intentions. Israel’s
Defence Forces have strict orders to observe the cease-fire
and to hold to their present positions.

105. Official and well-placed representatives of the Soviet
Union had ample opportunity to examine the factual
situation existing prior to the outbreak of hostilities. While
Arab propaganda, for purposes of its own, had charged
Israel with concentrating large forces along the Israel-Syrian
border-allegations which were refuted not only by Israel
but by the Secretary-General in an official report-the
Soviet Union rejected the invitation of my Government to
permit the Soviet Ambassador in Israel to investigate the
situation on the spot. Complete freedom of access and all
facilities were offered to him. Yet the Soviet Government,
instead of agreeing to verify the facts, chose to support the
Arab fiction.

102. Assuming that the Egyptian Government also is
anxious to maintain the cease-fire, my Government wishes
to propose that local Israel and United Arab Republic
commanders in the area of the incidents should meet and
agree upon appropriate arrangements to avoid breaches of
the cease-fire in the future. Similar local arrangements are
already in existence in the Port Said and Kantara areas in
respect of civil affairs, such as the supply of water and the
transfer of wounded military personnel and prisoners of
war. These arrangements have worked to mutual satisfaction through the co-operation of the local authorities.

106. President Nasser himself revealed in his speech of
9 June, in which he gave the first hint to his people of the
miIitary disaster that had befallen his army, that responsible.
Soviet leaders had at the end of April informed a visiting
Egyptian parliamentary delegation that Israel had concentrated large forces on its northern borders and was
about to attack Syria. As Nasser explained the course of
events, this warning compelled him to dispatch massive
forces to Israel’s southern borders.

103. I come now to the observations made by the
representative of the Soviet Union. His central theme and
basic premise is that Israel has committed aggression, that
Israel is an aggressor. Despite their incessant and persistent
repetitions, the Soviet representatives have not obtained the
support eitber of world opinion or of the United Nations
itself for their unfounded charges. Indeed, the General

107. I was in Moscow at that time, and I encountered that
Egyptian delegation on Red Square at the 1 May celebrations. I wish I had had the opportunity to talk to them. I
would have extended to them the same invitation to verify
the facts that my Government extended to the Soviet
Ambassador in Israel. But they were exposed to Soviet
admonitions and advice, the sole purpose of which was to
advance Soviet political and strategic ambitions in the

3 This statement wasmade at the 1464th meeting of the First
Committee, the official records of which are published in summary
fOIll1.

11

earnest hope that under your able Presidency, the Council
will be able to complete its unfulfilled task in dealing with
this serious situation.

Middle East, which apparently have not changed since the
days of the Ribbentrop-Molotov
agreement, by which the
Soviet Government obtained Nazi recognition of its expansionist designs extending as far as the Persian Gulf.

113. We should also like to express our deep appreciation
and regard for the diligence and high sense of duty with
which Ambassador Tabor of Denmark conducted the
meetings of this Council during the last few weeks, whelk
the Council devoted considerable time and energy to the
consideration of this difficult question. I should like to
associate my delegation with the many statements made by
previous speakers, in appreciation of Ambassador Tabor’s
able and efficient Presidency in trying circumstances.

108. The Arab peoples have paid a heavy price for having
been misled. Their leaders, in their blindness, have become
a wilful but helpless tool in the game of big-Power politics.
There is no jubilation in our hearts at the toll the Arab
peoples had to pay for the folly of their leaders and the
recklessness of their partners. Of course, we feel relieved
and thankful that the very threat to our national existence
has been removed by the valour of our army and the
determination and sacrifice of our nation. But we had to
pay a very heavy price for our deliverance and our survival
in freedom.

114. The Security Council has met under the dark shadow
of a renewed threat to the peace resulting from clashes in
the sensitive area of the Suez Canal. So far as temporary
measures like the sending of observers to this area are
concerned, my delegation has no objection. We approve of
the suggestions made by the Secretary-General in his two
reports in this respect. But the problem of restoration of
peace in the Middle East has to be dealt with in a more
fundamental way,

109. For our own sake, and I dare say for the sake of the
Arab people, we have to embark, all together, upon a
forward-looking course. The fundamental change will not
come about through the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel forces from the territory where they
stand now as a result of Arab belligerence and hostility and
as a protection against the renewal of hostilities. This
change can be brought about only by Arab withdrawal
from the fruitless policy of rancour, hostility and belligerence. The lesson of the month of June is not to
withdraw to a state of affairs which has caused such terrible
suffering to the peoples of the area and such concern to the
peace-loving nations of the world; the lesson of the month
of June is to go forward to the negotiation of a stable and
secure peace between Israel and the Arab States.

115. Members of the Council will recall the great clifficulties which the C,ouncil experienced in effecting a
cease-fire, which was brought about only after insistent
demands for a cease-fire in three resolutions of the Council.
116. In its resolution 236 (1967), the Council reaffirmed
its demand for a cease-fire and discontinuance -of all
military activities, including a prohibition of any forward
military movements. From the very beginning of the
outbreak of hostilities, my delegation has taken the
position that the call for a cease-fire must be coupled with a
provision for immediate withdrawal of armed forces. It has
been ou1 judgement, and events have proved it to be true,
that it is much more difficult, if not impossible, to ensure a
total cessation of hostilities without simultaneous withdrawal.

110. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): I am advised that
there is a prospect of reaching an agreement on a consensus
on which all of us have been working. I therefore would
propose, under rule 33 of our provisional rules of procedure, that we recessfor ten minutes for consultations.
111. The PRESIDENT: The representative of India has
proposed, under rule 33, that there be a recess for ten
minutes, If there is no objection, I shall take it that this is
agreeable to the Council. There being no objection, the
meeting will be suspended for ten minutes.

117. Since the last cease-fire resolution (236 (1967)/ of
the Council was passed, nearly four weeks ago, we have
received a number of reports of incidents and clashes
between the Israel and Arab forces. It is not only on the
territory of the United Arab Republic but also in Syria that
violations of the cease-fire have taken place. I need refer
only to paragraph 2 of General Bull’s report of 7 July
/S/7930/Add.21]
which shows that Israel troops opened
fire against Syrian military positions on 6 July,

The meeting was suspended at IO.55 p.m. and resumed at
12 midnight.
112. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): Mr. President, I
should like to associate my delegation with the felicitations
extended to you by my colleagues who have spoken before
me, on your assumption of the high office of President of
the Security Council. It is a source of special pride and
satisfaction to my delegation, particularly in view of the
very close relations between our two countries and our
personal regard for you, that the Council should have the
benefit of your wise and dedicated leadership at this
juncture. Representing as you do a great African nation,
which has consistently played and continues to play a
leading role in the resurgence of Africa, it is most fitting
that you should guide the deliberations of the Council,
particularly at a time when it is considering the serious
situation in the Middle East, which is of great concern to all
countries, especially to those in Africa and Asia. It is our

118. Are we to look helplessly at the situation and wait
for a settlement of all the complicated issuesbefore taking
action to prevent another conflagration? No, we cannot go
from cease-fire to cease-fire, nor periodically merely rem
affirm our decisions regarding the cease-fire.
119. I should like to recaI1 in this context my statement in
the Sedurity Council on 11 June, in which I said:
“ . 9 . we shall have to take more far-reaching steps, the
most important of which would be to order an immediate
withdrawal of all Forcesto the positions they occupied OII
4 June 1967. Unless we take that step immediately, WC
12

c

shall be faced every day with situations like the ones we
have had to deal with in the last few days.” (1357th
meeting, para. 172.1

120. As the Council
. . is .aware, the series of cease-fire
resolutions was preclicatcd on a clear understanding that
t]lis was to be only the first step. AS I hue stated earlier,
the Council must now take the next step, which is to call
upon Israel to withdraw immediately all its armed forces to
tile positions they occupied prior to the outbreak of
hostilities.
121. At the same time, my delegation believes that the
Secretary-General should bc rccluestecl to take steps to
strengthen the United Nations machinery existing in the
area,with a view to arresting deterioration of the situation,
securing withdrawal of Israel forces, and ensuring strict
observanceof the General Armistice Agreements by all the
parties concerned. My delegation is also in favour of the
Secretary-Generaldesignating a special representative to go
to the area for these purposes and to help bring about
reduction in tension and restoration of peaceful conditions,
srld to report to the Security Council.

with the Governments of the United Arab Republic and
Israel, as speedily as possible, the necessary arrangements
to station United Nations military observers in the Suez
Canal sector under the Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization.”
126. I believe that the statement which I have just read
represents the consensus of the views of the Council
members.
127. Since I hear no objection, I declare the consensus
accepted by the Council.
It was so decided.

128. I cannot allow this moment of accord in the Security
Council to pass without giving expression to what, I am
sure, is a common feeling of satisfaction on the part of all
members at the decision which we have just adopted.
129. The task of peace-keeping is hard, slow and often
painful, but in this endeavour every positive step counts
and helps to prepare the way for more positive achievements. Every move forward, however small it may be, and
however small it may seem compared with the high
objectives ahead, is none the less a welcome pointer to the
final goal and is a sign of progress in the right direction on
the way to that peace with justice which it is our challenge
and responsibility to achieve.

122. Our deliberations in the Security Council and in the
fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly
have once again reaffirmed certain fundamental principles.
Our discussionshave shown that the overwhelming majority
of Member States agree that no dispute should be settled
through the use of force. It is also generally recognized that
Member States have an obligation to respect the territorial
integrity and political independence of other States, It is on
the basis of these twin principles that the Council should
proceed to give urgent consideration to the problems of
West Asia and seek solutions within the framework of the
sovereignty of the States concerned, It is only by such a
concerted approach that the Council can facilitate the
transition from conflict to peace,

130. The step that we have just taken today makes the
previous cease-fire decisions more complete and more
effective in their over-all application, The nature of today’s
decision and the common accord that accompanied it can
augur well for our ceaselessefforts to achieve genuine peace
in this troubled region, but this will be possible only if we
are willing to work diligently, with courage, common
accord and imagination.
131. The biggest hindrance to peace and the sure obstacle
to its fruitful progress is a state of stalemate. Our common
objective should therefore be to get things moving surely
and constructively and with that reasonable speed which is
compatible with the common accord that is so essential a
factor in the effectiveness of the Security Council.

123. But I repeat that, unless we decide to order withdrawal of the intruding armed forces, there can be no
progress towards the objective of peace which we all
earnestly desire.
124. What I have outlined above is the basic approach of
my delegation, for the acceptance of which we shall plead
and press, whether the matter is considered in the Security
Council or in the General Assembly,

132. Before I conclude, I feel duty bound to thank the
Secretary-General in the name of the Council for the useful
initiative which he took in this regard. I wish to assurethe
Secretary-General of the Council’s full support in all his
efforts to carry out the task entrusted to him. I also wish to
express, through him, the Council’s appreciation and
gratitude to General Bull and the United Nations personnel
serving under him for the excellent peace-keeping job they
are doing on behalf of the United Nations.

125. The PRESIDENT: Since there are no more speakers
On my list for this meeting, with the permission of the
Council I shall present what I consider to be a consensusof
the viewsof the members:
“Recalling Security Council resolutions 233 (1967) of

6June, 234(1967) of 7 June, 235 (1967) of 9 June and

133. I wish, in conclusion, to appeal to the parties
concerned to give to the Secretary-General their full
support and whole-hearted co-operation both in ensuring
full compliance with the Council’s decisions and by
extending, wherever necessary, such facilities as the Secretary-General or his personnel may require in the performance of their peace-keeping duties in the area. Again I thank
my colleagues for their understanding and co-operation.

236 (1967) of 11 June 1967, and emphasizing the need
for all parties to observe scrupulously the provisions of
these resolutions, having heard the statements made by
the Secretary-General and the suggestions he has addressed to the parties concerned, I believe that I am
reflecting the view of the Council that the SecretaryGeneral should proceed, as he has suggested in his
statements before the Council on 8 and 9 July 1967, to
request the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
SuPervision Organization, General Odd Bull, to work oLlt

Tlze meeting rose on Monday, IO July, at 12.20 a.m.

13

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publicotionr.may
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
d6positaires
du
Notions

Unies,

KAK

IlOilYYUTb

Section

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles
Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS
Notions
entier.

DES NATIONS

Unies sent
Informer-vous

des ventes,

U3+!4AHUh’

New

York

OPTAHU3A~UU

06bEAUHEHHblX

mra:InIIe
IIpOAaiIiC

1t.111 IIIIIIIIIT~
no axpccy
: Opramo3aqun
Il3AaIlIIii,
WbIO~l’IOpIC
iI!IR ~llCIIeBE4.

CONSEGUIR

Las publicncionas
en todas portes
Ventos,

Nueva

llaI”lOIIaX

>rIIpa.

PUBLICACIONES

del
York

et Jes ogences
odressez-vous
B:

ou Genbve.

Opralnr:lar(nn 06%r~nIIc1II1I~Ix
110 DCCX

throughout
New York

UNIES

en vente
dons les libroirier
oupr&s
de votre
librairie
ou

II:I~~lIIrIrI
iU?CIlTt!TnaX

COMO

Litho in U.N.

des
monde

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

HAL(U&i

IIalpfi hfoihI~0IiyIIIITh
~hllO~IiTe

DE LAS

de Ias Nociones
Unidas
estbn
mundo.
Consulte
o su librero

CIIl~ELIlIiIf

NACIONES

n I~lIII;IilIIJX
mra31IIIax
06 113~allIIllx
n IIaIIICM
IilIIliliIIOl

n

06-be~m~e~~r~r~~x
Hartnil, Ceiiqns no

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerios
y cases distribuidoror
o dirljase
o: Naciones
Unidas,
Seccibn

de

o Ginebra.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

356634anuary

1971-kf00
