5

Reeolutiona adopted on reporta of the Fint Committee
611 (VII). The Tuniaian question
The General Assembly,
H aving debated the question propose<l by thirteen
Member States in document A/2152,
Mindful of the necessity of developing friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle! of equal rights and self-<letermination of peoples,
Considcring that the United Nations, as a centre for
harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of
their common ends un<ler the Charter, should strive
towards removing any causes and factors of misun<lerstanding among Member States, thus reasserting
the general principles of co-operation in the maintenance of international peace and security,
1. Expresses its confidence that, in pursuance of
its proclaimed policies, the Government of France will
endeavour to further the effective <levelopment of the
iree institutions oi the Tunisian people, in conformity
with the Purposes and Principles of the Charter;
2. Expresses the hope that the parties will continue negotiations on an urgent basis with a view to
bringing about self-government for Tunisians in the
light of the relevant provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations;

3. Appeals to the parties concerned to conduct their
relations and settle their disputes in accordance with
the spirit of ~he Charter and to refrain from any acts
or measures hkely to aggravate the presént tension.
404th plenary meeting,
17 December 1952.

612 (VII). The question of Morocco
The General Assembly,
Having d_ebated the "Question of Morocco", as proposed by th1rteen Member States in document A/2175,
J:lindful of the _necessity of developing friendly rel~ttans among nattons based on . respect for the princ1ple of equal rights and sclf-determination of peoples,
Considering that the United Nations as a centre for
hatmonizing the actions of nations i; the attainment
of their common ends under the Charter should strive
towards removing any causes or factors' of misunderstanding a!-llo!lg Member States, thus reasserting the
general prmc1ples of co-operation in the maintenance
of international peace and security,
l. E:rpresses the confidence that, in pursuance of
its proclaimed palicies, the Government of France will
endeavour to further the fondamental liberties of the
people of Morocco, in conformity with the Purposes
and Principles of the Chart~r ;

2. . E~presses the hope tha! the parties will continue
negottat1ons on an urgent basts towards developing the
fr~e political institutions of the people of Morocco
w1th due regard to legitimate rights and interests un~
der tl~e established norms and practices of the law
of nations;
3.

Appeals to the parties to conduct their i:elations

in an atmosphere of goodwill, mutual confidence and
respect and to settle their disputes in accor<lance with
the spirit of the Charter, thus reiraining from any acts
or measures likely to aggravate the present tension.
407th plenary meeting,
19 December 1952

613 (VII). Question of an appeal to the Powers
signatories to the Moscow Declaration of 1
November 1943 for the enrly fulfilment of
their pledges towards Austria
The Gencral Asscmbly,
Recalling the terms of resolution 190 (III) of 3 November 1948, whcreby an appeal was ma<le to the great
Powers to renew their efforts to compose their di fferences and establish a lasting peace.
Recalling the terms of the l\1oscow Declaration 5 of
1 November 1943, wherebv the Governments of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America recognized that Austria
shoul<l be re-established as a free and independent
State,
Recalling furthcr that the Guvernment of France
joined the three above-mentioned Governments in the
said declaration as of 16 November 1943, 6
Considerir.g that, in the spirit of the said declaration,
the four Powers accepted the responsibility of reestablishing a free and independent Austria, and, to
that end, have entered into negotiations towards the
conclusion of an Austrian treaty,
N oting with concern that those negotiations, which
have been under way intermittently since 1947, have
hitherto failed to bring about the proposed objective,
Taking into account that such a state of affairs, still
prevailing after a lapse of seven years since the liberation of Austria at the end of the Second Worl<l \Var,
and arising from the inconclusive stage of the aforementioned negotiations, does constitute a source of
deep disappointment for the Austrian people, who have
by themselves made successful efforts towards the
restoration and democratic reconstruction of their
country,
Recognizing that only through the unhampered exercise by the Austrian people of their freedom and
independence can these efforts attain full realization,
Taking further into account that such a state of
affairs hinders the full participation by Austria -in the
normal and peaceful relations of the community of nations and the full exercise of the powers inherent in its
sovereignty,
s See United Nations Docu,nents, 1941-1945, Moscow ConCommuniqué, NO'llember 1, 1943, Declaration 011
Austrin, p. 15, Royal Institute of International Affairs, London
and New York.
8 See Recueil de Te:rtes à l'usage des Conférences de la
Paix, Première partie, Documents génirarix. //, Déclaration
d" Comité français de la libération nationale relative à
l'indépendance de l'Autriche, p. 5, Imprimerie Nationale de
France, 1947.
ferettce,
