A /68/PV.35

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

35th plenary meeting

Monday, 21 October 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 120
Follow-up to the commemoration of the
two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition
of the transatlantic slave trade
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/68/135
and A/68/291)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.7)
The President: Many will recall that paragraph 101
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
of 2001 invited the international community and its
member States to honour the victims of slavery and the
slave trade in this follow-up exercise. All of us will,
no doubt, recall that in December 2011, the Assembly
endorsed the initiative of Member States to erect, at
United Nations Headquarters, a permanent memorial
in honour of the tragedy of slavery and the slave trade.
Approximately one month ago, I had the distinct
honour to speak at the unveiling of the winning design
for the permanent memorial honouring those victims.
Three hundred and ten artists from 83 countries drew
upon their creative faculties to reinforce, through the
medium of the visual arts, sentiments to which Member
States had already given eloquent voice in the Durban
Declaration and subsequently. The design that the
judges considered to be most expressive of the desired
message was appropriately entitled Ark of Return and its
creative artist, Mr. Rodney Leon, is a native of Haiti, a
country with an illustrious history and its own struggle

to end slavery — a struggle that has taken a heavy
toll on its people. Mr. Leon described his winning
submission as depicting
“a sacred space that is designed to psychologically
and spiritually transport visitors to a place where
acknowledgement, education, reflection and
healing can take place.”
Just as other monuments erected on the grounds of
the United Nations serve to remind the international
community to honour the values of peace and
non-violence, it is my sincere hope and wish that
the soon-to be-erected Ark of Return will serve a
corresponding purpose as a tribute to the collective
aspirations of this Organization, namely: peace, human
rights, social justice and the dignity of human beings.
The year 2013 marks the 206th anniversary of the
abolition of the transatlantic slave trade. The General
Assembly’s engagement with the question of slavery
and the slave trade continues with draft resolution
A/68/L.7, before us today, as we commit once again to
raising public awareness about the legacy of that dark
period in our past. Since the United Nations began
considering this item some years ago, there have been
numerous initiatives at the national and international
levels, dedicated to the noble goals of remembering and
honouring all the victims of that monstrously inhumane
practice. Through their various efforts, Member States,
United Nations agencies and civil-society partners
have celebrated the indomitable spirit of the victims of
a tragedy that continues to be inflicted upon numerous
persons today, albeit in more subtle forms, including

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-52279 (E)

*1352279*

A/68/PV.35

social and economic inequality, hatred, bigotry, racism
and prejudice.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/68/291)
highlights the educational, outreach and awarenessraising activities undertaken following resolution
67/108. Those campaigns provide an opportunity not
only to reflect upon the history and legacy of slavery
but also to address questions such as the dearth of
resources and materials in educational institutions
worldwide on why slavery happened, the full extent
of its consequences and what lessons we have learned
from it. In addition to helping ensure that the past is
remembered and never repeated, those activities also
offer an opportunity to highlight the often-overlooked
contributions that enslaved Africans made to their
economies and communities.
Among the principles on which the Charter of
the United Nations was shaped are those of equality
and non-discrimination. The Universal Declaration
of Human Rights proclaims that all human beings are
born free and equal in dignity and rights; that no one
shall be held in slavery and servitude and that slavery
and the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.
By adopting the draft resolution today, we dedicate
ourselves, once again, to the task of undertaking
concrete and concerted actions to uphold those rights
and freedoms. Once again, we also commit ourselves to
initiating and supporting efforts that make it abundantly
clear to the cradle of humanity what such violations of
human rights and dignity represent. My hope is that our
joint recollection of the horrors of slavery and the slave
trade will move us to further resolute and concrete
action. Let us make a fresh resolve today that slavery,
in whatever form or manifestation, will forever be a
thing of the past.
I now give the floor to the representative of Jamaica,
who will introduce draft resolution A/68/L.7.
Mr. Rattray (Jamaica): The institutionalized
system of slavery and its enabler, the transatlantic slave
trade, represent an appalling yet consequential period
in the course of our human history. They reflect a
tragic age when successful efforts to divide the human
family were played out on a grand scale, encompassing
the vast geographic and economic triangle linking
Europe, Africa and the Americas. It was a time when
our common humanity was not yet acknowledged, and
a man and his family, through barbaric exploitation,
could claim ownership of another man, woman or child,

2/9

21/10/2013

and could see to their own needs and enlargement at
the expense of other human beings. It was a time when
nations became great and wealthy. Others emerged
while some were subjugated and exploited. Some
scholars posit the view that slavery is one of the most
influential phenomena in history, shaping every aspect
of the world as we now know it.
So it is an honour for me to introduce today’s draft
resolution A/68/L.7 in the Assembly, where once again
the global community has the opportunity to condemn
that contemptible and barbaric historical practice,
but also to renew a pledge to ensure that nothing of
the kind is ever again visited on humanity. Draft
resolution A/68/L.7, entitled “Permanent memorial
to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade”, the text of which is before us
today, continues to take account of the importance of
ensuring that current and future generations are made
aware of the past and exhorted to join in a determination
to prevent anything so dastardly from ever happening
again.
A key activity in that quest is the erection here at
United Nations Headquarters of a permanent memorial
to honour the victims of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade. Let me take this opportunity, as Chair of
the committee established to steer the project to reality,
to advise the Assembly of the successful completion of
the international artistic competition to select a design
for the memorial, held over the past two years.
At this juncture, I would like to express our
gratitude to UNESCO and the United Nations Office
for Partnerships for their excellent collaboration in
conducting the competition. A total of 310 entries were
received, from persons representing 83 nationalities.
Sixteen contestants were shortlisted and evaluated
through an anonymous procedure by an international
panel of judges, all of whom are experts in their fields
and reflect a cross-section of nationalities. Seven
finalists were brought to New York and interviewed,
and their models were assessed by the judges, who
came to a unanimous decision on the winning design,
Ark of Return, by Rodney Leon, which was unveiled
on 23 September in a special ceremony here at the
United Nations. I would like to once again congratulate
Mr. Leon and the other finalists, whose works, we are
told by the judges, were all of high quality and showed
a good understanding of the depth and importance of
the subject matter.

13-52279

21/10/2013

The Ark of Return, according to the judges, is an
entirely feasible and appropriate proposal, which has
an impressive visual impact and invites exploration by
the viewers. We therefore owe a debt of gratitude to
the panel of distinguished judges — Mr. David Boxer,
from my own country, Jamaica; Ms. Nadia Bakhurji,
from Saudi Arabia; Ms. Dominique Fontaine, from
Canada and Haiti; Mr. Michael Gomez, from New York
University, here in the United States; and Mr. Ashfar
Isahq, from Pakistan — who undertook this enormous
task on a completely voluntary basis and have
collectively pledged their ongoing commitment to the
memorial.
It would be remiss of me to not also convey
deep appreciation to those Member States that have
so generously contributed to the Trust Fund for the
Permanent Memorial. We appreciate all donations
received, which in many ways reflect the broader
commitment to the goals of the permanent memorial
project, as represented not only in the draft resolution
before us but in those we have annually adopted under
this agenda item since 2006. We also express thanks
to a range of private individuals, corporations and
foundations that have made contributions as well. That
broadens the scope of ownership of and fidelity to this
noble initiative.
The ongoing work to bring this worthy project to
completion would not have been possible without the
vision and unstinting support of a team of pioneers who
laid the firm foundation on which we now build. Here
I must mention my predecessor, Ambassador Raymond
Wolfe, who worked tirelessly to bring the vision to
reality. Allow me also to make special mention of
Mr. Amir Dossal, former head of the United Nations
Office for Partnerships, who was a committed partner
and who, although officially retired from the United
Nations, remains faithful to the initiative.
We will now embark on the final phase of the
project, which is to commission the construction and
erection of the memorial on a United Nations podium.
The aim of the draft resolution is not only to endorse the
erection of the monument. Although that in itself is an
admirable accomplishment in honour of the victims of
slavery, we consider that the more important aspect of
the draft resolution is the fact that it that calls for broad
education and outreach to disseminate information to
the global public on the history and impact of slavery.
The aim is to influence modern social norms in a way
that rejects racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia

A/68/PV.35

and prejudice and that promotes healing, tolerance and
respect for diversity.
It is for that reason that we have continued to
emphasize the work of the United Nations through
the Department of Public Information in maintaining
a focus on that important aspect of relations in global
society. I commend the excellent work that has been
done by the Department of Public Information over the
years and implore all Member States to actively engage
in the outreach programme envisaged in the draft
resolution. The Secretary-General’s report (A/68/291)
illustrates the large selection of noteworthy activities
that the Organization has undertaken across the globe to
achieve that mandate. We encourage further activities
to that end.
In commending this draft for adoption, let us be
reminded that we share one humanity and that there is
no place for prejudice and discrimination in the world
today. As we mark those milestones, the best way to
honour the memory of those victims is to fulfil their
fundamental hope for equality, dignity, humanity and
justice for every human being. I am pleased, therefore,
on behalf of the Caribbean Community, the African
Group and all our sponsors, to present this draft for
consideration and adoption.
Mr. Kumar (India): I deem it a singular privilege
to be able to speak on behalf of my country on this
important agenda item before the General Assembly. I
would like to welcome the Secretary-General’s report
on the programme of educational outreach on the
transatlantic slave trade and slavery (A/68/291), and
his status report on the United Nations Trust Fund for
Partnerships—Permanent Memorial, that is, for the
permanent memorial to and remembrance of the victims
of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade (A/68/135).
The transatlantic slave trade is one of the most
abhorrent chapters in the history of humankind. It
ravaged African and Caribbean nations to satisfy the
rapacious economic greed and exploitation of colonizers.
The lingering consequences of its brutality and human
suffering are visible even today. We must, therefore,
take initiatives to ensure that future generations do
not forget the grief and tragedy borne by the countless
nameless victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade. It is equally imperative that the international
community take upon itself a commitment to ensuring
that such crimes against humanity will never recur.
Education has a critical role in creating awareness

13-522793/9

A/68/PV.35

among current and future generations of the history,
causes and impact of slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade. A better understanding of history provides a
valuable perspective for confronting today’s challenges.
India welcomes the various outreach activities and
programmes organized in March by the Department of
Public Information to commemorate the International
Day of Remembrance at the United Nations, as well as
in other countries, through its network of information
centres and partner organizations. We stress the need
for regular and adequate allocation of financing to the
Department for organizing such events. We also welcome
the initiatives undertaken by States in reaffirming their
commitment to implement paragraphs 101 and 102 of
the Durban Declaration, aimed at countering the legacy
of slavery and honouring the memory of the victims of
slavery and the slave trade.
The construction of a permanent memorial will be
a fitting tribute by the United Nations to the millions
of victims of the transatlantic slave trade. We are
pleased to note that the international competition to
finalize the memorial design has been concluded,
and that the Secretary-General and the President of
the General Assembly unveiled the winning design
in September. With the sum of $260,000, India is the
lead contributor to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Partnerships — Permanent Memorial for erecting
a permanent memorial. So far, however, the Trust
Fund has received only close to $1.4 million, against
an anticipated cost of $4.5 million for the memorial’s
construction. We therefore strongly urge all countries,
and particularly those that benefited from the
transatlantic trade, to come forward and contribute
generously to show their earnest admission that wrongs
were committed and that there is a sense of repentance.
As we recall the struggle, the degradation and the
deaths of the victims of the transatlantic slave trade,
we hope that a permanent memorial can be constructed
at an early date. It will indeed be a small but fitting
commemoration of the struggle of the victims, who
suffered silently, with no hope of freedom, before they
disappeared into the night. We have a chance to pay our
humble tribute to those who suffered that disgrace by
contributing generously to the Trust Fund. That is the
least we can all do.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the African Group. I would like to pay
tribute to Jamaica and all involved for the tireless

4/9

21/10/2013

efforts they have been making to the realization of the
Permanent Memorial. I admit we all have to do more.
The transatlantic slave trade is the gravest crime
committed against humanity with few rivals in its
infamy and cruelty. The inhumane and barbaric manner
in which it was committed, its magnitude and the time
span over which it was allowed to continue have no par
in history and will remain a scar on the conscience of
humanity. Africans and peoples of African descent have
suffered for centuries owing to that horrendous crime.
Even after the official abolition of the slave trade, its
institutionalized legacy continued to be a source of
exploitation, humiliation, discrimination, bias, hatred,
prejudice and racism against peoples of African origin
both in the continent and elsewhere.
As we remember that unparalleled crime, we cherish
the struggles of those Africans and their descendants,
who aspired and dreamed to live in freedom and equality.
We recognize, with great emotion, their contribution
to the genesis of the ideal of Pan-Africanism, an ideal
that inspired a people’s movement in the diaspora,
which was later joined by Africans from the continent.
Indeed, that movement, among other things, created
the momentum for Africa’s quest for freedom from the
yoke of colonialism and, later, for the establishment of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU). As we are
celebrating the golden jubilee of the OAU/African Union
this year, we indeed remember those who perished and
the immense contribution of those who followed them.
It is therefore imperative that we remember those
who perished and were uprooted. That has meaning for
today and for the future and posterity. We are of the
view that a clear and frank analysis of the situation and
the heroic struggle of those who rose up against slavery
can provide a valuable perspective and be a source of
pride and motivation for present and future generations
in overcoming today’s challenges.
In that connection, we have noted with satisfaction
the successful conclusion of the international design
competition for the Permanent Memorial and the
selection of the design for Ark of Return as the model
for the permanent memorial. However, the fact that
as of June 2013 the United Nations Trust Fund for
Partnerships—Permanent Memorial has received only
$1.37 million as against the anticipated expenditure of
three times that existing balance for the construction of
the Memorial is indicative of how much more we still
have to do. In that regard, we encourage Member States

13-52279

21/10/2013

and other interested parties to make further voluntary
contributions to the Trust Fund. We all have obligations,
without exception.
In our view, the Memorial will not only serve as
a hallmark for us to pay our respect but will also be a
reminder for the international community of the grief
and tragedy borne by the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade.
Africa welcomes the various remembrance activities
and programmes undertaken by the Department of
Public Information, including the commemorative
activities at the United Nations in March 2013. We
support the continued efforts of the Department of
Public Information to utilize its network of global
information centres to build awareness on the issue. We
also welcome the initiatives undertaken by States in
reaffirming their commitment to implement paragraphs
101 and 102 of the Durban Declaration of the World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, aimed at
countering the legacy of slavery and honouring the
memory of the victims of slavery and the slave trade.
As sponsors of draft resolution A/68/L.7, the States
members of the Africa Group fully support the speedy
implementation of the initiative of Member States
to erect, in a place of prominence at United Nations
Headquarters that is easily accessible to representatives,
United Nations staff and visitors, a permanent memorial
in acknowledgement of the tragedy and in consideration
of the legacy of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
The adoption of a draft resolution is the least we can do.
Mr. Strickland (United States of America): As
a multicultural society, the United States remains
committed to fighting racism, safeguarding the
dignity of people regardless of race or background and
countering the hateful legacy of slavery. We believe
strongly in spreading awareness of the struggle of the
men, women and children who fell victim to slavery
and to educating future generations on that tragic past
as a means of combating racism and prejudice. The
United States continues to press forward on eliminating
discrimination within our own country, as well as in
joining the global community in creating a world of
freedom and equality for all.
In addition, the United States has supported
UNESCO’s Breaking the Silence transatlantic slave
trade education project. As part of that effort, we have
engaged Governments and civil society organizations

A/68/PV.35

alike to raise awareness of the history of the slave trade
as well as to highlight the invaluable contributions made
by persons of African descent in every field of human
endeavour. The United States is proud to congratulate
Mr. Rodney Leon on his being chosen to design the
Permanent Memorial. Mr. Leon, a Haitian-American,
is a celebrated artist whose work has offered our nation
space and inspiration to reflect on our painful history
as well as on the progress we have made. His design,
Ark of Return, will inspire us to remember and honour
the victims of the transatlantic slave trade, to reflect
on the past and the lessons we have learned, and to
contemplate the steps we each must take to combat
the lingering consequences of slavery and to eradicate
discrimination.
The United States is honoured to co-sponsor today’s
draft resolution (A/68/L.7) on the Permanent Memorial
to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
translatlantic slave trade. We must never forget the
terrible human tragedy of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade and the moral courage of those who worked
to end it.
Mr. Magid (Israel): I would like to thank
Ambassador Rattray and the Permanent Mission of
Jamaica for their leadership and their efforts to bring
this important subject to the forefront of the United
Nations agenda.
The American author Robert Heinlein once said,
“A generation that ignores history has no past … and
no future”. Today we recommit ourselves to memory
so as to ensure that the tragedies of the past have clear
lessons for the future. The transatlantic slave trade
casts a dark shadow over history. The enslavement of
Africans was cruel and dehumanizing. Thirty million
people were forced from their homes, uprooted from
villages and driven into bondage. Many have recalled
the horrific conditions during their voyages and their
conditions during their enslavement. The dark centuries
of the slave trade represent one of the longest and most
sustained assaults on the life, integrity and dignity of
human beings in history, yet even after the abolition
of slavery, living conditions for African communities
remained horrific during the nineteenth century.
The Jewish people share the story of people who
were persecuted. The Jewish Bible describes how the
Jewish people emerged from bitter enslavement in
ancient Egypt to become a nation in the land of Israel.
They remained there until conquering forces expelled

13-522795/9

A/68/PV.35

and scattered them across the globe. Powerless and
persecuted, they suffered in every country and every
century. Every day for 2,000 years, Jews prayed, asking
God to return them to the land of Israel. At long last,
in 1948, we realized independence and the opportunity
to rebuild our own land. We built our State on the
principles of freedom, tolerance and understanding.
The Jewish people identify with the suffering of
the peoples of Africa and the Caribbean and all those
who share a burdened history. Because we were born
in slavery, we understand the yearning for freedom.
Because we suffered the indignity of persecution, we
understand the value of human dignity. And because
for 2,000 years Jews’ lives were held to be cheap, we
understand the sanctity of life.
Israel is proud of its financial contribution to the
Permanent Memorial in honour of victims of slavery
and the international slave trade. We are honoured to be
among the sponsors of the draft resolution on the topic,
as we have been every year. The Memorial must serve
as a call to action — a call to every nation, every leader
and every citizen — to do everything they can to ensure
that no human being is ever enslaved.
All human beings are born free and equal in
dignity and rights. Yet as we gather here today, many
around the world are not free. Every year, hundreds of
thousands of people, mostly women and children, are
trafficked across borders worldwide. The trafficking of
human beings is a grave injustice that has no place in a
civilized world. There is also no place in the civilized
world for those who enslave others with hate, racism and
prejudice. They are the fuel that power persecution, war
and violence. We must believe in memorials. Through
education, remembrance and vigilance we can ensure
that the tragedies of the past serve as clear lessons for
the future.
Israel joins with the international community today
in advancing that work. Together, we must extend a
promise to our children that freedom is universal,
dignity is inherent, and that life is sacred.
Mr. Gaspard (Haiti) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me to thank the Secretary-General for his
reports (A/68/135 and A/68/291) and also to welcome
the excellent work carried out by the commemoration
committee for the 200th anniversary under the wise
and energetic leadership of our friend and brother
country, Jamaica. In that regard, my delegation would

6/9

21/10/2013

like to support the statement made by the Ambassador
of Jamaica.
This morning’s discussion is, for my delegation,
a very special one. Indeed, it is occurring only a few
days after 17 October, the anniversary of the death
of the founder of the Haitian nation, Jean-Jacques
Dessalines. It also takes place just a few days after the
commemorative activities held by the authorities of the
city of Savannah at the memorial erected to the memory
of the Haitian heroes who took part in the great battle of
Savannah, at the end of the eighteenth century.
The commemorative activities conducted by our
Organization, the information provided by its Member
States in their national educational programmes,
under paragraph 8 of resolution 67/108, and the many
programmes developed by UNESCO all show that we
are on the right path regarding the goals we have set
ourselves. My delegation can only encourage staying
the course.
In the same vein, we welcome the noble initiative
taken up by Member States to build a Permanent
Memorial at United Nations Headquarters. The
execution of such a project will be an important
moment in the life of our Organization. Beyond its
symbolic significance, the Memorial should serve as
a real catalyst for unity and for a major reconciliation
among peoples. The Memorial must also contribute to
combating forgetfulness and to building this great work
of memory, so very necessary in order to serve as a
reminder that throughout history thousands of human
beings have been deprived of their freedom and treated
as things, as merchandise, as something that is valuable
and to be exploited at will.
My delegation would therefore like to welcome
the establishment of a trust fund for the Permanent
Memorial, called the United Nations Trust Fund for
Partnerships—Permanent Memorial, and takes this
opportunity to express its deep gratitude to all States
that have made contributions to the Fund. For my
delegation, the Permanent Memorial will represent
an acknowledgement of the bitter struggles that
our ancestors waged to eradicate forever that cruel,
inhuman and degrading order that the colonial and
slavery system represented, to bring about a new world.
Our presence here to discuss it is a clear manifestation
of that.
My country was the pioneer of that great struggle.
Haiti’s contribution to the birth of that free world

13-52279

21/10/2013

is incontestably and universally recognized, even if
sometimes certain events arise to push us to forget or
minimize it. It is important for us to briefly recall some
historical facts that are universally recognized and
which mark the contribution of Haiti in the liberation
of humanity from slavery.
First, as we said at the beginning, Haitian fighters
were in Savannah in 1779, fighting alongside American
combatants in their struggle for liberation. Among those
heroes, we can cite Henry Christophe, Jean-Baptiste
Chavannes, Jean-Louis Villatte and André Rigaud, to
name just a few. It is to pay tribute to those freedom
fighters that the city of Savannah erected a memorial to
their memory in October 2007.
Secondly, in 1804, during an unprecedented
revolutionary war, we overthrew a colonial and slave
order that was established on the island of Santo
Domingo, which gave birth to the first black republic
in the world. The island of Santo Domingo became
the Republic of Haiti. One should emphasize that
immediately after Haitian independence, hospitality
and Haitian nationality were granted to all blacks
around the world who were fleeing the slave order and
arrived on Haitian territory.

A/68/PV.35

Here we would like to show that solidarity is not simply
connected to the wealth of a State. It is first and foremost
a matter of the heart, of generosity, of humanity.
All that is to say that we attach great importance
to the monitoring of the commemoration of the
bicentenary of the abolition of the transatlantic slave
trade. The choice of theme, “Victory over slavery: Haiti
and beyond,” to commemorate 2014 is for us a source
of pride, satisfaction and recognition of Haiti’s historic
role in the fight to end slavery. We welcome the choice.
At the opening of the international conference held
in 2009 on the Haitian Revolution and the universality
of human rights, the then UNESCO Assistant DirectorGeneral for Social and Human Sciences, Mr. Pierre
Sané, presented Haiti as the cradle of human rights. He
said, “The universality of human rights was conceived
in Paris in 1789, but the birth occurred in Haiti a few
years later”.
In conclusion, may the construction of the
Permanent Memorial lead to greater respect for the
rights of all peoples in the world, regardless of their
place of origin or what they have suffered.

Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We Cubans are proud of our African roots. The identity
Thirdly, once independent, the generals of that era,
of the Cuban nation was the result of a process of
including Alexandre Pétion, helped several fraternal
acculturation that occurred with inputs from various
Latin American countries in their liberation struggles
ethnic groups in difficult environments, first colonial,
by providing weapons, ammunition and soldiers. In
then neocolonial. From 1959 onwards, a phase of true
recognition of that support, some countries integrated
integration began, where all the components of the
the colour red, which is one of the two colours of the
Cuban nation were given equal value. We are essentially
Haitian flag, into their national flags. We would also
a blend of our Hispanic and African heritage. We have
like to recall that the flag of one Latin America country
also been influenced by Asia and the Native American
was actually sewn in Haiti, and Simón Bolivar made​​
peoples.
several trips to Haiti.
In Cuba as in several other countries in Latin
Fourthly, during the Second World War, we granted
America and the Caribbean, we can clearly see the
hospitality to many peoples who were persecuted in
consequences of the transatlantic slave trade. The
their own homelands and elsewhere, including Jewish
colonial plantations of the island saw the arrival, as part
people.
of that cruel trade, of about 1,300,000 Africans. Those
Fifthly, in the 1960s Haiti played a major role in the men, women and children were snatched by force from
decolonization of the Africa continent. Thus, among their African villages and families and sold as slave
the other efforts undertaken, it is important to recall labour on the other side of the Atlantic.
that many Haitian professors were sent to Africa.
With the passage of the centuries, Cuban culture
The list is a long one.
and nationality arose, also nourished by our African
heritage. Cubans are grateful to their African ancestors
In recalling those few historical facts, we do not
for, among many other things, their wisdom, joy,
want to talk about past behaviour; rather, we want to
creativity and adaptability to adverse environments,
recall that Haiti has always moved forward with history
the richness of their history and religious beliefs,
and always played the role that history assigned to it.

13-522797/9

A/68/PV.35

the rhythm of their music, their energy in spirit and,
essentially, their spirit of rebellion against injustice and
their dauntless courage in the struggle for independence
and freedom.
Freed slaves and their descendants were the main
actors in the various phases of the wars that made it
possible for the Cuban people to exercise their selfdetermination. As the commander-in-chief of the
Cuban Revolution, Fidel Castro, said in his statement
at the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in
Durban in 2001:
“The inhuman exploitation to which the
peoples of the three continents, including Asia,
were subjected affected the destiny and the daily
lives of over 4.5 billion people living in third world
countries, whose poverty rates, unemployment,
illiteracy, diseases, infant mortality, life
expectancy, and other innumerable calamities are
impossible to enumerate briefly, are shocking and
horrific. They are the contemporary victims of that
atrocity, which lasted for centuries, and clearly
deserve compensation for the horrendous crimes
committed against their ancestors and peoples.”
Developed countries and their consumer societies,
which are responsible for the accelerated and nearly
unstoppable destruction of the environment, have been
the main beneficiaries of conquest and colonization,
transatlantic slavery and human trafficking and the
ruthless exploitation and extermination of hundreds of
millions of children of the South. They have also been
enriched through the unjust economic order oppressing
humankind and the international financial institutions
created exclusively by them and for them. That rich and
wasteful world possesses the technical and financial
resources to pay its debt to humankind.
Cuba supports the just compensation request
put forward by the States members of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM). Cuba also demands the special
and differentiated treatment that developing countries
merit and need, particularly the African countries, in
terms of international economic relationships. Cuba
rejects the shameful and selfish opulence of the few
that is guiding the ongoing globalization.
Cuba supports and co-sponsors the draft resolution
that is presented, each year, by the States members of
CARICOM and the African Group. Cuba recognizes
the importance of strengthening the activities of the

8/9

21/10/2013

United Nations and other international organizations,
especially UNESCO, in the matter. It is the minimum
that the international community can do to repair the
crime committed against humanity in the form of the
transatlantic trade that forced Africans into slavery.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on agenda item 120.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/68/L.7, entitled “Permanent memorial
to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/68/L.7, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Andorra,
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, China, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia,
Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, Japan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Norway, Paraguay, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, the Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, the Republic of Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Ukraine.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.7?
Draft resolution A/68/L.7 was adopted (resolution
68/7).
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Brazil.
Mrs. Almeida Watanabe Patriota (Brazil):
Brazil can not overstress its thanks to Member States,
the United Nations and civil society for their tireless
efforts in organizing and successfully accomplishing
the international competition to build the Permanent
Memorial on United Nations premises in honour of
the victims of the transatlantic slave trade. That trade
was one of the worst tragedies, as it was the largest

13-52279

21/10/2013

and longest-lasting crime ever committed against
humankind.
Brazil commends the joint efforts of Member States,
in particular the Permanent Mission of Jamaica, for its
leadership of the Permanent Memorial Committee, in
which Brazil proudly participates. Brazil is convinced
that the hour has come for the proclamation by the
United Nations of the international decade for people
of African descent.
As stressed by the representative of Jamaica,
the establishment of the Permanent Memorial is a
milestone; however, it is but a first step along the long

A/68/PV.35

and necessary path to achieve the broad education of
the public in order to raise awareness against prejudice,
intolerance and racism. Brazil will endeavour to make
every necessary effort and work with Member States
and partners towards the adoption of a draft resolution
on the international decade for people of African
descent, as mandated in paragraph 79 of resolution
67/155.
In conclusion, Brazil would request the decisive
support of Member States and the President of the
General Assembly to that end.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
120.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

13-522799/9
