A /ES-11/PV.5

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Eleventh Emergency Special session

5th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 2 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)
President:
diplomacy and dialogue over confrontation and hostile
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
postures in Ukraine and the region.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Solomon Islands further calls on all countries
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
to preserve the purposes, principles and spirit of the
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
Charter of the United Nations with open hands of
addressed to the President of the Security Council
friendship, not a clenched fist. We in the present must
(S/2014/136)
look to the past as we chart our way forward. We must
never forget that the United Nation was created out of
Mr. Matea (Solomon Islands): I am taking the floor
the ashes of a world war. My people in the Solomon
to speak on this important agenda item in my national
Islands have lived through the consequences a world
capacity. Solomon Islands is following the developments
war can bring. Never again should the world endure
in Ukraine with great concern and is deeply worried
another. Never again must humankind suffer its
about the worsening situation. As a peace-loving nation,
brutal consequences.
we want to reiterate our principled position in support of
peaceful co-existence, non-interference in the internal
We are already inundated with global challenges,
affairs of other States and refraining from the use or including the coronavirus disease pandemic, climate
threat of use of force against the territorial integrity change and rising sea levels. As a small, vulnerable
of any State. We deeply deplore the intervention in State, Solomon Islands is deeply concerned about the
Ukraine by its neighbour the Russian Federation and fact that the situation in Ukraine is diverting muchcall for an immediate de-escalation of the situation. We needed attention from our global development agenda
urge all to exercise maximum restraint, abandon any as we continue to work to combat climate change,
provocations and restore our faith in our rules-based improve the quality of life of all and deliver on the
international order as we preserve and respect Ukraine’s Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
for Sustainable Development.
Solomon Islands calls on all the parties to settle their
international disputes by peaceful means. We welcome
the talks currently taking place between Ukraine and
the Russian Federation and urge all the parties to listen
more and work to better understand each other. We
trust that this dialogue will bring a glimmer of hope for
a sustainable peaceful outcome. We fully support the
efforts of the Secretary-General and call for a united
global approach in support of the talks, embracing

Solomon Islands stands in solidarity with all who
have lost loved ones and is deeply concerned about the
worsening humanitarian situation. We commend the
initiatives taken by Ukraine’s neighbours to protect
the lives of the vulnerable population. We need one
another more during this difficult period. Let us use the
available multilateral tools to seek permanent peace, for
the stakes are just too high if we fail. Solomon Islands
will vote in support of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.1.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-27523 (E)

*2227523*

A/ES-11/PV.5

Mr. Kyaw Moe Tun (Myanmar): At the outset,
we welcome the convening of this emergency
special session. We thank you, Mr. President, and
the Secretary-General in that regard. It is timely and
enables all countries, big and small, to make our voices
heard on the serious situation that Ukraine is facing and
our concerns about the state of affairs in our universal
Organization, the United Nations.
Myanmar has always adhered to and taken a
firm position in support of the territorial integrity,
independence and sovereignty of all countries.
Myanmar therefore condemns the invasion of Ukraine
and the unprovoked attacks on the people of Ukraine,
which are flagrant violations of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. We call for respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. We have been following the situation on
the ground with great concern. It is regrettable that the
situation is further escalating as the Russian Federation
intensifies its attacks. Many have been killed and
hundreds of thousands have left their homes. People
are suffering in the severe cold weather. We call for an
immediate cessation of the hostilities and the attacks
on Ukraine.
Myanmar understands and feels more than
some the suffering that the people of Ukraine are
encountering. The people of Myanmar are dealing with
similar horrible suffering resulting from the inhumane
acts, atrocities and crimes against humanity committed
by our country’s military. Owing to the military’s
excessive use of force, indiscriminate attacks on people
and inhumane and brutal acts, much farmland and many
houses, religious and health-care facilities and schools
have been destroyed, driving and displacing hundreds
of thousands from their homes. That is in addition to
the large numbers who have been killed or injured.
The displaced and other victims include members of
vulnerable groups such as people with disabilities, the
elderly, women, girls and children.
I want to commend those of Ukraine’s neighbours
that have opened their borders and extended a warm
reception to Ukrainians and other nationals escaping
from the terrifying attacks. We also thank all Member
States supporting Ukraine in every possible way. I
appeal to them to continue to do so and to do even more.
The Charter of the United Nations begins with the
clear words
2/25

02/03/2022

“We the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war”, followed by “to unite our strength
to maintain international peace and security, and
to ensure, by the acceptance of principles and the
institution of methods, that armed force shall not be
used, save in the common interest”.
It is time for all of us to stand with justice and
with the principles of the Charter. Myanmar stands in
solidarity with the people of Ukraine. Myanmar has
sponsored draft resolution A/ES-11/L.1 and will vote
yes. Justice, freedom and peace must prevail all over
the world.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan is committed
to the fundamental principles of the Charter of the
United Nations — the self-determination of peoples,
refraining from the use or threat of use of force, the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States and
the pacific settlement of disputes. Equally, Pakistan
upholds the principle of equal and indivisible security
for all. Those principles must be consistently and
universally respected.
Pakistan remains deeply concerned about the recent
turn of events, which reflect a failure of diplomacy.
Prime Minister Imran Khan previously deplored the
latest developments in the situation between Russia and
Ukraine and expressed Pakistan’s hope that diplomacy
could avert military conflict. We have since repeatedly
stressed the need for de-escalation, renewed negotiations,
sustained dialogue and continued diplomacy. Every
effort must be made to avoid any further escalation of
violence and loss of life as well as the military, political
and economic tensions, which have the potential to
pose an unprecedented threat to international peace and
security and global economic stability. As Mr. Khan
has consistently emphasized, it is developing countries
that are hit the hardest economically by conflict
anywhere in the world. We hope that the talks initiated
between representatives of the Russian Federation and
Ukraine will succeed in bringing about a cessation
of hostilities and a normalization of the situation. A
diplomatic solution based on the relevant multilateral
agreements, international law and the provisions of the
Charter is essential.
Pakistan also supports all efforts to provide
humanitarian relief to civilians in the areas affected.
We are very concerned about the safety and welfare of
Pakistani citizens and students in Ukraine. A majority
22-27523

02/03/2022

of them have been evacuated, and those who remain
will be evacuated as soon as possible. We appreciate
the cooperation of the Ukrainian authorities as well as
the Polish, Romanian and Hungarian Governments in
that context.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
welcomes the convening of this emergency special
session of the General Assembly to address an urgent
matter, the unprovoked aggression against Ukraine. It
is a matter for deep regret that the Security Council
failed to act in unison after the veto cast by Russia,
effectively undermining that vital organ’s ability to
exercise its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. We often lament the
Council’s inability to respond decisively to emerging
crises. The refusal expressed by a majority of Member
States to be paralysed into inaction is a testament to
their commitment to ensuring that the United Nations
remains relevant in the face of vexing and complex
security challenges.
Djibouti unequivocally condemns what in our view
constitutes an egregious breach of international law
and the most fundamental principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular the obligation of all
States under Article 2 to refrain in their international
relations from the use or threat of use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State. If a country has legitimate security concerns,
we urge it to prioritize the use of tools as expressly
contemplated in Article 33 of the Charter, which
obliges the parties to a dispute that is likely to endanger
peace and security to seek solutions through other
means — negotiation, mediation, arbitration or judicial
settlement. We welcome the Secretary-General’s offer
of his good offices and reiterate the African Union’s call
for establishing an immediate ceasefire and opening
political negotiations without delay under the auspices
of the United Nations in order to preserve the world
from the consequences of global conflict. No argument,
no pretext can justify the use of force, all-out war and
brutal violence unleashed on Ukraine and its people.
We are appalled by the continued attacks targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure and heartsick to
see the gut-wrenching images of civilians fleeing the
violence and seeking refuge in neighbouring countries.
We echo the call by the Emergency Relief Coordinator
and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees for unimpeded humanitarian access so that
aid can be delivered to those in need.

A/ES-11/PV.5

The Ukrainians may have decided to valiantly
defend their country and not surrender. But if the
war does not stop now, they may not survive. As the
representative of Ukraine stated so powerfully at the
start of this emergency special session, if Ukraine
does not survive, international law will not survive
(see A/ES-11/PV.1). The aggression against Ukraine is
putting stress on the system of international law and
international relations that the Charter put in place. Let
us not allow decades of efforts to strengthen the rule of
law and revitalize multilateralism to go down the drain.
Djibouti will therefore vote yes in order to reaffirm its
solidarity to the people of Ukraine. It will vote yes to
uphold the United Nations Charter. It will vote yes to
reject the use of armed force under any pretext in an
aggression against a sovereign country. It will vote yes
in support of the sanctity of borders.
(spoke in French)
We are reassured by the measures taken to address
the discriminatory acts against Africans that have
disturbed people across the continent. However, we are
also alarmed at the persistent negative representations
of Africans and the statements in the media made by socalled experts who draw distinctions between refugees
fleeing conflicts in the Middle East and those fleeing
the war in Ukraine. Conflicts are the same regardless
of where they occur, and they often have the same
devastating consequences. We are at a critical moment
in the history of the United Nations. We must put an end
to this conflict and do everything we can to prevent the
outbreak of others. That is within our reach. We have
the resources. Let us mobilize the political will to do so.
Ms. Tshering (Bhutan): We meet today in the
eleventh emergency special session of the General
Assembly to address the alarming situation in Ukraine,
a fellow State Member of our United Nations. It is
significant that a deadlock in the Security Council has
made this the first time in 40 years that the provisions of
the Uniting for Peace resolution (resolution 377 A (V))
have been invoked.
Bhutan has been closely observing with deep
concern the rapidly escalating conflict on the ground.
We join others in calling for respect for Ukraine’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders. Even
the folds of our mighty mountains cannot shield us,
perched atop the Himalayas, from the reverberations of
events thousands of miles away. Today, core principles

22-275233/25

A/ES-11/PV.5

of the Charter of the United Nations and the rulesbased international order are at stake, endangering
international peace and security far beyond the borders
of Ukraine and Europe. Each and every one of us,
big and small, rich and poor alike, has on admission
to the United Nations pledged itself to the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter. Bhutan made
that solemn pledge more than 50 years ago. They are
principles that all Member States are beholden to, but
for small States they serve as the guarantor of our
existence. Bhutan is a small and peace-loving country,
firmly sworn to peaceful coexistence and good
neighbourly relations between States.
Bhutan adds its voice to the chorus within this
Hall in defence of the Charter and the principles of
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of all countries. We can never accept the use or threat
of use of force and acts of aggression against another
sovereign State. We cannot condone the unilateral
redrawing of international borders. Bhutan will
therefore support the draft resolution that is now before
the Assembly (A/ES-11/L.1) and thereby reaffirm
the call for respect for international law and the core
principles of the Charter.
In closing, Bhutan would like to express its regret
about the reports of growing numbers of casualties and
innocent lives lost as a result of the crisis in Ukraine.
Our hearts and prayers go out to the families of those
who have lost their lives in the escalating conflict and
the hundreds of thousands of others who have been
displaced and suffer in its wake.
Mr. Vongnorkeo (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): As a peace-loving nation, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic firmly upholds the principles of
the Charter of the United Nation and its obligations
under international law. To that end, we have continued
to pursue a consistent policy of peace, independence,
friendship and cooperation with all nations. As a
country that has suffered from the scourge of war in
the past, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is all
too familiar with the endless negative consequences
that the war will have for innocent people. We believe
that what it entails is not in the interests of any party.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic has been
closely following the current complex and fragile
situation developing in Ukraine. We commend the
United Nations and the countries that have offered
humanitarian assistance to the people affected.
4/25

02/03/2022

We remain sceptical of unilateral sanctions. In
fact, we should bear in mind that the sanctions imposed
could have long-term effects on innocent people,
including the global community at large, especially
at a time when we are still living with the pandemic.
We therefore call on all parties concerned to refrain
from any action that could further fuel the escalation
of tensions and to seek peaceful solutions and restore
peace and security. In that regard, we support the
ongoing efforts to find a peaceful settlement to this
situation through diplomatic means, including the
recent negotiations held at the border of Belarus. It is
important that the legitimate security concerns of all
the parties be taken into account.
In the past two days of this emergency special
session we have heard divergent views and opinions.
Nevertheless, one common call that has been loudly
echoed in this Hall is the call for peace, which can be
achieved only through diplomatic means. It is our fervent
hope that through this diplomatic effort, the peace that
constitutes the heart and soul of our Organization, the
United Nations, can be restored.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): Cambodia expresses its
grave concern about the human suffering, the loss
of life and the situation unfolding in Ukraine. We
strongly believe that a lasting peace can be achieved
only through peaceful dialogue and negotiation. All
the parties should ensure the protection of all civilians
and civilian infrastructure. Access to humanitarian
assistance for the people in and around Ukraine must
be ensured during this fragile time. Cambodia fully
supports the efforts of the Secretary-General to address
the humanitarian crisis and find a peaceful solution. On
26 February the Foreign Ministers of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations released a statement urging
the parties concerned to seek a peaceful solution in
accordance with international law and the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Cambodia maintains the firm position that all of us
must respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of our fellow Member States.
With that, Cambodia has sponsored draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.1 and will vote yes.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): The situation in and
around Ukraine is a source of extreme concern
necessitating urgent action to de-escalate the tensions
and find a peaceful solution in accordance with
international law. Azerbaijan deeply regrets that the
22-27523

02/03/2022

ongoing crisis continues to cause significant casualties,
in particular among the civilian population. We would
like to express our deep condolences to the families of
the wounded and of those who perished. We call for strict
adherence to international humanitarian law. Civilian
lives and civilian infrastructure must be protected and
safeguarded at all times. The evolving humanitarian
crisis on the ground requires speedy measures to
alleviate the impact of the situation on civilians.
Proceeding from that understanding, Azerbaijan has
already provided humanitarian assistance on a bilateral
basis in the form of medicines, medical equipment and
other emergency essentials for the people of Ukraine.
The situation should be settled through peaceful
diplomatic means in full compliance with the norms
and principles of international law that guide inter-State
relations, including respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and inviolability of State borders.
Strict compliance with the norms and principles of
international law concerning friendly relations and
cooperation among States and the fulfilment in good
faith of the obligations assumed by States are vital to
the maintenance of international and regional peace
and security. Azerbaijan reiterates its call for dialogue
without delay to prevent the situation from escalating
further, and underlines the necessity of direct
negotiations between the parties.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus will vote against draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.1. We all bear our share of the responsibility
for what is happening in Ukraine. Eight years ago
the Minsk agreements were signed and the Security
Council adopted resolution 2202 (2015). However,
neither the Security Council nor the General Assembly
nor the international community as a whole was able
to persuade or compel the Ukrainian authorities to
fulfil their provisions. For all of those eight years
and for all practical purposes, Ukraine has been in
a state of civil war, because the Kyiv authorities did
not want to sit down at the negotiation table with their
compatriots from Donetsk and Luhansk and refused
to consider their legitimate interests. For all of those
eight years people in the Donetsk and Luhansk people’s
republics — largely civilians, including the elderly,
women and children — have been dying.
Paragraph 8 of the draft resolution makes a
hypocritical call to all the parties to abide by the Minsk
agreements. I would very much like to ask the sponsors
of this draft resolution where they have all been. Why

A/ES-11/PV.5

for all of those eight years were they unable to compel
Kyiv to fulfil the provisions of those documents?
What has transpired is that the United Nations, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Council of Europe and the entire international
community have succumbed to ruthless pressure from
the United States, Canada and the countries of the
European Union — which of course believe themselves
to be the gold standard of democracy — and so have
been unable to find the strength and courage to respond
adequately to the criminal actions of the Ukrainian
authorities. When we are asked why we are recalling
past events now, at a time when people are dying during
an armed conflict, our answer is very simple. We still
have not learned the lessons of the Second World War.
The international community did not realize then
that any germs of neo-Nazism in any country had to
be swiftly exterminated. What is happening today
in this Hall and outside its walls is yet another clear
demonstration and affirmation of double standards
on the part of the United States and its allies, whose
crimes have created hundreds of thousands of victims
in Yugoslavia, Iraq, Libya and Afghanistan.
We categorically deny any accusations that Belarus
is involved in any unlawful use of force against Ukraine.
Let me reveal a shocking secret. We are indeed involved.
President Aleksandr Lukashenko has been personally
making every possible effort to establish contacts
between the Russian and Ukrainian sides. So our
current involvement consists in organizing negotiations
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine and doing
everything necessary to ensure that they take place, and
we sincerely wish the participants in the negotiations
every success. A lot of countries have not said a word
about those negotiations in their statements. We realize
that they never utter our country’s name in a positive
or even a neutral way, but is it that they do not want
to mention Belarus or is it that they do not want the
negotiations to succeed?
In reacting to the events in Ukraine, various
countries have as usual reached for their favourite
instrument, sanctions. And it is they that will bear
full responsibility for the fact that the imposition
of sanctions — on Belarusian potash fertilizer, for
example — will worsen economic and social problems
and increase hunger both at home and in countries that
are thousands of kilometres from Belarus. The sanctions
that have been announced are not targeted. They are
designed to strangle economies and lower people’s

22-275235/25

A/ES-11/PV.5

standards of living. The current sanctions — and some
have described them as a declaration of economic
war — represent the worst kind of economic and
financial terrorism.
Some countries’ representatives have been
reporting that their borders are fully open for
Ukrainians and foreign citizens of third countries to
leave Ukraine. With respect to those supposedly open
borders, I have to inform the Assembly that citizens
of Belarus and Russia, in particular all men over the
age of 18, are encountering serious difficulties as they
try to leave Ukraine. The Ukrainian authorities are
not letting them out, and Russians and Belarusians
are essentially being held hostage. We also know
of cases of racism, discrimination, beatings and
pushbacks across the border by Polish guards against
foreign citizens. On 26 February Polish border guards
beat up and sent back to Ukraine a group of around
100 Indian students, who were then fortunately taken
into a refugee camp in Romania. We in Belarus are
also receiving many requests from both Belarusian
citizens and from embassies of countries represented
here in this Hall whose citizens would like to go
through Belarus in order to go home. The border on
our side is open. We are ready to receive Belarusians
and to consider requests for entry from citizens of
third countries. We urge the Ukrainians to heed our
calls and open humanitarian corridors — or even just
one humanitarian corridor — to enable individuals to
cross the Belarusian-Ukrainian border into Belarus.
We have already made an urgent request in that regard
to the representatives of the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross in Minsk.
We are seriously concerned about the rampant
abuse and looting going on in Ukraine, including
against foreigners. The uncontrolled distribution of
weapons has already led to a sharp spike in violence
and robberies victimizing ordinary people, such as
long-distance truck drivers delivering international
goods, some of whom have died. Why are delegations
here saying nothing about it? Incidentally, we believe
that the African Union leadership has in fact made
statements on the issue.
Belarus lost a third of its population in the Second
World War. We are very familiar with the cost of a human
life. We mourn all who have died in the past eight years
in the Donetsk and Luhansk people’s republics and in
Kyiv. We mourn those who were burned alive in Odesa.
We mourn all who are dying today. Only negotiations
6/25

02/03/2022

can end this bloodshed. Belarus has already done a
great deal and will continue to do everything it can
to settle the conflict. In any war, each side has its
own truth. Every war has its own dynamic, and the
longer it drags on, the more cruel it becomes, and that
is what we are seeing today. We are all drowning in
a flood of lies and disinformation being spread by
information terrorists. I cannot call them anything else.
The vast majority of them are sitting comfortably in
armchairs in offices thousands of kilometres from the
theatre of military operations.
In a few minutes we will all vote on this draft
resolution. In actual fact it should consist of a single
paragraph written in plain, ordinary language, not
United Nations jargon. It should call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and for the holding of negotiations.
I realize that everyone here has instructions from their
capitals. I also know that there has been huge pressure
on some delegations to vote in favour of the draft
resolution and I have absolutely no illusions about what
the result will be. Nevertheless, I do ask Member States
to think it over once more and to vote according to their
conscience, although I understand that voting one’s
conscience at the United Nations can result in the loss
of one’s job.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): To all who dedicate themselves to the noble
mission of this Organization, today we call on Russia
to stop its unprovoked, unjustified and unconscionable
war and to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. We call on another neighbour of
Ukraine, Belarus, which we have just heard from, to
stop supporting the war and allowing its territory to
be used to facilitate this aggression. Today we stand
together to hold Russia accountable for its violations
of international law and to address the horrific human
rights and humanitarian crisis unfolding before
our eyes.
This is an extraordinary moment. For the first
time in 40 years, the Security Council has convened an
emergency special session of the General Assembly. I
repeat — 40 years. Most of the men and women fighting
in Ukraine were not even born the last time the United
Nations came together in this way to unite for peace,
and I would venture to say that many of the people in
this room were not born then either. However, a few
of the oldest Ukrainians and Russians might recall a
moment like this — a moment when one aggressive
European nation invaded another, without provocation,
22-27523

02/03/2022

to claim the territory of its neighbour; a moment when
a European dictator declared that he would return his
empire to its former glory; and an invasion that caused
a war so horrific that it spurred this Organization into
existence. Now, at more than any other point in recent
history, the United Nations is being challenged. If the
United Nations has any purpose, it is to prevent war, to
condemn war, to stop war. That is our job here today.
It is the job that we representatives were sent here to
do — not just by our capitals, but by all of humankind.
A lot has happened very quickly to bring us to
this unique moment. Barely a week ago, in the dead
of night, President Putin launched a full-scale invasion
of our fellow Member State at the very moment that
the Security Council was holding an urgent meeting
attempting to foster diplomacy and de-escalation
(S/PV.8974). As the Security Council discussed peace,
Putin declared war. Ukraine has defended itself with
great courage and vigour. As President Biden said in his
State of the Union address last night, President Putin
“met a wall of strength he never imagined. He met the
Ukrainian people.” But the brazen and indiscriminate
nature of Russia’s attack has had devastating, horrific
consequences for the entire country. Russia has
bombed residential apartment buildings. It has bombed
sacred burial grounds. It has shelled kindergartens
and orphanages and hospitals. Russia has spurred
mass hunger and caused huge numbers to flee their
homes — the latest United Nations estimates are
marching towards a million people. We thank the
countries that have opened their borders, hearts and
homes to those fleeing Ukraine. I also want to echo
the call of the United Nations Refugee Agency urging
everyone to help and welcome all those fleeing
conflict, without regard to race or nationality. Refugees
are refugees.
For those who remain, Russia is destroying critical
infrastructure — vital services that provide millions of
people across Ukraine with drinking water to stay alive
and gas to keep people from freezing to death. Now it
appears that Russia is preparing to increase the brutality
of its campaign against Ukraine. We have seen videos of
Russian forces moving exceptionally lethal weaponry,
which has no place on the battlefield, into Ukraine. It
includes cluster munitions and vacuum bombs, which
are banned under the Geneva Conventions of 1949. We
have all seen the 40-mile-long lethal convoy charging
towards Kyiv. President Putin continues to escalate the
situation, putting Russia’s nuclear forces on high alert

A/ES-11/PV.5

and threatening to invade Finland and Sweden. At every
step of the war, Russia has betrayed the United Nations.
Its actions go against everything this body stands for.
People across the world have already come together
in exactly the way the Assembly must do today. Protests
and vigils against Russia’s war and in solidarity with
Ukraine, marked with blue and yellow, have sprung
up across the globe. They are protests for peace. From
Bangkok to Budapest, Berlin to Buenos Aires, Sydney
to Seoul, Calgary to Cape Town, and even in Moscow
and Minsk, people everywhere are standing up to call
on President Putin to stop this attack. The Russian
people themselves are asking how many lives Putin
will sacrifice for his cynical ambitions, and they are
appalled at the answer. I thank the Russian protesters
for their bravery. To the Russian soldiers sent to the
front lines of an unjust, unnecessary war, I say that they
have been lied to by their leaders. I urge them not to
commit war crimes and to do everything they can to put
down their weapons and leave Ukraine.
The truth is that this war was the choice of one
man and one man alone — President Putin. It was his
choice to force hundreds of thousands of people to stuff
their lives into backpacks and flee the country; to send
newborn babies into makeshift bomb shelters; to make
children with cancer huddle in hospital basements,
interrupting their treatment — essentially sentencing
them to death. Those were President Putin’s choices.
Now it is time for us to make ours.
The United States is choosing to stand with the
Ukrainian people. In coordination with our allies
and partners, we are choosing to impose severe
consequences on Russia. We are choosing to hold
Russia accountable for its actions, and we will soon
vote on draft resolution A/ES-11/L.1, which does just
that. We believe it is a simple vote. Members should
vote yes if they believe that Member States — including
their own — have a right to sovereignty and territorial
integrity. They should vote yes if they believe Russia
should be held to account for its actions. They should
vote yes if they believe in upholding the United Nations
Charter and everything this institution stands for.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Holy See.
Archbishop Caccia (Holy See): I thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this emergency special
session, because in the past few days we have been
shaken by something tragic — war. The Holy See joins

22-275237/25

A/ES-11/PV.5

the many Member States and the millions across the
globe who call for the immediate cessation of hostilities
in Ukraine and a return to diplomacy and dialogue.
This Organization was founded to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war so that they
might live together in peace with one another as good
neighbours. It is the duty of all States to seek to resolve
disputes through negotiation, mediation or by other
peaceful means, even when a war has started.
Last Sunday, Pope Francis expressed his closeness
to all who are now suffering as a result of the conflict,
stressing that
“[i]t is urgent to open humanitarian corridors,
and those fleeing must be welcomed. We are
heartbroken by what is happening in Ukraine. Let
us not forget the wars in other parts of the world.
I repeat: put down your weapons. Those who love
peace reject war as an instrument of aggression
against the freedom of other peoples and as a means
for the settlement of international disputes.”
The Holy See would also like to express its appreciation
in this forum to the States that are offering humanitarian
assistance to those in need, both in Ukraine and in the
neighbouring countries where many Ukrainians have
sought safety.
Pope Francis has called on believers and
non-believers alike to observe today, 2 March, as a day
to feel the suffering of the Ukrainian people, to be aware
that we are all brothers and sisters and to implore God
for an end to this war. The Holy See believes firmly that
there is always time for goodwill. There is still room
for negotiations. There is still a place for the exercise of
wisdom that can prevent the dominance of parties and
special interests, safeguard the legitimate aspirations
of all and spare the world the folly and horrors of war.
May this emergency special session advance efforts
that help attain that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Sovereign Order of Malta.
Mr. Beresford-Hill (Sovereign Order of Malta):
The Sovereign Order of Malta, a sovereign entity that
provides global humanitarian aid with a special mission
to serve the sick and the poor, has been observing with
great sadness and regret the ongoing conflict, which
has affected the lives of so many citizens of Ukraine
and which is currently creating an unprecedented flow
of refugees seeking peace and security beyond their
8/25

02/03/2022

nation’s borders. In the past eight years of conflict the
Order’s embassy to Ukraine has provided considerable
support, advice and material help to Ukrainian citizens
and to non-Ukrainian residents of Ukraine who are
in need.
The current crisis is seeing multiple cities and towns
attacked and bombed, forcing families to leave their
homes and seek shelter elsewhere. Our representatives
and ambassadors in the region have reported that while
some refugees have sufficient means to travel and find
refuge on their own or enjoy dual citizenship in nearby
nations, the majority do not have the resources to
provide for themselves without support. United Nations
agencies predict that a potential refugee exodus of
more than 6 million people may well be the outcome
of this situation. Meanwhile, many elderly people and
those who are sick or disabled in some way are unable
to escape the bombing and the stress that accompanies
civil unrest. Obviously we are as concerned about
them as we are about those who have managed to
leave. Our staff and volunteers in major population
centres in Ukraine have continued to provide as much
assistance as is feasible, given the ongoing security and
safety problems.
This past weekend we held a summit of our regional
ambassadors and aid providers under the auspices of
our international relief agency, Malteser International.
We were able to review both the growing extent of the
refugee crisis as well as the initiatives we are taking to
support their increasing numbers, consisting primarily
of mothers and children and a small number of senior
citizens. As of this morning, it is estimated that almost
700,000 individuals have made the journey across the
borders of Poland, Slovakia, Romania, Hungary and
Moldova. Each day that the conflict continues, the flow
of anguished families will grow.
We have seen some nations go out of their way
to welcome those people and help them through their
trauma. Our Order of Malta staff along the border with
Ukraine total more than 5,000 personnel, with tens of
thousands of volunteers doing everything from serving
hot food and drink, caring for the victims of injury and
accident, providing counselling and emotional support
and helping to secure short-term accommodation.
Volunteers from locations away from the border, many
of them from other countries, representing churches
and community groups, have driven their cars and vans
to provide transportation to new arrivals to ensure that
they are given every opportunity to find a place to stay.
22-27523

02/03/2022

We are coordinating our activities with international
aid agencies such as the International Red Cross and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, and are engaged in an international fundraising
programme to ensure that adequate resources continue
to be available to support and maintain those in need.
We are encouraged that the Human Rights Council in
Geneva will be holding a debate on human rights in
Ukraine today. Representatives from our Government
will be participating in that important discussion.
We appeal to nations of goodwill to appreciate
the trauma experienced by all refugees. In particular,
we appeal to countries that are receiving refugees to
extend the same welcome they are offering Ukrainians
to members of other national and ethnic groups who
have been caught in this conflict and are seeking
security. Offers of help and support should transcend
ethnic, racial and cultural lines and not be tainted by
discriminatory acts or attitudes. This conflict in Europe
drives home the realization that the issues of internally
displaced persons and the needs of refugees forced
from their homes affect the whole world — Africa, the
Middle East, Asia, Latin America and now Europe.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the International Institute for Democracy and
Electoral Assistance.
Ms. Sourek: The International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance (International
IDEA) strongly condemns the unprovoked war of
aggression waged by the Russian Federation, with
the involvement of Belarus, against Ukraine, a
sovereign nation and a democracy. It is in breach of
the international law, international agreements and
rules-based international order that underpin our
shared objective of global peace and the existence of
organizations such as International IDEA.
The invasion order by President Vladimir Putin
of the Russian Federation is a blatant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations. As firm believers in the
right of people to exercise their fundamental rights and
freedoms, we want to express our full support to and
solidarity with the people of Ukraine. They are innocent
victims of this aggression. We salute the brave partners
and democracy activists with whom International IDEA
has been engaging in the past few years as Ukraine
has made huge progress towards becoming a stable
and thriving democracy. We call on the international
community to spring into action to protect them and

A/ES-11/PV.5

mitigate the humanitarian consequences of the invasion.
We should not fail to note that the military operation
was launched while the Security Council was meeting
to discuss the crisis (S/PV.8974). We reiterate our firm
belief that international crises should be addressed
through multilateral diplomacy and resolved based on
the principles of the Charter.
It is particularly unfortunate that this naked rejection
of those principles has happened during a pandemic
that has rendered evident the need for increased
global cooperation to make the world governable and
achieve justice for all. We are now witnessing what an
unchecked ruler who for decades has trampled on the
fundamental rights and freedoms of his own citizens
can do to undermine peace and democracy beyond his
own borders. Ukraine is a country that has successfully
reached democratic standards over the past two
decades, from respecting media freedom to free and
fair elections, local democracy and fighting corruption.
It is no wonder that President Putin is scared of such
democratic vibrancy on his doorstep. This is a pivotal
moment for democrats all over the world to stand united
in support of Ukraine. It is also a moment to reinforce
action to counter and prevent the rise of authoritarian
regimes elsewhere, which cannot survive without
kleptocracy and systematic violations of human rights
and freedoms.
We call on Russia to immediately withdraw its
military forces and fully respect Ukraine’s sovereignty.
Revanchist interpretations of history and attempts to
change borders based on ethno-nationalist fantasies
do not offer a luminous path for humankind but a road
towards darkness and endless cycles of violence. They
certainly do not provide hope to the young and unborn
generations that will bear the brunt of the climate crisis
or to the billions of vulnerable people around the world
who have yet to realize the promise of a life free from
fear and want and the promise of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Those are the real challenges
of our age.
We encourage Secretary-General António Guterres
to make use of his good offices to advance ceasefire
negotiations, humanitarian access to the areas affected
by the war and the protection of civilians, particularly
those who are most vulnerable. We urge Member States
to adopt and enforce sanctions against the Russian
Federation until it withdraws its forces and Ukraine’s
territorial integrity is fully restored. We urge Member
States to do whatever it takes in accordance with the

22-275239/25

A/ES-11/PV.5

principles of the Charter to stop this war and prevent
any further escalation of the conflict. International
IDEA will do its part, in collaboration with the United
Nations, our member States and other democratic
Governments and organizations, to protect in Ukraine
and elsewhere the principle that every country has a
right to freely determine its own fate on the basis of
the will of its people, freely expressed. Democracies,
institutions and processes are the best means to protect
that right. Today we must stand up for those principles.
Today we must stand up for Ukraine, which embodies
those principles and is defending them, earning our
great respect.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in the debate on this item. The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 5.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.1
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine to introduce draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.1.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): We are living through
a defining moment for our generation. Ours is the
generation that our predecessors supposed would be
saved from the scourge of war. That is why they created
the United Nations. And yet today it falls to us to save
future generations. Let me read the following text.
“Our position is that whatever grievances a
nation may have, however objectionable it finds the
status quo, aggressive warfare is an illegal means
for settling those grievances or for altering those
conditions. It may be that the [Germany of the 1920s
and 1930s] faced desperate problems, problems that
would have warranted the boldest measures short
of war. All other methods — persuasion, propaganda,
economic competition, diplomacy — were open to
an aggrieved country, but aggressive warfare was
outlawed. These defendants did make aggressive
war, a war in violation of treaties. They did attack
and invade their neighbours in order to effectuate
a foreign policy which they knew could not be
10/25

02/03/2022

accomplished by measures short of war. And that is
as far as we accuse or propose to inquire.”
Justice Robert Jackson, Chief Counsel, said those
words in his opening address to the International
Military Tribunal on 21 November 1945 in the Palace of
Justice at Nuremberg. Today, those words are addressed
to Mr. Putin, Mr. Shoigu, Mr. Lavrov, Mr. Volodin,
Ms. Matviyenko and perhaps dozens more, but they are
certainly not addressed to those Russian citizens who
have tried to preserve their dignity.
For almost a week Ukraine has been fighting,
fighting under the bombs and missiles, fighting in the
face of armadas, hardware and countless crowds of
enemies. They have ventured onto Ukrainian soil not
only to kill some of us, not only to change our course
and priorities, but to deprive Ukraine of the very right
to exist. As their propagandists claimed, they have
come to resolve the Ukrainian issue. Let us stop and
think whether those words remind us of something.
Yes, more than 80 years ago another dictator tried to
finally resolve the issue of another people. He failed
when the world responded in a resolute and united
manner. It happened immediately, and yet the delay
cost tens of millions of lives. Are we ready to pay such
a price now? Or is it now time to demonstrate our unity
of purpose and deed?
We appreciate all the manifestations of that unity
and solidarity with Ukraine. I would like to express our
gratitude to all the Member States that are supporting
Ukrainians in their battle for freedom. I would also
like to thank the Member States that have accepted
Ukrainian refugees, mostly women and children. More
than half a million have already fled Russia’s missiles
and shells. I will not recite all the facts concerning
the new war crimes and crimes against humanity that
the Russian troops have committed since my previous
statement two days ago (see A/ES-11/PV.1). The list
is so long that we would run out of time. The crimes
are so barbaric that it is difficult to comprehend. In
the face of the Ukrainian population’s total resistance,
Putin’s regime has proceeded to make widespread use
in residential areas of indiscriminate weapons such as
multiple rocket launchers and aerial bombs. Ukrainians
have been killed by Russian ballistic missiles and
thermobaric weapons. Just yesterday, Kyiv, Kharkiv,
Zhytomyr, Mariupol, Melitopol and many other cities
and towns sustained heavy shelling that killed dozens
of innocents, including children.
22-27523

02/03/2022

Ukraine deeply regrets that a student from India
has been killed in shelling by the Russian armed forces
in Kharkiv. We offer our deepest sympathies to India
and the victim’s relatives. A Chinese citizen was also
injured in another Ukrainian city because of Russia’s
deadly attacks. Ukrainian and foreign citizens have
become hostages in the Russian armed aggression
against Ukraine. In Kyiv, Russian murderers hit the
city’s television tower, killing five passers-by. One of
the missiles fell on the Babyn Yar Holocaust Memorial,
a sacred place of commemoration of the trauma of
Ukrainian Jews and representatives of other ethnic
groups killed by Nazis during the Second World War.
How ironic is it that victims of Nazis are being killed
for a second time by modern followers of Nazism?
As President Zelenskyy asked, what was the point
of repeating the slogan “never again” for 80 years?
It is already clear that Russia’s goal is not merely
occupation; it is genocide. On 7 and 8 March, the
International Court of Justice will hold public hearings
on a case concerning allegations of genocide under the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, Ukraine v. Russian Federation.
The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) has also decided to proceed with opening a
formal investigation into the situation in Ukraine.
The unprovoked escalation of Russia’s aggression
against Ukraine gives reason to believe that crimes
that fall within the jurisdiction of the ICC continue to
be committed on Ukrainian territory. Along with the
situation in Crimea and Donbas, recent events suggest
that the aggressor’s troops are continuing to commit
war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Observing the bloodshed in Ukraine, one might be
inclined to say, “This is not my war”. That would be a
mistake. The evil will never stop. It will require more
and more space to conquer. If tolerated, it will advance
further and further. Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.1 is one
of the building blocks of a wall to stop it, to stop it in
Ukraine and not let it go further. That wall will protect
all of us, in particular younger generations.
By voting today, Member States also reaffirm their
countries’ commitment to the Charter of the United
Nations. After the vote, I invite representatives to stop
by the Indonesian Lounge and sign this little blue book.
It may be small, but it is of global magnitude. Every
vote in favour of the draft resolution and the signature
of every country that voted in favour will be a historical
reaffirmation of the Charter. It is very easy to sign the

A/ES-11/PV.5

Charter in time of peace. It is a duty to sign, reaffirm
and implement the Charter in time of war. So I ask all
to stop by the Indonesian Lounge and, if they voted in
favour, to put their countries’ names in the book. I will
then hand it over to the Secretary-General so that he
can keep it in front of him in his office. That way he can
draw inspiration every moment from the overwhelming
majority of nations that still trust in the United Nations
and its Charter.
There is a very frail old gentleman who was born
in a territory that was part of the Kingdom of Hungary
and who will celebrate his 102nd birthday nine days
from now. His name is Benjamin Ferencz. Benjamin
Ferencz was an investigator of war crimes and a chief
prosecutor at one of the 12 Nuremberg trials. He later
became an advocate for the international rule of law
and the establishment of the International Criminal
Court. With the producer’s permission, I will play a
few seconds of his words. I want the Assembly to listen
very carefully.
An audio recording was played in the General
Assembly Hall.
I ask everyone here to please show respect — respect
for the Charter, respect for the Secretary-General,
respect for that gentleman who will be celebrating his
102nd birthday. I call on all responsible Member States
to support draft resolution A/ES-11/L.1.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/ES-11/L.1, entitled “Aggression
against Ukraine”.
Before giving the floor to those wishing to speak
in explanation of position, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Russia requests that draft resolution
A/ES-11/L.1 be put to a vote. We urge the Assembly
not to support it. However, we know the unprecedented
pressure that our Western partners are putting on a
huge number of countries, pushing them to vote the
way it suits them. One cannot even call it pressure.
There have been open, cynical threats, and we know
it. The draft resolution will not help to end the military
operations. On the contrary, it could embolden Kyiv’s
radicals and nationalists to continue to determine their
country’s policy at any price while holding the civilian
population hostage. And that is in the literal sense of the

22-2752311/25

A/ES-11/PV.5

word “hostage”, not the figurative one. That is exactly
what is happening in a number of major Ukrainian
cities, where people are being used as human shields.
Today we learned that the Ukrainian armed forces
are not allowing the peaceful residents of Mariupol to
leave the city. They are keeping them, and that includes
women and children, in a Mariupol school, and are
forcibly turning back all the civilians who are trying
to leave the city along humanitarian corridors. We have
also been informed about planned provocations by
nationalist battalions, which they have been preparing
in collaboration with civilians with the aim of accusing
the Russian military of carrying them out after the fact.
In contravention of the norms of international
humanitarian law, military equipment, rocket launchers
and artillery are being moved into residential areas.
Today we will provide examples of such activity to the
United Nations leadership, who right up to this moment
have continued to assert that there is no evidence for it
despite the videos made by ordinary Ukrainians that are
freely available on the Internet. The responsibility for
that lies fully with the Ukrainian authorities, as it does
for the reckless and criminal distribution of weapons
to anyone who wants them, including people who have
been let out of prison. That has already led to robbery,
murder and looting on a massive scale.
Member States who refuse to back today’s draft
resolution are casting a vote in support of a peaceful
Ukraine, free from radicalism and neo-Nazism, living
in peace with its neighbours and refusing to be governed
from outside. Those were the aims of our special military
operation, which the sponsors of the draft resolution
are trying to portray as aggression. Today we heard
the Ukrainian representative speak of Nazism, but he
was shamefully silent about the rampant neo-Nazism in
Ukraine itself, the outrageous neo-Nazi and nationalist
radical organizations, the torchlit processions and the
glorification of Hitler’s accomplices.
Those who have followed the evolution of the
Ukrainian crisis understand its genesis very well. What
we are doing today is first of all trying to end the Maidan
regime’s eight-year war with the people of Donbas. For
the past several years we have done everything we can
to prevent this scenario. In the words of the SecretaryGeneral, we have left no stone unturned and knocked
on every door, but we have gone unheard. They are still
bombing the citizens of Donbas, and they do not intend
to stop at 14,000 dead, the vast majority of them in the
Luhansk and Donetsk people’s republics. The aims of
12/25

02/03/2022

our special operation, declared on a basis of Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations, are being carried
out and will be achieved. However, we are not firing on
civilian facilities or civilians, and no one should believe
the enormous numbers of fakes that have proliferated
about this on the Internet. Those fakes were baked
like pies in the Ukrainian special forces’ centre for
disinformation and psychological warfare, which was
destroyed yesterday.
A scenario for peace in Ukraine could happen
sooner if the radicals cared about saving civilian lives
there rather than hiding behind them. There is no call
for that in the draft resolution. Nor does it mention the
illegal February 2014 coup in Kyiv when the country’s
legitimately elected President was overthrown with the
connivance of Germany, France and Poland and the
support of the United States. It says nothing about the fact
that the new nationalist authorities immediately limited
the right of citizens to use the Russian language. That
gave a green light to a long series of violations of the
basic rights of people living in eastern Ukraine — and
not just in the east — including the most valuable right
of all, the right to life. There are many here who do not
want to hear about the tragedy in Ukraine that began
with the 2014 coup, about the people who were burned
alive in Odesa and the dissenters who were persecuted
and murdered. The most blatant example of all was the
war that Kyiv unleashed on Donbas. There is nothing in
the draft resolution about the fact that for the past eight
years the United States and Europe have been pumping
weapons into Ukraine to help the Maidan regime kill
civilians in Donbas, as well as justifying the complete
disregard of Kyiv authorities loyal to them of the Minsk
agreements and their sabotage of Security Council
resolution 2202 (2015).
Finally, the draft resolution is an obvious attempt
by those who over the past decades have carried out
countless aggressions, military operations in violation
of international law, and coups, including the Maidan
coup in Ukraine, to present themselves as champions of
international law.
Mr. Stevanović (Serbia): Serbia sincerely regrets
the events unfolding in Eastern Europe. Russia and
Ukraine have always been friendly to Serbia and we
see Russians and Ukrainians as our brother peoples.
We consider every life lost in Ukraine a true tragedy.
We are committed to respecting the territorial integrity
and political independence of States, which, as a
basic principle of international law, enshrined in the
22-27523

02/03/2022

Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final
Act, guarantees all States the right to inviolable
borders. Just as Serbia is committed to preserving its
own sovereignty and territorial integrity, it advocates
respect for those principles for other sovereign nations.
Regardless of the fact that we do not agree with
all of its wording, Serbia will vote in favour of draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.1. I feel obliged to point to the
thirteenth preambular paragraph of the draft resolution
and remind the General Assembly that the first attack
on a sovereign State on European soil after the Second
World War took place not so long ago, in 1999, when 19
countries attacked what was then the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, targeting primarily the territory of
Serbia. At the time, our Organization did not react
appropriately to that flagrant violation of the Charter.
Despite the fact that Serbia still suffers from the
consequences of that gross violation by others of the
fundamental principles of international law, we are not
giving up on those principles, even today.
The Republic of Serbia will continue to promote
a resolution of the conflict and expect the parties
concerned to invest additional effort in reaching a
diplomatic solution and creating the conditions for
peace through dialogue. We will provide every possible
form of humanitarian aid to Ukrainian citizens who are
in danger and remain committed to peace and consistent
respect for international law.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.1, which is before
us today, clearly represents a biased approach based
on political propaganda, and is a tool of pressure and
political blackmail. The authors of the draft resolution
wanted to include in it aggressive language directed
against the Russian Federation, with the aim of
targeting the legitimate positions that Russia has taken
based on its security concerns and its right to protect
its territory and people from genuine threats to national
security. Not only that, but the draft resolution extends
to Belarus as well.
The draft resolution represents flagrant political
hypocrisy. Had the United States and its Western allies
been serious about de-escalating tensions in the region,
they would have fulfilled the promises they made to
Russia three decades ago not to expand NATO eastwards
and turn Ukraine into a direct and genuine threat to
the Russian Federation. They would have pressured the
Kyiv authorities to abide by the Minsk agreements and

A/ES-11/PV.5

cease their grave violations against civilians in Donbas.
And yet those States have rushed to arm Ukraine with
heavy weapons and missiles and encouraged volunteers
from among their citizens to fight in Ukraine. That
clearly indicates their desire to provoke and escalate
rather than calm and contain.
The vote on this draft resolution is happening at a
time when misleading information is proliferating on a
massive scale, involving significant campaigns aimed
at distorting the facts and spreading misinformation. It
is designed not to find a genuine solution to the crisis
but rather to demonize the Russian Federation and
tarnish its image. The draft text is full of gaps, far from
objective and ignores the real reasons as to why this
crisis has erupted.
The people expressing their eagerness to defend the
Charter of the United Nations today should have shown
the same enthusiasm in combating Israel’s continuing
occupation of Arab territories and the Turkish forces’
aggression against the sovereign Syrian territories,
not to mention the United States forces that have been
violating Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The Syrian Arab Republic rejects the West’s hegemonic
policies and interference in the internal affairs of
Member States as it ignites and prolongs crises,
spreading chaos, promoting selectivity and double
standards and imposing unilateral coercive measures.
We must therefore reject the draft resolution and vote
against it.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): It is
clear from the debate that has taken place over the past
two days that the membership of the United Nations is
united in its call to end the war in Ukraine and return
to diplomacy. We would like to explain our vote before
the voting on the draft resolution (A/ES-11/L.1) before
us today.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will vote in
favour of the draft resolution, in accordance with our
steadfast commitment to upholding the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
form the core of multilateralism and gave birth to our
Organization 76 years ago. It bears repeating that
those principles underscore respect for the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of States
and enjoin Member States to refrain from the threat or
use of force in the conduct of their international relations.
Our support for the draft resolution is rooted in our
conviction that strict adherence to international law,

22-2752313/25

A/ES-11/PV.5

02/03/2022

including international humanitarian law and human
rights law, and to the principles of peace, dialogue and
compromise, with a view to preserving humankind, is
not optional.
For a small island developing State, full compliance
with the bedrock principles of international law is an
existential issue. I am taking the floor to repeat our
call for those principles to be applied consistently and
upheld as universal truths rather than selective, uneven
and unpredictable tools for anyone to use to further
great power anywhere. Both historically and in recent
times we have witnessed naked hypocrisy, double
standards and cynical misapplications of international
law, which we have condemned. Today we strongly
urge the General Assembly to apply impartially the
fundamental principles of the Charter, irrespective
of the size, economic and military power of the
parties involved.
In the midst of our current global challenges,
such as the climate crisis and the coronavirus disease
pandemic, we simply cannot afford another conflict.
War does not manage grievances. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines therefore calls for an immediate ceasefire
in order to avert further bloodshed and human suffering
and a global catastrophe, and for the parties to engage in
peaceful dialogue and find a solution to this war posthaste. Today we must unite for peace. I wish profound
peace to all.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote.
Before proceeding to take a decision on draft
resolution A/ES-11/L.1, I wish to address the question
of the majority required for the adoption of the draft
resolution. In the light of paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article
18 of the Charter of the United Nations, is there any
objection to taking action on draft resolution A/ES11/L.1 by a two-thirds majority of the members present
and voting?
I see no objection. I will therefore take it that a twothirds majority of members is required for the adoption
of draft resolution A/ES-11/L.1.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/ES-11/L.1, entitled “Aggression
against Ukraine”.
I give the
the Secretariat.
14/25

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Abelian (Under-Secretary-General for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed in
document A/ES-11/L.1, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Barbados
and Cambodia.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Canada, Cabo Verde, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Republic of
Moldova, Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Eritrea, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic
22-27523

02/03/2022

Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Burundi, Central African
Republic, China, Congo, Cuba, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, India, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua, Pakistan,
Senegal, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Tajikistan, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uganda, Vietnam, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/ES-11/L.1 was adopted by 141 votes
to 5, with 35 abstentions (resolution ES-11/1).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the vote, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Tunisia
voted in favour of resolution ES-11/1 in support of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, on which our foreign policy is based. We
would like to emphasize that our country is committed
to ending the crisis by peaceful means, which represent
the only and the ideal way of preventing the escalation
and further deterioration of situations and the
exacerbation of humanitarian crises and tragedies. The
world has witnessed enough war and disasters and their
devastating repercussions for people’s lives and for
peace and security. Our experiences of both the distant
and the recent past have taught us that military options
cannot resolve crises, but that dialogue and negotiations
can settle all disputes and find compromise solutions
to them.
The current crisis in Ukraine comes at a time when
the world has been laying the groundwork for recovery
from the coronavirus disease pandemic and for the start
of a new stage based on cooperation, solidarity and
active engagement in promoting multilateral action and
achieving the goals of Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
We believe that the world cannot bear any more crises
of such magnitude and danger. Tunisia, which is
hopeful about the participation of the parties concerned
in the dialogue and negotiation process, renews its
call to the international community for concerted and
intensified efforts to encourage the parties to continue
their negotiations aimed at a cessation of hostilities, the

A/ES-11/PV.5

protection of lives and the creation of the conditions for
a lasting solution to the crisis.
Given that international peace and security are
indivisible, Tunisia calls for similarly addressing
all other relevant just causes, so that every country’s
people can regain their legitimate rights in accordance
with the international terms of reference and build a
more just, peaceful and stable world.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): I am taking the
floor to explain Rwanda’s vote on resolution ES-11/1,
which we just adopted. Rwanda voted in favour of the
resolution based on our firm support of the necessity
for respecting the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of every country. We supported the
resolution in order to reaffirm our commitment to the
Charter of the United Nations.
The military escalation should cease immediately
and the parties should seek a peaceful settlement of the
crisis. The Russian Federation and Ukraine hold the key
to resolving this conflict. External intervention will only
worsen the situation. We fully support the international
efforts to de-escalate the war, including those of the
Secretary-General aimed at resolving the crisis. We
urge all the parties concerned to exercise calm and seek
a solution to the conflict through dialogue in order to
ensure that civilians do not continue to pay the heaviest
price. A lasting solution can be achieved only through
dialogue between both parties, taking into account the
concerns on both sides. There is no guarantee that the
ongoing war will bring peace. Rather, it is likely to
result in subsequent crises and human suffering.
Rwanda is deeply concerned about the extent of the
humanitarian devastation and the challenges to peace
and security that the conflict has caused. We are also
concerned about the reports of Africans being racially
segregated and denied safe exit out of Ukraine and
admission into neighbouring countries. We call on all
involved to permit people’s unhindered evacuation,
without discrimination based on their colour or origin.
The founding principles of the Charter include
living peacefully with one another and upholding
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States
while also taking account of their security concerns.
The diplomatic options represent the best solutions for
achieving sustainable peace. We call for open dialogue
and negotiations in good faith. Finally, Rwanda calls
for a sincere commitment to the Charter and the
international order. The ongoing crisis poses a severe

22-2752315/25

A/ES-11/PV.5

threat to international peace and security. We encourage
the parties concerned to give peace a chance. We want
to underline that a lasting solution to the current crisis
lies primarily in the hands of both Ukraine and the
Russian Federation. Dialogue is the only option for
resolving the current crisis.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
situation in Ukraine continues to evolve dramatically.
What is unfolding now is indeed heart-wrenching.
China’s basic position on the issue of Ukraine is
consistent and unequivocal. We believe that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries
should be respected, and that international disputes
should be resolved peacefully in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
The top priority right now is to ease the situation
on the ground as much as possible and prevent it
from escalating or possibly spiralling out of control.
Russia and Ukraine have already held a first round of
negotiations. China welcomes the fact that both sides,
despite their differences, have shown a willingness to
pursue the talks. In the face of this highly complex
and sensitive situation, China once again calls on the
international community to continue its efforts in the
overall direction of a political settlement and to create an
atmosphere and conditions that are conducive to direct
talks and negotiations between the parties concerned.
Any action by the United Nations and the relevant
parties should give priority to regional peace and
stability and the universal security of all the parties,
and should play a positive role in de-escalation and
finding diplomatic solutions. Regrettably, resolution
ES-11/1, which was just put to a vote at this emergency
special session, was not subject to full consultations
within the whole membership and does not take into
full consideration the history and complexity of the
current crisis. It does not highlight the importance
of the principle of indivisible security or the urgency
of promoting a political settlement and stepping up
diplomatic efforts. That is not in line with China’s
consistent position, and we therefore had no choice but
to abstain in the voting.
A lasting settlement to the Ukraine crisis requires
abandoning a Cold War mentality and the logic that
one country’s security should come at others’ expense.
It requires abandoning an approach that guarantees
regional security by expanding military blocs. It is
16/25

02/03/2022

important to give full attention and respect to every
country’s legitimate security concerns and to undertake
negotiations on that basis to put in place a balanced,
effective and sustainable European security mechanism.
Blindly exerting pressure, imposing sanctions and
creating divisions and confrontation will only further
complicate the situation and quickly lead to a spillover
of the negative effects of the crisis, affecting even more
countries. We call on the international community to
take a responsible approach and encourage the relevant
parties to return immediately to the political settlement
track and seek a comprehensive solution to the Ukraine
issue through dialogue and consultation. China is ready
to continue playing a constructive role in that regard.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): My delegation is taking
the floor to explain Sierra Leone’s position on agenda
item 5 and its vote on resolution ES-11/1.
The Government of Sierra Leone is gravely
concerned about the regrettable and serious situation
that has unfolded in Ukraine, with regional and
international ramifications for peace and security. We
are also deeply concerned about the growing refugee
and humanitarian crisis in and around Ukraine,
especially where the safety and welfare of Sierra
Leonean students in Ukraine are concerned. While we
appreciate the efforts to provide the safety and refuge
that are needed, it is important to ensure that all fleeing
the conflict are treated equally and with dignity, without
discrimination based on race or status. A blanket denial
is not the answer, nor does it represent the values that
we seek to protect.
Sierra Leone voted in favour of the resolution
based on its fundamental belief in the principles and
sanctity of the Charter of the United Nations and the
purposes of our Organization. In voting today, we
did not selectively apply our fundamental belief in
the principles of sovereign equality and the territorial
integrity and political independence of all Member
States or of non-interference and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Our vote today does not absolve the United
Nations of its action or inaction, particularly with
regard to addressing questions of peace and security
in Africa.
We believe that the United Nations must be
consistent in the application of the Charter in pursuit
of its purposes, and that resorting to the threat or use
of force or violating the territorial integrity of any
Member State in a manner that is inconsistent with the
22-27523

02/03/2022

Charter must be rejected. Accordingly, Sierra Leone
calls for full respect for the national sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. We also call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities. In that regard, we welcome the
beginning of ceasefire talks and urge that they continue
in a meaningful way. Finally, we also urge for goodfaith diplomatic efforts to resolve the conflict.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): After careful
consideration, Thailand voted in favour of resolution
ES-11/1 because of the overriding importance that
we attach to the principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and those of international law,
particularly respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and the non-use of force against
them. Our support for the resolution also underlines our
deep concern about the plight of the civilians affected
and the humanitarian consequences of the hostilities
and violence in the area. In that regard, we call on all
the parties to fully comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. We are also concerned
about the conflict’s potential longer-term consequences
for the rules-based international order and renew our
calls for peace and for all parties to enhance dialogue
through various means in order to truly achieve a
peaceful settlement to the situation.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): We recognize the
exceptional circumstances we are all facing and share
the conviction that the General Assembly cannot
remain silent. Resolution ES-11/1, which we adopted
this morning, conveys a message to which Brazil
and other members have added their voices. The
Assembly’s adoption of the resolution demonstrates the
international community’s unwavering commitment
to upholding the core principles on which the United
Nations was built.
We appreciate the attention that various paragraphs
of the text give to the critical need to monitor and
alleviate the humanitarian situation on the ground. We
also welcome the fact that the text urges the parties to
the conflict to fully respect international humanitarian
law, guarantee the safety of civilians and humanitarian
and medical personnel and facilitate unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance for those in need. However,
the resolution as adopted does not go far enough in
underscoring that a cessation of hostilities is only a
first step to achieving peace. Sustainable peace needs
additional steps. In that regard, it is regrettable that
the supportive role that the United Nations can and

A/ES-11/PV.5

should be playing has fallen by the wayside, owing to
an eagerness to point fingers.
While the resolution does indeed convey the
international community’s call for peace, peace requires
more than silencing the guns and withdrawing the troops.
It requires comprehensive work to address the security
concerns of the parties, and its only precondition should
be an immediate ceasefire. This resolution should not
be seen as permitting the indiscriminate application
of sanctions and the deployment of arms. Such
initiatives are not conducive to a proper resumption
of constructive diplomatic dialogue and run the risk
of further escalating tensions, with unpredictable
consequences for the region and beyond. We also have
concerns about the fifteenth preambular paragraph. At
a time that is fraught with danger, it is not constructive
for this particular resolution to comment on the military
measures adopted by any specific nuclear Power,
whether the Russian Federation or NATO members.
Once effective negotiations do get started, all the
parties must show genuine flexibility and a spirit of
compromise. Lasting solutions can be achieved only
at the negotiating table through committed dialogue.
Brazil continues to urge all actors to de-escalate and
renew their efforts in favour of a negotiated, diplomatic
agreement between Ukraine and Russia that contributes
to re-establishing the security and stability of the
region. We stand ready to work resolutely for peace in
the discussions of the Assembly, the Security Council
and other forums.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): This
emergency special session comes at a time when the
conflict in Ukraine has reached a dangerous inflection
point. The clear message conveyed by today’s
resounding vote is that the international community
is alarmed by the developments on the ground. The
humanitarian situation is worsening by the day. We
have seen reports of rapidly rising civilian casualties
and massive displacement, the extent of which Europe
has not experienced in decades. The United Arab
Emirates is deeply concerned about those developments.
However, our collective responsibility must be to
exhaust every effort and use every diplomatic channel
to prevent further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation. That is our belief and we remain more firmly
committed to it than ever. Yesterday, the United Arab
Emirates pledged $5 million in response to the United
Nations humanitarian flash appeal, and we know that
more must be done in the days, weeks and months ahead.

22-2752317/25

A/ES-11/PV.5

The credibility of our Organization, which was
born out of the ashes of the Second World War, rests
on its universal representation and its effectiveness in
applying the principles that we all uphold. However, as
this conflict has revealed, it has only grown harder to
summon the clear and full voice of the United Nations,
because it is not equally applied. Despite the deepening
divisions, now is the time to take a step back, identify
diplomatic off-ramps and engage constructively to end
this conflict. It is also a time to summon our reserves
of wisdom and experience to guide the way forward.
Global solidarity means doing more than focusing
on conflicts in some parts of the world while ignoring
others. We need to shift our mindset from conflict
management to conflict resolution — our collective
security depends on it. Let this crisis be our wake-up
call. The future of the Organization may depend on
it. We all need to galvanize United Nations efforts to
promote dialogue, work to end the hostilities and address
the humanitarian situation for those most desperately
in need. The United Arab Emirates recognizes the
importance of meeting this moment with renewed
diplomacy and leadership and of putting the needs of
the people on the ground at the centre of our efforts. It
is also more crucial than ever to keep the avenues for
dialogue open and pursue them together.
We recognize the General Assembly’s adoption
today of resolution ES-11/1 as a necessary signal of the
direction that we need to take. Resigning ourselves to
a cycle of perpetual violence and sanctions that only
adds to the suffering of civilians diminishes us all.
We voted in favour of the resolution in order to join
other Member States in an appeal for peace — a just
peace that endures because it recognizes the legitimate
concerns of all parties and abides by the principles
of independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
However, as others have said, this resolution is not
enough to achieve a sustainable peace. Resolving this
conflict requires dialogue and effective diplomacy.
The text reflects Member States’ determination to
respond to the conflict today in Ukraine. That is the
call ringing out clearly from this meeting. Now we
must turn to finding ways to bring about a peaceful
resolution with full respect for and commitment to real
and engaged diplomacy.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): India has been deeply
concerned about the rapidly deteriorating situation
18/25

02/03/2022

in Ukraine and the ensuing humanitarian crisis.
Tragically, an Indian national was killed yesterday
in Kharkiv as a result of the ongoing hostilities. We
express our deepest condolences to his family and to
those of each and every innocent civilian who has died
in this conflict. We demand safe and uninterrupted
passage — especially from Kharkiv and other cities in
the conflict zones — for all Indian nationals, including
students, who are still stranded in Ukraine. Many
Member States share our concern. We have reiterated
that demand to both the Russian Federation and Ukraine
and it remains our top priority.
The basic duty of every Government is to ensure the
well-being and safety of its citizens. We have therefore
arranged special flights to bring Indians home from
conflict zones. Senior ministers from the Government
of India have been deployed to Ukraine’s neighbours
as special envoys to facilitate the evacuation. We thank
all those neighbours of Ukraine that have opened their
borders and extended their facilities to our embassies
at this time. India has already dispatched humanitarian
assistance to Ukraine, including medicines, medical
equipment and other relief material, and we will be
sending more in the coming days. India supports the
international community’s call for an immediate
ceasefire and for safe humanitarian access to
conflict zones.
We continue to believe firmly that differences
can be resolved only through dialogue and diplomacy.
Prime Minister Modi has conveyed that unequivocally
in his discussions with world leaders, including
those of the Russian Federation and Ukraine. He has
underscored the urgent need to facilitate humanitarian
access and the movement of stranded civilians. In that
regard, we sincerely hope that the second round of talks
between Russian Federation and Ukraine will lead to
a positive outcome. India urges all Member States to
demonstrate their commitment to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all States. Keeping in view the evolving situation in
its entirety, India decided to abstain in the voting on
resolution ES-11/1.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): My
country voted in favour of resolution ES-11/1 based
on our firm belief in the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, in particular
the principles of good neighbourliness, the resolution
of disputes by peaceful means and respect for the
22-27523

02/03/2022

sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all
States. The Kingdom of Bahrain underscores its support
for all efforts aimed at halting military operations,
making use of dialogue and using diplomatic means.
Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): My delegation is taking the
floor to deliver an explanation of vote after the vote on
resolution ES-11/1.
Eritrea firmly believes that respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, is a sacrosanct principle that should
be respected by everyone at all times in order to achieve
sustainable world peace. Eritrea’s vote on the resolution
demonstrates its uncompromising stand in support
of peace. We are against the internationalization
of issues, incessant rhetoric and the imposition of
unilateral sanctions, which regrettably further polarize
international relations and escalate situations, with
enormous implications for civilians. Instead, we have
consistently called for every region to be given the space
and support it needs to address its political problems.
The situation between Russia and Ukraine raises
serious concerns and has political, economic and
security ramifications for Europe and the rest of the
world. It should be resolved immediately by giving
diplomacy more of a chance. We hope that the ongoing
talks on the border of Belarus between the two sides
will lead to a quick and acceptable agreement to stop
the war and pave the way for peace in the region.
Eritrea opposes all forms of unilateral sanctions and
deems them illegal and counterproductive. For two
decades Eritrea has been subjected to these kinds of
measures, including new sets of unilateral measures,
and we therefore understand that sanctions do not
resolve peace and security problems. On the contrary,
they only hurt innocent people and undermine the road
to peace.
I would be remiss if I did not address the disturbing
reports about African citizens living in Ukraine who
are facing difficulties in crossing its borders. We call
on all countries to facilitate safe passage to people
who are fleeing for their safety, regardless of their
racial identity.
Let me conclude by reiterating that Eritrea
would like to see the avenues for diplomacy remain
open. We are confident in the parties’ ability to
resolve their differences and reach an outcome that
addresses the interests and concerns of all. We

A/ES-11/PV.5

hope that the international community will provide
constructive support to the parties in their search for
sustainable peace.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of
Iran): The Islamic Republic of Iran is following the
ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine with
grave concern. We reiterate our principled position
that disputes should be settled by peaceful means in
accordance with international law and underline the
need for all parties to fully respect the deeply enshrined
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, including international humanitarian
law. We emphasize that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all States must be fully respected and the
safety and security of all civilians guaranteed.
In order to find long-term and sustainable solutions
to crises such as this one, it is necessary to address their
root causes. We note that the current complexities in the
fragile region of Eastern Europe have been exacerbated
by the provocative actions and decisions of the United
States and NATO. Russia’s security concerns must be
respected. Inflicting war and destruction on civilians
and civilian infrastructure, regardless of where it occurs,
is unacceptable. The Islamic Republic of Iran calls for
an immediate cessation of hostilities and de-escalation
of tensions in this conflict. We emphasize that dialogue
is essential for addressing issues of concern on all sides
and can produce long-term results.
The United Nations must always refrain from
applying double standards, especially when it is
considering issues related to the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is unfortunate
that at times the United Nations, in particular the
Security Council, has ignored that principle, which
has undermined its credibility. A case in point is the
Security Council’s handling of the conflict in Yemen.
We believe that the text of resolution ES-11/1 lacks
impartiality and realistic mechanisms for resolving
the crisis through peaceful means. Furthermore,
not all Member States were given the opportunity to
engage in negotiations on the text of the resolution. It
should be emphasized that the General Assembly is not
in a position to determine the existence of an act of
aggression, because in both Article 39 of the Charter
and resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, the
Security Council is the organ that is called to do so.
Moreover, convening an emergency special session
on the basis of resolution 377 A (V) should not be

22-2752319/25

A/ES-11/PV.5

considered the end of the dialogue. My Government
continues to call for a comprehensive, peaceful and
sustained resolution to the conflict, including an
immediate ceasefire and start to the dialogue, as well as
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the people in
need. For all of those reasons, my delegation abstained
in the voting on the resolution.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
would like to emphasize the following points regarding
resolution ES-11/1, which was just adopted, and which
we voted for based on our firm belief in international
law and the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
First, the primary goal of all of us and the
international community as a whole should continue
to be finding an immediate political solution in order
to end this crisis through dialogue, peaceful means
and active diplomacy, and to ensure the political
environment essential to achieving that goal.
Secondly, we reiterate that we should not ignore
the importance of addressing the root causes of the
current crisis in order to defuse it and achieve security
and stability.
Thirdly, Egypt rejects the approach of employing
economic sanctions outside the framework of
multilateral international mechanisms, because
previous experience in past decades has shown that
such sanctions have dire humanitarian consequences
and result in greater suffering for civilians.
Fourthly, all the parties should fulfil their
responsibilities and ensure that humanitarian assistance
reaches all in need, without discrimination, and that
third-country nationals are permitted free passage
across borders, given that there have been reports of
discriminatory treatment in that regard.
Fifthly, Egypt warns once again about the potential
economic and social consequences of the current crisis
for the global economy, which is still suffering from
the repercussions of the pandemic. The increasing
disruptions of supply chains and international air traffic
are the clearest examples of that.
Sixthly, if international multilateral mechanisms
for confronting successive international challenges and
crises are to be effective and credible, they must address
all such problems based on the same standards, in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter, rather
20/25

02/03/2022

than settling for the status quo, which has perpetuated
human suffering for decades.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria): I would like to deliver an
explanation of Algeria’s vote on resolution ES-11/1.
(spoke in Arabic)
At a time when my country, Algeria, is following
with deep concern the dangerous and escalating
developments in Ukraine, my delegation would like
to reaffirm that Algeria is firmly committed to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which should remain the basis of international
law and the cornerstone of international relations,
especially with regard to respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, in
accordance with international legitimacy and the right
of peoples to self-determination.
Based on Algeria’s principled positions regarding
the promotion and preservation of the multilateral
system, and in line with our commitment to developing
friendly relations among States on a basis of peaceful
coexistence, the peaceful settlement of disputes
and mutual respect for international obligations and
security guarantees, Algeria feels compelled to join
all the diplomatic efforts and calls aimed at easing the
current tensions and encouraging dialogue in order
to promote peaceful coexistence among States and
maintain international peace and security.
Mr. Gastorn (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania decided to abstain in the
voting on resolution ES-11/1 as a matter of principle
and in defence of the Charter of the United Nations.
Our decision was fundamentally the result our
inability to make amendments or reservations to some
provisions of the resolution, which in our view needed
adjustments. The United Republic of Tanzania believes
that diplomacy is the best way to end this conflict. To
that end, we appeal to all parties to the dispute to uphold
human rights and their obligations under international
law and international humanitarian law in order to
de-escalate the conflict and give peace a chance.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to take the
floor to elaborate on South Africa’s decision to abstain
in the voting on resolution ES-11/1.
Let me reiterate the position that we expressed
(see A/ES-11/PV.3) in the discussions of the past few
days during the emergency special session, first by
22-27523

02/03/2022

highlighting that South Africa remains deeply concerned
about the escalation of the conflict in Ukraine and its
regional and international socioeconomic implications.
We strongly urge all sides to uphold international law,
including humanitarian law and human rights law,
as well as the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including those relating to State sovereignty
and territorial integrity. This is an armed conflict
involving two members of the United Nations, and
the Organization has a foundational responsibility to
prevent it. The United Nations must therefore take
decisions and actions that will lead to a constructive
outcome conducive to establishing a sustainable peace
between the parties.
The resolution that the General Assembly has
adopted today does not create an environment
conducive to diplomacy, dialogue and mediation. While
we agree with and support the efforts of Member States
to bring the situation in Ukraine to the attention of the
international community, South Africa feels that greater
attention should have been paid to bringing the sides
closer to dialogue. South Africa believes that the text
in its current form could drive a deeper wedge between
the parties rather than contributing to resolving the
conflict. The resolution should have welcomed the start
of talks between the parties. Additionally, the role of the
Security Council and the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral could have been given more prominence. It is
understood that one of the root causes of the conflict
is related to the security concerns of the parties. That
should have been addressed in the resolution.
Even though this emergency special session of
the General Assembly is being held after the Security
Council’s failure to address the matter, we believe
that the Council should still be urged to play the
role mandated to it by the Charter of maintaining
international peace and security. South Africa believes
that the United Nations, especially in the context
of emergency special sessions, whose nature and
significance speak to the gravity of the issues brought
before the international community, should be used as a
platform to build bridges, address divergent views and
provide recommendations and support for the parties to
engage in a spirit of compromise while de-escalating
tensions, committing to a cessation of hostilities and
building trust and confidence. Unfortunately, the text
of the resolution did not do that.
South Africa would also have preferred an open and
transparent process for negotiating today’s resolution.

A/ES-11/PV.5

That would have enabled all of us, as equal members
of the Assembly, to present our views and ideally reach
a level of understanding before the text was submitted.
As Member States of the Organization, committed to
global peace and development, we must continue to
work together to promote peace. Gestures that merely
create the impression of promoting peace without
meaningful action will not assist in that endeavour.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): Lebanon voted in favour
of resolution ES-11/1 because, as a founding member
of the United Nations, we believe in the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
especially the prohibition of the use or threat of use of
force in international relations and the importance of
non-intervention and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Those are not merely slogans for Lebanon. We have
lived through invasions, occupation and intervention in
our internal affairs and have experienced devastation,
loss and pain whose consequences we are enduring to
this day. That is why we did not take our decision today
lightly. We know what happens in wars, but we also
know that wars happen not only when people fail to
prevent them, but especially when the voices of war
drown out the cries for peace. As a peace-loving nation,
Lebanon enjoys a good relationship and friendships
with all the parties to the conflict between Russia and
Ukraine. In that spirit, we call on everyone to return to
a logic of peace.
Yesterday, a European colleague told me that he
had never lived through a war. I was happy for him. In
my country I have lived through at least two invasions
and a civil war, as well as multiple assassinations
and explosions. That is why I do not want anyone to
experience what I have lived through. It is time for
diplomacy, dialogue and a peaceful resolution to this
conflict. I hope that all of my colleagues here in this
Hall will invest the same energy and commitment that
they expended in realizing this vote and its outcome
into working for a peaceful resolution that takes into
consideration the concerns and interests of both sides so
that the world can step away from the abyss of war. The
Preamble to the Charter tells us to “unite our strength
to maintain international peace and security”. We need
that unity for peace now. The United Nations is well
positioned to step up and step in to make that peace a
reality. Now we need to stop the escalation in words and
deeds and help both sides take the path of peace, not
only for their sake but for the sake of our world.

22-2752321/25

A/ES-11/PV.5

We in the Middle East are very concerned about
this war, both because of its impact on Europe and
because we know from experience that what happens
in Europe does not stay in Europe. We know that the
two World Wars left deep scars on our part of the world
and obliterated countries and hopes, and we are still
living through their aftermath today. I hope that we all
learn the lessons of the past wars and that from this
moment, we will start working only for peace — not
merely peace in our time, but peace in all time, as a
former President of the United States once said. I agree
with Albert Camus, who, after being awarded the Nobel
Prize in Literature in 1957, said that
“Each generation doubtless feels called upon to
reform the world. Mine knows that it will not reform
it, but its task is perhaps even greater. It consists in
preventing the world from destroying itself.”
The Charter tasks us with that same responsibility,
as it instructs us to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.
Ms. Mohd Izzuddin (Malaysia): As a member of
the family of nations, Malaysia is committed to the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and the ideals it espouses. We reiterate the
inviolability of the fundamental principles of the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of countries and
the peaceful settlement of disputes in the maintenance
of both international peace and security and global
prosperity. All parties must uphold those fundamental
and sacrosanct principles of the Charter and international
law that guide the conduct of friendly relations between
nations and ensure peaceful coexistence. While many
would agree that resolution ES-11/1 is far from perfect,
and my delegation continues to have concerns about
some of its language, Malaysia voted in favour of it as a
matter of principle and based on our strong belief in the
principles I mentioned.
Malaysia values its strong and close relations with
Ukraine and Russia. We believe that given the complex
geopolitical context, the differences and legitimate
security concerns of both parties must be addressed
through dialogue and peaceful means in accordance
with the principles of the Charter and the rule of law.
In that context, we welcome the direct talks between
Russia and Ukraine in Belarus and urge both sides to
continue on a path of peace in order to prevent further
destruction and loss of life. What has stood out vividly
to us during the animated discussions of this emergency
22/25

02/03/2022

special session is the overwhelming desire for the
current conflict to be resolved peacefully. The General
Assembly has spoken clearly and fervently in that regard
today. It is now more important than ever to see the
Security Council fulfil its primary responsibility as the
custodian of international peace and security. Malaysia
calls on the Council to spare no effort in resolving this
conflict. The future of humankind is on a precipice.
Humankind must prevail, and peace is the only answer.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): My delegation is distressed
by the ongoing violence and conflict in Ukraine.
Conflict anywhere inflicts stress everywhere. Nepal
is a peace-loving country. Our soil is consecrated as
the birthplace of Lord Buddha, an apostle of peace.
For us, the values of peace, harmony and peaceful
coexistence are our way of life and are therefore
supremely precious. The principles of world peace
and respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity,
as well as non-aggression, as enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, are the fundamentals of our
foreign policy. The use of force against Ukraine runs
contrary to those values and principles. Nepal opposes
that violation of international law and the principles of
the Charter.
There is no alternative to diplomacy and dialogue
or to building and sustaining peace. Nepal welcomes
the second round of talks between Russia and Ukraine.
We urge both sides to continue the dialogue in full
sincerity and integrity in order to resolve this conflict
peacefully and find a lasting political solution that
can ensure enduring peace for themselves and for
Europe. Based on Nepal’s principled position on the
inviolability of the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of any State, in accordance
with international law, the rules-based international
order and the Charter, my delegation voted in favour of
resolution ES-11/1.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): We are
taking the floor in explanation of our vote on resolution
ES-11/1, on which Iraq abstained.
Iraq regrets the deterioration of the situation
and the tension between the Russian Federation and
Ukraine. We call on all parties to resolve this crisis by
opting for dialogue and diplomacy, and to return to the
negotiation table to resolve their problems, with a view
to maintaining international peace and security rather
than exposing States to economic and security crises as
a result of the conflict.
22-27523

02/03/2022

Iraq is gravely concerned about the possibility of
terrorists exploiting this crisis, as well as about the
divisions it can create in the international community.
It could hinder the collective international efforts to
combat terrorism and violent extremism. Iraq’s stance
on the issue is based on our own historical experiences
and suffering resulting from the continued wars
that have been waged on generations of our peoples
and because Iraq does not support war as a solution
to crisis, as a matter of principle. We stress that all
conflicts should be settled by peaceful means in order
to safeguard the lives of civilians. Iraq calls on all the
parties to uphold the Charter of the United Nations and
international law and emphasizes the need to ensure the
security and safety of diplomatic missions and citizens
on the ground.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan
voted in favour of resolution ES-11/1, just adopted
by the General Assembly, in order to emphasize the
importance of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of States and because we believe
that force should not be used in international relations,
because it violates the provisions of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.
Jordan hopes that efforts will be made to defuse the
conflict and reach a peaceful solution to the crisis, and
that all the parties will sit down together at the negotiation
table in order to achieve that peaceful solution. We also
hope to see an increase in international efforts, both
political and diplomatic, in order to help them end the
crisis, as well as to avert the grave consequences for the
region and the world that could result from this conflict.
We stress the need for all the parties — I repeat, all
the parties — to uphold the provisions of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and international
refugee law, without discrimination.
Lastly, Jordan would like to reiterate the importance
of respecting the provisions of international law and the
Charter with regard to refraining from acts of aggression
and the use of force against other States and peoples, as
well as respect for the right to self-determination, based
on a single standard, regardless of the region concerned
and without discrimination in the application of
international principles and standards. We hope that
will lead to effective dialogue within the Organization
on implementing that approach, evaluating the current
approach and realizing our goals.

A/ES-11/PV.5

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting. We will now hear
statements after the adoption of the resolution.
I give the floor to the representative of the European
Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): Last week, the
Security Council was prevented from acting in response
to Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified military
aggression against Ukraine because of one isolated
vote, that of the Russian Federation. Immediately after
that, we initiated work to ensure that this body, where
the countries of the world can all speak up, could live up
to its responsibility. The European Union worked hand
in hand with Ukraine and countries from all parts of the
world to prepare resolution ES-11/1, which has just been
adopted. We would like to thank all the countries that
have supported it. The decision is clear. The world has
spoken. The Russian Government must immediately
stop its aggression, withdraw its troops and abide by
the rules of the Charter of the United Nations, which
apply to all of us equally.
In the past few days the brutality of Russia’s
invasion, with the complicity of Belarus, has reached
unimaginable levels. Ukrainian cities have been
attacked indiscriminately in complete disregard of
international law, causing death and destruction among
civilians. This is not just about Ukraine. This is not just
about Europe. It is about defending an international
order based on rules that we have all signed up to and
the sovereign equality of all States, large and small. It is
about whether we choose dialogue and diplomacy over
tanks and missiles. Today’s historic vote clearly shows
Russia’s isolation from the rest of the international
community. By voting overwhelmingly in favour of
the resolution, we have chosen to defend peace where
Russia has chosen brutal aggression. We have chosen to
defend our Organization and its Charter, where Russia
has violated the fundamentals of both. Russia stands
increasingly alone. The European Union and the world
stand with the Ukrainian people.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the eight Nordic-Baltic countries:
Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway,
Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
We have come together from all corners of the world,
to send a resounding yes to upholding international law
and the Charter of United Nations, to the principle of
the sovereign equality of all Member States and to the

22-2752323/25

A/ES-11/PV.5

need to respect the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political independence of all Member States. In the
words of a colleague who spoke yesterday, we have sent
a resounding message to Ukraine and all Ukrainians
that they are not alone and that we will stand with them
today, tomorrow and until peace prevails and Ukraine’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity are
fully restored and respected.
We have also sent a clear message to Russia and
to Belarus. We are telling them to stop the aggression
now — full stop — and that what they are doing is
unacceptable. It is wrong. The unprovoked aggression
against Ukraine is a violation of the core principles to
which Russia committed when it laid the foundations
of this very Organization, this community of nations.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine deserves our strongest
condemnation, and it will be held accountable. Every
legal avenue available must and will be used to hold the
aggressor to account. It must stop the war immediately
and withdraw its troops to Russia. It must return to a
path of peace and of genuine dialogue. It is not too late
to stop or reverse course. It is not too late for Russia to
return to this community, where we believe — with all
our faults and imperfections — in the principle of the
sovereign equality of all.
We are deeply concerned about the grave
humanitarian crisis that is unfolding. We demand
that all the parties fully comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, protect civilians and critical civilian
infrastructure and ensure safe, rapid and unhindered
humanitarian access and passage. Humanitarian and
medical personnel and hospitals and other medical
facilities must be protected.
Thousands of civilians have been killed, and even
more have been injured. Close to a million innocent
civilians have been forced to flee across borders,
and even more have been internally displaced inside
Ukraine. They are in need of help and assistance without
delay, hindrance or pre-conditions. We would like to
take this opportunity to commend Ukraine’s neighbours
and express our deepest respect, appreciation and
admiration for the generous assistance and protection
that they have shown to all fleeing the conflict — men,
women and children from all corners of the world. We
once again echo the words of a protester who wrote
on her sign, “If Russia stops fighting, there will be no
more war. If Ukrainians stop fighting, there will be no
more Ukraine”.
24/25

02/03/2022

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): We thank the President
for convening this historic emergency special session
of the General Assembly, which was called because
once again the Security Council failed to fulfil its
primary responsibility. It was convened because a
permanent member of that very organ, entrusted by the
entire membership with preserving peace and security,
committed an unjustified, illegal and illegitimate act
of aggression against a founding member of the United
Nations, and because of the use of its veto power by
the member of the Council that is itself perpetrating
the aggression.
We are compelled to reiterate that Russia’s ongoing
military offensive against Ukraine is in blatant violation
of the fundamental rules of international law and the
principles on which our Organization was founded.
Those rules and principles aim to prevent wars and
protect humankind from disastrous consequences.
Unfortunately, owing to Russia’s attacks, we are
witnessing those consequences in and around Ukraine.
The international community cannot be a mere spectator
to such an act of aggression, and I am proud that as of
today, it is not.
In its adoption today of resolution ES-11/1,
the General Assembly has emphasized loudly and
clearly that it stands against egregious violations of
the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political unity of fellow Member States. The
membership is committed to preserving the letter and
spirit of the fundamental constitutional document of
our Organization, the Charter of the United Nations.
By adopting this resolution, the most democratic
institution of the multilateral system has denounced
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine in the strongest
possible terms. We commend the Member States that
contributed to the collective endeavour that culminated
in today’s outcome. They stood firm in upholding full
respect for the Charter and preserving the rules-based
international order. We hope and trust that the calls and
demands in this historic resolution will not fall on deaf
ears. The Assembly must follow through on its decision.
We once again call on Russia to listen to the demands
of the global community and heed its own people’s
pleas to stop its military operations, withdraw all of
its forces from Ukraine, reverse its decision regarding
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine, as well
as its annexation of Crimea, and return to diplomacy
and dialogue without delay. We also reiterate our call
for an immediate humanitarian pause. The peoples of
22-27523

02/03/2022

the world are holding their breath, waiting and hoping
to see a halt to the march towards the precipice. It
is not too late to return to the negotiating table and
engage seriously. As a neighbour and friend of both the
Russian and Ukrainian peoples, Turkey stands ready to
facilitate a peaceful settlement of the conflict.

A/ES-11/PV.5

The President: There are still nine more Member
States wishing to make statements after the adoption.
We have heard the last speaker for this meeting. We
shall hear the remaining speakers at 3 p.m. today in
this Hall.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

22-2752325/25
