A/66/PV.73

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

73

rd plenary meeting
Monday, 5 December 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Körösi
(Hungary), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 27 (continued)
Social development
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
Report of the Third Committee (A/66/454 (Part I))
Follow-up to the International Year of
Volunteers and the commemoration of its
tenth anniversary
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
report of the Third Committee that is before it today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Before we begin to take
action on the recommendation contained in the report
of the Third Committee, I should like to advise
representatives that we are going to proceed to take a
decision in the same manner as was done in the
Committee, unless the Secretariat is notified otherwise
in advance.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report. The draft resolution is

entitled “Tenth anniversary of the International Year of
Volunteers”. The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
66/67).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now convene, in accordance with Assembly
resolution 63/153 of 18 December 2008 and resolution
66/67, which was just adopted, two plenary meetings
devoted to the follow-up to the International Year of
Volunteers and the commemoration of its tenth
anniversary, under sub-item (b) of agenda item 27,
“Social development, including questions relating to
the world social situation and to youth, ageing,
disabled persons and the family”.
Statement by the President
The Acting President: In my capacity as Acting
President, I shall now read out a statement by His
Excellency the President of the General Assembly:
“Today we celebrate the tenth anniversary
of the International Year of Volunteers. We come
together to pay tribute to the millions of
volunteers around the world — men and women
who show that every citizen makes a difference
and that volunteerism matters. Volunteerism
matters in reaching United Nations targets, such
as the Millennium Development Goals,
humanitarian response, poverty reduction and
sustainability. Volunteerism involves overcoming

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-62097 (E)

*1162097*

A/66/PV.73

social exclusion and discrimination, strengthens
values based on collaboration and partnership,
and helps to build a better world.
“Today the global community faces a
myriad of challenges — from environmental
disasters, conflicts, humanitarian emergencies
and the financial crisis, to political transitions.
All of these have the power to destabilize
communities and undermine the hard-earned
gains of the past decade. We must therefore
realize that common challenges require common
responses for our common future.
“Rising to these challenges demands
solidarity, creativity, engagement and partnership
from all segments of our society. With the world
population now at 7 billion, it is important to
leverage resources in ever better and more
effective ways. Volunteering is the people-centred
approach to peace, humanitarian response and
sustainable development. It strengthens trust,
solidarity and reciprocity among citizens. It
empowers change from the grass-roots level up,
especially when enabled by strong partnerships at
every level.
“The United Nations Volunteers programme,
established 40 years ago, deploys about 8,000
volunteers every year. Through United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, peacekeeping
and special political missions, United Nations
Volunteers contribute to the global agenda of the
United Nations and support national development
efforts.
“The contribution of volunteers has not,
however, been sufficiently recognized to date,
and we must change that. Let us join together to
support volunteer action as a vast and powerful
resource
of
social
engagement
and
transformation.
“Commemorating the tenth anniversary of
the International Year of Volunteers provides us
with the opportunity to reinvigorate the spirit of
volunteerism through collaborative action among
Governments, the United Nations system, civil
society and the private sector, in order to share
ideas,
expertise
and
experiences.
By
acknowledging the value of volunteerism to
societies, we can facilitate volunteering at the

2

local, national, regional and global levels through
the development of more conducive policies.
“In this respect, I look forward to the launch
of the first State of the World’s Volunteerism
Report and to its suggestions on how to take
volunteerism forward and move it into a new era.
Together, let us commit to promoting and
supporting volunteerism as an important factor to
the achievement of international peace and
development.
“In closing, I would like to thank our
unsung heroes — all volunteers worldwide — for
contributing their time, talent, knowledge, and
energy to the promotion of a better world. We
salute their tireless efforts and honour them
today.”
I now give the floor to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I am delighted
to join participants at this morning’s event and to pay
tribute to one of our most valued assets — United
Nations Volunteers. Allow me to read a message on
behalf of the Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, who is
currently travelling but sends his best wishes:
“Beginning with the words ‘We the
peoples’, the United Nations Charter reminds us
that crafting solutions to global challenges is a
job not only for Governments but for people,
communities and civil society.
“On International Volunteer Day, we
recognize the dedication of Volunteers, their
admirable spirit of service and their wide-ranging
efforts to promote the goals of the United
Nations.
“With the world population having
surpassed 7 billion this year, we must tap every
person’s potential to help others. Everyone can
make a difference; volunteering matters.
“All over the globe, millions of volunteers
are helping to advance sustainable development
and peace. That engagement takes many forms:
volunteering organizations, individuals working
on their own in their communities, and service
with us and our partners as United Nations
Volunteers.

11-62097

A/66/PV.73

“This year’s first-ever State of the World’s
Volunteerism Report showcases the impact that
volunteers have made. I congratulate the United
Nations Volunteers programme and commend the
many millions of volunteers working in connection
with
sustainable
development,
humanitarian
assistance, environmental preservation and progress
towards the Millennium Development Goals. With
passion and commitment, they are helping to
show how volunteering can change the world.
“As we mark International Volunteer Day, I
encourage policymakers to do even more to
support and welcome volunteerism, and I urge
everyone to consider what they can do to join the
movement.”
The Acting President: I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for her statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of African States.
Mr. Sefue (United Republic of Tanzania): I am
grateful to the President for the opportunity to speak on
behalf of the African Group at this event marking the
tenth anniversary of the International Year of
Volunteers.
When, in November 1997, the General Assembly
proclaimed 2001 the International Year of Volunteers
(resolution 52/17), it did so based on the universal
realization of the important role that voluntary service
played in addressing a wide array of global challenges,
including those relating to social, economic, cultural,
developmental, humanitarian and peace. That is why
the resolution was sponsored by 123 countries,
including many in Africa. It provided a valuable
framework and favourable environment for the growth
and strategic use of volunteer contributions. It led to
the greater recognition of, promotion and facilitation of
volunteer work, and provided space and motivation for
networking and sharing best practices in volunteerism.
Those were the original objectives, and we are pleased
that considerable progress has been made in all of
them.
The African Group notes with appreciation the
first State of the World’s Volunteerism Report by the
United Nations Volunteers (UNV) programme, which
will be launched later today. We hope that the Report
will further enhance the goals of recognizing,

11-62097

facilitating, networking and promoting volunteerism
worldwide. We also believe that it will increase
recognition of UNV’s critical role as an organization
that determines core values and sets standards in
volunteerism, in the United Nations system and
globally.
Volunteerism is woven into the fabric of African
philosophy and culture. As the final declaration of the
Southern Africa Conference on Volunteer Action for
Development in Johannesburg, issued on 19 October,
stated:
“Volunteering is universal, inclusive and
embraces free will, solidarity, dignity and trust …
strong traditions of volunteering are an
expression of Ubuntu, the African philosophy and
way of life, which connects individuals and
communities through reciprocity and provides a
powerful basis for unity, common humanity,
peace and development.”
As Africans, therefore, we associate ourselves
fully with, and encourage, the renewed spirit of
volunteerism, and want to gratefully pay tribute to all
the volunteers who have worked and continue to work
hard in all corners of our continent in many sectors,
including those of education, health, water,
entrepreneurship and business development, famine
relief,
post-conflict
reconstruction,
sustainable
development, sport, natural disasters and other
emergencies, and many others.
On this day, we especially remember and pay
tribute to the 8,000 United Nations Volunteers working
in peacekeeping missions, as well as agencies and
partners across the world. They and others are helping
African and other developing countries in their national
efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
We pay tribute to all the volunteers who have lost their
lives or been injured while serving others in Africa and
elsewhere.
The African Group appreciates and commends the
work of United Nations Volunteers in supporting
Member States and other stakeholders in coordinating
the planning of the tenth anniversary of the
International Year of Volunteers, including by
co-hosting regional consultations and global volunteer
conferences. Going forward, we wish UNV continued
success in its important work. We hope that it will rise
to emerging challenges, not only as an agency for
volunteer recruitment and management but also one

3

A/66/PV.73

that sets standards in furthering volunteerism, supports
and promotes national volunteer efforts, provides the
framework for sharing best practices and increasingly
harnesses the power of technological advances in doing
so. It is also important that volunteerism remains
driven by nothing other than the ideals of service and
human solidarity.
In conclusion, on behalf of the African Group, I
would like to once again convey our appreciation to all
the volunteers who are currently working in different
communities across the continent. We believe that their
work not only helps to improve, and in some cases
even transform, the situation of the communities and
people they aid but also that, as volunteers, they are
themselves being transformed by the experience. All
that contributes to global mutual understanding, respect
and empathy and, ultimately to peace and development.
Nelson Mandela has said that “a different world cannot
be built by indifferent people”. By definition,
volunteers are not indifferent to the pain and needs of
others. Working with us and driven by their ideals of
service and solidarity, a different world is possible.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands, who will speak on
behalf of the Group of Western European and Other
States.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Western European and
Other States.
Today we commemorate the tenth anniversary of
the International Year of Volunteers, an excellent
occasion for honouring the work of all those who
voluntarily dedicate their time and efforts to making
the world a better place. We strongly believe that it is
important to promote greater participation and
involvement on the part of citizens in today’s world.
This is a win-win situation for all: it is rewarding for
the volunteers and for those who benefit from
volunteer work.
Volunteers care about society. They spend their
free time working without being paid and demonstrate
solidarity every day. Hundreds of millions of people
are active as volunteers worldwide. They work in
schools, hospitals and sports clubs, protect the
environment, provide social services, help people in
other countries — and therefore make a difference to
our lives. Volunteering builds social capital and
promotes social cohesion, and therefore contributes to

4

the very idea of the United Nations. We, the peoples of
the United Nations, promote universal human values
and build a better future for all.
I would like to thank United Nations Volunteers
and its Executive Coordinator, Flavia Pansieri, for
making the tenth anniversary of the International Year
of Volunteers a success. Every year, more than 7,700
United Nations Volunteers work in 130 countries
worldwide, with 80 per cent coming from developing
countries and more than 30 per cent volunteering
within their own countries. United Nations Volunteers
support a large number of peacekeeping and
humanitarian projects and comprise one third of all
international civilians working in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. That is a huge achievement,
and we would like to express our sincere recognition
and gratitude to all United Nations Volunteers for their
work, often in difficult conditions and circumstances.
Today we look back on 10 years of advancing the
agenda of voluntarism. When, 10 years ago, the
international community first decided to celebrate an
International Year of Volunteers, it focused on four key
aspects for action, namely, recognition, facilitation,
networking and promotion. We believe that the
International Year of Volunteers has been a success
story in all four of those aspects. The momentum it has
created has convinced more people to engage in
volunteer work and has promoted the idea of
volunteerism worldwide. Since the declaration of the
International Year of Volunteers, more than
70 countries have adopted or introduced new laws or
policies on volunteerism, and a large number of
countries have developed or expanded their national
volunteer services.
In addition to the United Nations International
Year of Volunteers, other countries and regional groups
have raised awareness of the idea of volunteer work.
As an example, I would like to mention that 2011 is
also the European Year of Volunteering. We also look
forward to welcoming the official partnering of the
Voluntary Service Overseas of the United Kingdom
with the United States Peace Corps when they sign a
memorandum of understanding this afternoon.
Facilitating volunteerism aims to ensure that the
maximum number of people from the broadest range of
backgrounds have access to volunteer opportunities. To
give one example, due to ageing demographics,
especially in developed countries, the contribution of

11-62097

A/66/PV.73

the elderly through volunteerism is growing every day.
That is a great opportunity that can be supported by
tailor-made volunteer programmes.

remarkable contributions to the economic and social
development of all of our societies. Volunteers, as
invaluable partners, stand at the heart of our efforts.

This commemorative event and the side events
that will take place today serve as powerful
illustrations of successful networking among
volunteers and national and international volunteer
organizations. Those efforts should be continued to
strengthen networking opportunities among volunteer
organizations and among the volunteers themselves. In
that regard, we very much welcome the first State of
the World’s Volunteerism Report, which will be
presented later today. It is an important contribution in
our discussion on how volunteerism can be taken
forward and how we can enhance the impact of
volunteerism worldwide. We look forward to the
presentation of the Report and to the side events on the
occasion of the tenth anniversary of the International
Year of Volunteers.

Today our need for volunteers is greater than
ever. To continue making meaningful contributions in
today’s world, including towards the Millennium
Development Goals, we must help volunteers to help
us by further recognizing and fostering the efforts of
volunteers at all levels — local, regional, national and
global — and by all partners, including Government,
civil society and the business sector.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. Korček (Slovakia): On behalf of the Group
of Eastern European States, it is a distinct honour for
me to join in today’s worldwide celebration of the
spirit of volunteerism as we observe the International
Volunteer Day for Economic and Social Development
and commemorate the tenth anniversary of the
International Year of Volunteers.
On this occasion, we welcome the first State of
the World’s Volunteerism Report, which is being
launched today. We trust that this first focused and
systematic study will further enhance awareness of the
important role played by volunteers in all areas of
social and economic development.
We are grateful for the support that the United
Nations Volunteers (UNV) programme makes as the
focal point for the tenth anniversary of the
International Year, including by co-hosting regional
consultations and conferences such as the one held in
Budapest in September together with the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Volunteering is one of the clearest expressions of
solidarity in action. Each contribution, no matter how
small, makes a huge difference. The impressive growth
in the number of volunteers of all ages and cultures
over the past decade illustrates the significance of their

11-62097

Today, let us pay special tribute to the millions of
volunteers who selflessly and with enthusiasm dedicate
their time and skills to advancing human development,
social and economic growth and sustainable peace.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States.
Mr. Alcántara Mejía (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): The phenomenon of volunteering is
not old in Latin America and the Caribbean, but it has
become a powerful movement. In most of our
countries, volunteerism began to manifest itself in two
ways: first, through certain leaders of civil society who
tackled social work aimed at sectors they had identified
where States were ineffective or had even neglected to
take them into account. For example, in my country,
the Dominican Republic, that was the case with the
Association for Rehabilitation, which has provided
dignity to the lives of thousands of disabled people and
helped us to be declared free of polio. The second
manifestation of volunteerism in our region has been
the way in which we have dealt with humanitarian
assistance in natural disasters. Not too long ago, for
example, the huge disaster created by the January 2010
earthquake in Haiti led to a generous aid movement
composed mostly of volunteer organizations.
In every country of the region that I represent
here at the tenth anniversary of the International Year
of Volunteers, there are hundreds of groups doing
volunteer work on behalf of their fellow citizens. It is
also important to point out that, early in 2009, the
Latin American University Volunteer Network was
established, under the auspices of the United Nations
Development Programme’s Regional Bureau for Latin
America and the Caribbean, the Spanish Agency for
International Development Cooperation and the United

5

A/66/PV.73

Nations Volunteers programme itself. The Network has
fostered a dramatic change in both the perception of
volunteer work in our region and the social role played
by universities and youth.
It is worth pointing out here in the Hall the role
played by volunteerism in the world, including the
impact it is having on the lives of the less fortunate.
We must acknowledge that volunteering appeals to the
better angels of our nature. It also serves to
significantly augment the contributions made by social
capital to enable change in our societies.
In a continent such as ours, characterized by
poverty, inequality and States whose institutions are
still fragile, the social debt continues to be enormous
and there is still a lack of resources to meet it before
we are swallowed up by despair. Viewed through that
perspective, it is clear that ours is a region suitable for
volunteer work. We are a continent in which the work
of volunteers, along with a socially responsible State,
can make a great difference. That is why we wish to
recognize the delegations of Brazil and Japan for their
excellent work during the negotiations in the Third
Committee on resolution 66/67, entitled “Tenth
anniversary of the International Year of Volunteers”.
Over the years, the International Volunteer Day
has mobilized the focus, energy and the strategies of
many countries towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals and has led to excellent
opportunities for individuals, communities and
organizations to contribute to development at local,
national and international levels. International
Volunteer Day highlights the service capacity of human
beings and in that way combines forces aimed at
tackling major problems such as poverty reduction,
sustainable development, climate change, health,
disaster prevention and social integration and
management.
Volunteering and civil society awareness should
be integrated into the education system. The Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States recognizes that it
is through education that we can build an altruistic
impulse and noble and selfless attitude — values that
we must pursue as an investment in the future of our
communities and of our peoples.
For the people of Latin America and the
Caribbean, what excites us about volunteering is that it
is not motivated by monetary interest; those who
practise it do not seek material gain, or medals or

6

awards. What excites us about volunteering is that it is
driven by the powerful impetus provided by
enthusiasm and by a moral commitment capable of
moving mountains. What excites us about volunteering
in Latin America and the Caribbean is its ability to
produce responsible citizens.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan, who will speak on behalf of
the Asia-Pacific Group of States.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): On behalf of the AsiaPacific Group, I am honoured and pleased to address
the General Assembly on the commemoration of the
tenth anniversary of the International Year of
Volunteers. We greatly appreciate the participation
today of Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro,
as well as that of Ms. Helen Clark, Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, and
Ms. Flavia Pansieri, Executive Coordinator of United
Nations Volunteers.
Brazil and Japan submitted a draft resolution to
the Third Committee at this session, entitled “Tenth
anniversary of the International Year of Volunteers”
(resolution 66/67), which emphasized the importance
of volunteerism and encouraged further volunteering.
The resolution was adopted by consensus both in the
Third Committee and, today, in the General Assembly
with the support of 97 sponsors. We expect today’s
meeting to follow up on the progress made since the
launch of the International Year in 2001 and to further
the promotion of volunteerism.
The aim of the International Year of Volunteers,
proposed by Japan in 2001, was for Governments, the
United Nations system and civil society to collaborate
and identify ways of enhancing the recognition,
facilitation, networking and promotion of volunteer
activities. Ten years have passed since the first
International Year of Volunteers. Volunteerism has
certainly grown and developed among us. We reaffirm
that many volunteers have played a very active role in
areas such as poverty reduction, health, sustainable
development and disaster prevention and recovery
around the world.
The resolution adopted by the General Assembly
today commends the contributions from national and
international volunteers for their role in disaster
prevention and recovery in many parts of the world,
such as the mass landslides and floods in south-eastern

11-62097

A/66/PV.73

Brazil and the devastating earthquake that struck
eastern Japan.
In the Asia-Pacific region, volunteerism is
recognized as one of the most important pursuits of
society. Governments have made efforts to encourage
volunteering and to support every person’s access to
volunteer activities. The private sector promotes those
goals by providing employees with opportunities for
volunteering.
We welcome the work of United Nations
Volunteers (UNV), which has engaged in the
promotion of volunteering, in collaboration with
Member States, and served as the focal point for the
International Year in 2001 and during the tenth
anniversary. In that regard, we appreciate UNV’s
efforts in co-hosting regional consultations and the
global volunteer conferences for the tenth anniversary
this year. We expect that UNV will contribute to the
further promotion of volunteering. At the same time,
we welcome the launch here today by UNV of the first
State of the World’s Volunteerism Report.
Volunteerism is an important activity in
strengthening people-to-people relations. Participation
in volunteer activities and the generous spirit inherent
to volunteerism can create solidarity within society.
Such activities should be promoted by the international
community within a framework of social integration. It
is also important to create a supportive environment for
volunteers and to enhance their security and protection.
Finally, we would like at this meeting to stress
the importance of discussion in the coming decade and
beyond. In that regard, it is crucial to exchange views
on ways in which volunteers can contribute towards
peace and development, especially in the fields of
peacebuilding
and
disaster
prevention
and
management. Moreover, we should discuss promoting
youth engagement in volunteering and leadership in
such areas. We expect such discussions to be included
among the recommendations of a report to be
submitted by the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly at its sixty-seventh session.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, who
will speak on behalf of the host country.
Mr. Meek (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking all volunteers worldwide for their
service. In particular, United Nations Volunteers

11-62097

(UNV) deserves our gratitude and recognition as one of
the few international organizations that sends
volunteers to work in some of the most dangerous
situations in the world.
Today, as host country, the United States pays
special tribute to those United Nations Volunteers who
have lost their lives while helping others. They have
touched many lives and made them better.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my Government’s gratitude to American
volunteers, who exemplify the quintessential American
idea that, when we work together, we can change
things, make things better and solve problems. Today,
Americans are volunteering in great numbers, as we
always have throughout the history of our nation. In
2010, more than 62 million American adults
volunteered, donating more than 8 billion hours to
serve those in need. I thank them for their hard work.
Today, the United States is not only the largest
provider of development assistance dollars, but also the
largest donor of voluntary development services
through both citizen organizations and governmental
agencies. We are proud to say that in September we
celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of the United States
Peace Corps, which has sent more then 200,000
Americans to 139 countries. Peace Corps volunteers
have provided a wide range of development services
and have forged lasting bonds with people in those
countries.
The United States is grateful to all volunteers,
now and in the past, who have given their time and
energy to improve the world. We are a far better world
community today because of their selfless service.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 66/67, of 5 December 2011, I now give the
floor to the Executive Coordinator of the United
Nations Volunteers programme, Ms. Flavia Pansieri.
Ms. Pansieri (United Nations Volunteers): At this
very moment, as I have the honour of addressing the
General Assembly and welcoming the volunteers in
attendance today at this meeting commemorating the
tenth anniversary of the International Year of
Volunteers, somewhere around the world a person with
a disability is working on a computer to remotely assist
a non-governmental organization (NGO) in a
developing country to improve the content and
presentation of its website; a young woman is carefully

7

A/66/PV.73

sifting through, cleaning, cataloguing and compiling
photos and other mementos carried away in the mud
during the tsunami in Japan last March, to give them
back to people who have lost everything but who can
in that way maintain their memories; and a young man
from Brazil is contributing to improving educational
achievement in El Salvador, in a real example of
South-South cooperation, to promote the attainment of
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Over the
past few weeks, countless individuals have facilitated
citizen participation in their countries’ elections by
promoting civic education and the conduct of free and
fair elections in various countries, some of which have
only recently emerged from conflict.
Those individuals are all volunteers. They all
engage, in their different areas of competence, in
peace, humanitarian and development activities, often
far away from their countries of origin and, at times,
even in contexts of personal hardship and danger. Why
do they do that? It is because they believe in human
solidarity, personal commitment and the necessity to do
all they can to make a positive difference in the world
we live in.
Do we ever stop to consider how a world without
volunteers would look? It would certainly be much
poorer — because volunteers contribute with their
activities to a country’s gross domestic product, even if
their contributions do not generally show up in national
accounts. Yet their economic contribution is by no
means the main one that volunteers make. Volunteers
contribute to peace and social cohesion and to
participation and social inclusion. More generally, they
contribute to the well-being of a society by proving
with their actions that there are other values driving
human beings than simple self-interest — a desire to
contribute to the common good, a commitment to
fairness and justice and the recognition that their
engagement is not a condescending act of charity but,
rather, the expression of a relation of reciprocity, where
both parties at the same time are recipients and
providers of shared benefits.
It is only fair, therefore, to recognize those
contributions to peace, development and global wellbeing, as this important commemorative meeting is
now doing. It is equally important to commit continued
support to people who, through their volunteering, light
up our world with their commitment to those values,
which are in fact values intrinsically enshrined in the
Preamble to the United Nations Charter.

8

The year 2011, during which we marked the tenth
anniversary of the International Year of Volunteers, has
been an important opportunity to underline and
disseminate the values and results of volunteer work
throughout the world. Allow me therefore very briefly
to spend a few minutes, first, on the aim and objectives
of the year; secondly, on the process followed to
achieve broad-based participation; and, thirdly, on the
way forward as we move towards what should become
a decade of volunteerism during which this vital
expression of humanity becomes an integral and wellrecognized element of all forms of economic, social
and environmental activity.
The primary goal of the tenth anniversary
activities has been to shift the debate on volunteerism
from it being perceived as a marginal factor to being
recognized as a mainstream asset empowering all
people to play a part in achieving the MDGs and
promoting peace. As we planned our work in the
United Nations Volunteers programme (UNV) in
support of the tenth anniversary, our first consideration
was to look at what we had learned since the
International Year in 2001. As has been mentioned, the
celebrations were then structured around the four
pillars of recognition, facilitation, networking and
promotion. Considerable progress has been recorded in
all those fields since 2001; in fact, they have been
reported and reflected in a number of General
Assembly resolutions.
Yet a lot remains to be done. In particular, while
there is an acknowledgement of the importance of
volunteerism as a form of citizen engagement, its
impact on peace and development as an intentional
component of nationally owned capacity development
programmes has still to be fully recognized. As a
result, volunteer engagement becomes at times a
welcome add-on to peace and development
programmes, but an add-on nonetheless. Activities
during the year have therefore been geared largely
towards building the strong partnerships that we need,
spanning beyond volunteers organizations, by bringing
in key peace and development partners.
Let me now say a few words about the process
that we follow. Acting as the focal point for the year, as
UNV was mandated to do by resolution 63/153, UNV
proceeded to consult and meet with the broadest
possible range of partners from Governments, United
Nations agencies, NGOs, including volunteer
organizations, the private sector, academia and others.

11-62097

A/66/PV.73

We convened a first stakeholder consultation in
October 2009, and a follow-up meeting in October
2010. In preparation for this year, we shared
experiences and arrived at a common vision, drawing
up a joint action plan and agreeing on task distribution.
The vision statement and call to action developed in
those consultations are available in the Hall today.
We also recognized that the more that the tenth
anniversary was recognized and celebrated at the
national level, the greater and longer term its impact
would be. For that reason, and to support our partners,
we established about 40 United Nations Volunteers
positions to help coordinate the celebrations. We would
like to thank our donors, who made that possible. But
the most important source of inspiration for action
remains learning from one another. That is why we
organized a series of consultations of both global and
regional character.
This year also marks the first European Year of
Volunteers. It is for that reason that, with the support of
the European Commission, we held a consultation in
Bonn where European volunteer organizations and
volunteer organizations from the South came together
in a beautiful exchange that was not just North-South
but also South-North.
Then we held five regional consultations — for
Latin America and the Caribbean, in Ecuador; for the
Arab States, transition countries in Europe and Central
Asia, in Turkey; for Asia and the Pacific, in the
Philippines; and finally, for both French- and Englishspeaking Africa, in Senegal. I can personally attest to
the extremely engaged participation of all
representatives
of
Governments,
voluntary
organizations, non-governmental organizations and so
forth in all those meetings.
At the end of each consultation, we were eager to
have concrete results. We came up with a series of
recommendations on how to successfully promote
volunteerism, which in turn were brought to the Global
Volunteering Conference, which UNV organized in
partnership with the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies. The theme was
“Volunteering for a sustainable future”. It looked at
ways to mainstream volunteerism in peace,
humanitarian and development programmes.
This year, like every year, the United Nations
Department of Public Information organized its annual
global conference of non-governmental organizations.

11-62097

This year, the conference was hosted by Germany in
Bonn under the theme “Sustainable societies;
responsive citizens”. That dual theme allowed us to
connect the dots between citizen participation and
sustainable development — an agenda in which we are
all heavily engaged in the lead-up to the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, to be
held in Rio de Janeiro in 2012.
These activities were geared towards positioning
volunteerism as an invaluable asset that can be used to
accelerate progress towards the achievement of the
MDGs and the goals beyond them. Recommendations
that have been issued after all the consultations are also
available outside this Hall in the orange folders.
But we also felt that, in addition to the
consultations, it would have been important — indeed,
essential — to stop and consider what we had learned
so far and what we still need to work on for the future.
That is why UNV engaged in the preparation of the
first-ever State of the World’s Volunteerism Report,
about which the Assembly will hear more in a few
minutes, so I will not dwell on it.
We also have organized a multimedia exhibition
in the lobby of the Secretariat building, entitled
“Volunteers of the World”. I hope that participants here
today will find the time this evening to come and see
the faces and hear the voices of volunteers from all
walks of life, telling about the difference they make in
people’s lives and the difference that volunteering
makes in their own lives.
Now let me say a few words about the way
forward. The year 2011 is already drawing to a close.
There is much to celebrate this year in terms of
achievements by the volunteer community, but we
know that the hardest part still lies ahead. The
guidance that the Assembly has provided through
various resolutions, including the newly adopted
resolution 66/67, now needs to be put into practice.
The priorities are clear. We need to document what
volunteers do and the results they produce; we need to
do it better and more convincingly. We need to find
new ways to measure the impact volunteering makes,
not solely in monetary terms, but in terms of social
cohesion and human values as well. We also need to be
much more intentional in sharing that information with
others so that we all can build on successful ideas and
practices.

9

A/66/PV.73

More importantly, and as also highlighted only
last week at the International Forum on Aid
Effectiveness in Busan, Republic of Korea, truly
lasting development results can be achieved only
through broad-based partnerships, not just between
traditional development actors, but including all those
who have a stake in progress and development. That
primarily involves the people for whom development is
intended and by whom development can be achieved.
This year has shown us how much we can achieve
together; how indispensable it is to encourage and
support individuals to become actors in their own
development; and ultimately, how much our individual
destinies are all interlinked and dependent on the
engagement of each one of us.
Please allow me also to note that this year is also
UNV’s fortieth birthday. We can see no better way to
celebrate this milestone for UNV than to see
volunteerism recognized as a real, sustainable and
effective
force
for
development.
Ultimately,
recognizing volunteerism — and the values of free
will, engagement and solidarity that inspire it — will
be the best confirmation for us that our efforts over
these 40 years have borne fruit.
The Acting President: The Assembly has heard
the last speaker for this meeting in accordance with
resolution 66/67 of 5 December 2011.
We will now proceed to the launch of the first
State of the World’s Volunteerism Report. In accordance
with resolution 66/67 of 5 December 2011, I now give
the floor to the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, Ms. Helen Clark.
Ms. Clark (United Nations Development
Programme): I thank the President of the General
Assembly for enabling us to launch the 2011 State of
the World’s Volunteerism Report here at the Assembly.
Published by United Nations Volunteers (UNV), an
associated programme of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the Assembly will
find that the Report is a comprehensive overview of
volunteerism’s
many
forms,
revealing
that
volunteerism is universal in nature. The Report’s
messages are relevant for Member States and for all
who seek to overcome global challenges, empower
people to live better lives and achieve sustainable
human development.
In the International Year of Volunteers in 2001,
the General Assembly called on Governments to

10

recognize the potential of volunteerism to contribute to
achieving sustainable development. It is timely to be
reminded of that call now as we now prepare for the
United
Nations
Conference
on
Sustainable
Development at Rio de Janeiro next year and as we
approach the 2015 target date for achieving the
Millennium Development Goals and seek to sustain the
progress made towards them.
This new Report from United Nations Volunteers
asserts that the strong links between volunteerism and
peace and human development are still not adequately
recognized. Volunteerism, it says, is “one of the
missing components of a development paradigm that
still has economic growth at its core”. Conversely, we
can say that the pursuit of human development and
indeed of overall well-being will be enhanced by the
contribution of volunteerism.
Its expression may vary from country to country
or between one language and another, but the values
that drive it are universal. Volunteers share the desire
and motivation to contribute to the common good out
of free will and in a spirit of solidarity, without
expectation of material reward. The power that
potential volunteers have to make a difference is
remarkable.
As the new Report states, “[v]olunteerism in
developed countries is the subject of extensive
research, discussion and writing” and “is increasingly a
part of the discourse on the kind of societies that we
seek”. Yet the Report suggests that the same
phenomenon in many developing countries has yet to
be factored into strategic thinking about development
and that doing so has the potential to enhance
development.
The Report exposes a number of misperceptions
about volunteerism, revealing that much of it takes
place through small local groups and associations, and
not through formal, structured, non-governmental
organizations. It also reveals that volunteering happens
across a wide range of sectors, not only in the narrow
civil society sector. It involves rich and poor alike and
harnesses the energy of the skilled and the unskilled.
The Report reveals that men and women volunteer for
around the same number of hours; that young people
do volunteer — they are engaged; and that
volunteering is now done online as well as face to face.
The Report provides many examples of
volunteerism, and they are, without exception,

11-62097

A/66/PV.73

inspiring. Consider, for example, that since 1998,
20 million mostly local volunteers have been recruited
under the Global Polio Eradication Initiative, and that
together they have helped to immunize more than
2.5 billion children worldwide against polio; that
volunteers from the Japanese Red Cross played an
indispensable role in the aftermath of the terrible
earthquake and tsunami earlier this year; that United
Nations Volunteers make up a significant proportion of
the staff of United Nations peacekeeping missions,
representing as many as one third of the international
civilian staff in the missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and elsewhere.
Fifty thousand women volunteers in Nepal have
helped improve maternal health by 40 per cent over the
past 17 years. I met representatives of these lady health
volunteer workers there in the past two weeks, and
know how much they do to improve the life of the
mother and the prospects of the child. Then there is the
initiative of a group of young people in Chile building
houses for families living in slums. That has spread to
19 countries and led to a programme that mobilizes
more than 50,000 young people every year to volunteer
for that purpose.
At Johns Hopkins University, it is estimated that
bringing together all the people who volunteered
through voluntary organizations between 1995 and
2000, in only 36 countries, would total a number
equivalent to that of the world’s ninth most populated
country, and that figure includes only those who chose
to volunteer through organizations. The full scope of
volunteerism is much larger and quite impossible to
gauge at this point.
The motivation of volunteers everywhere is to do
good. People act on their values and beliefs, and on
their sense of community and solidarity. The
universality of volunteering is an expression of our
shared values and our common humanity. Leaders of
countries and societies can and should choose to
validate those contributions by recognizing them more
visibly and more often, and by facilitating them.
As we strive now to accelerate progress to reach
the Millennium Development Goals, the contributions
of volunteers must be factored into the strategies, plans
and debates that will influence and shape development
priorities. Volunteerism should become an integral part
of the way we do development. Where citizens are
engaged and working to overcome their own

11-62097

challenges, development and peace will be more
enduring. The people closest to the problems are most
likely to provide the solutions. People living with
challenges best understand the specific circumstances
surrounding them and can readily help identify ways to
overcome them. By engaging and mobilizing
individual citizens and civic groups, development
efforts can be made more responsive and have greater
impact.
For that to happen, Governments and local
leaders should open up more space for volunteerism
and establish channels that enable and encourage
people to contribute. UNV and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) are supporting
countries’ efforts to do that around the world. UNV
itself has helped more than 20 countries to develop
laws that promote volunteerism and uphold the rights
of volunteers.
Volunteerism can help turn national strategies and
development policies into meaningful and long-term
change in communities and in the lives of people.
Employing new and old technologies can help. In
Rwanda, for example, the Government has
significantly reduced maternal deaths in rural districts
by equipping volunteers working with expectant
mothers with mobile phones, enabling them to
communicate with health-care professionals and seek
assistance when it is needed. Rwanda is now
considering extending this successful concept to
agriculture and education.
The Internet is also increasingly being used to
recruit new volunteers and match people with projects
and organizations that need their support. Engineers
Without Borders in Cameroon, for example, has
brought together online volunteers to help explain
complex techniques in user-friendly language
accessible to local farmers.
Volunteerism, of course, should not and cannot
replace the State’s responsibility for seeing to it that
reliable services are delivered, that investment is made
in human development, and that responsive and
accountable governance systems are established. These
are also basic requirements for sustainable
development. But volunteerism’s impact can be
complementary; it can make development efforts more
effective, empower citizens, build their capabilities and
strengthen social trust and cohesion. The Report
comments on the impact that volunteering has on

11

A/66/PV.73

individual well-being. By enhancing fulfilment, selfworth and dignity, it empowers people to use their
knowledge and apply their talents.
The role of volunteerism in strengthening social
cohesion cannot be overstated, as it can help troubled
communities find a way back from the brink. One of
many possible examples we have seen of this is in the
Papua New Guinea highlands, where the women came
together from across warring villages to learn from one
another and work to improve local health and
agricultural practices. By building trust between them
and the sense of a common cause, they were then able
to convince the men who were fighting that the women
wanted peace, and thus helped to stop fighting between
villages. This is one of countless known examples of
the contributions of women to peace processes.
This tenth anniversary of the International Year of
Volunteers is a very good opportunity to be thinking
about the contributions volunteers make to all our
communities and the potential they have to do so much
more for development. We need to understand better
and acknowledge more the contributions made by
volunteers, and facilitate their efforts. We in UNDP and
our associated programme, United Nations Volunteers,
look forward to working together with Member States
in these endeavours. With these few words I am
pleased to launch the 2011 State of the World’s
Volunteerism Report.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 66/67 of 5 December 2011, I now give the
floor to the chief author of the State of the World’s
Volunteerism Report, Mr. Robert Leigh.
Mr. Leigh: It was a little over a year and half ago
that I was invited by the United Nations Volunteers
(UNV) programme to be the senior writer on the first
State of the World’s Volunteerism Report. It has been a
truly gargantuan effort to produce a document that
captures, in barely 90 pages, the extraordinary
phenomenon of voluntarism that makes such a vital
contribution to virtually all areas of work of the United
Nations, and that is found in almost every corner of the
world. I would like to begin, if I may, by underlining
that the Report would not have been possible without
the generosity of large numbers of contributors from
every region and every walk of life, many of whom
volunteered their time in the cause.
So why do we need the Report, and why now? As
we heard this morning on behalf of the President of the

12

General Assembly in his opening remarks, and just
now from the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the significance of
volunteerism has not yet been fully understood and
articulated in the development debate, particularly in
the context of the Millennium Development Goals.
That is the case despite the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly at the end of the International Year
of Volunteers, in 2001, and in subsequent years, which
encourage Governments, the United Nations system
and other stakeholders to move forward with the
volunteerism agenda.
That is not to deny that considerable progress has
been made in many countries in the North and the
South, but an enormous effort is still needed to realize
the full potential of the many, many millions of people
who every day volunteer to address key issues in the
field of peace and development. The Report highlights
the following general consideration set forth in General
Assembly resolution 56/38 of 2001:
“Neglecting to factor volunteering into the design
and implementation of policies could entail the
risk of overlooking a valuable asset and
undermine traditions of cooperation that bind
communities together” (resolution 56/38, annex,
para. 6).
So why now? On the one hand, at no point in
history have we seen such massive social upheavals
affecting most of the planet. On the other, never has the
potential been greater for people to be primary actors
rather than passive bystanders in their communities, as
well as nationally and globally. Increasingly, people are
able to affect the course of events that shape their
destiny. Volunteerism is a primary way in which people
get involved. There is an urgent need to recognize,
nurture and promote it as a way to engender a global
community living in harmony and characterized by
justice, peace and well-being.
Before delving into the Report, I would like to
underline two basic points. First, the Report focuses on
connecting volunteerism with the peace and
development work of the United Nations system. There
are other aspects of volunteerism that the Report does
not cover in any depth, or at all. It was felt, however,
that the Report should be an integral part of the process
started back in 1997, when the General Assembly
proclaimed the International Year of Volunteers to
promote awareness about the contribution of

11-62097

A/66/PV.73

volunteerism to economic and social development
(resolution 52/17).
Secondly, while there are plenty of illustrative
anecdotal stories — we have heard a few from the
Administrator of UNDP this morning — the Report is
based on robust empirical evidence. It draws on all of
the research material available, with a high level of
direct involvement of researchers and academics. That
has been a real challenge since, as the Report stresses,
volunteerism often goes unrecognized and therefore is
under-researched, especially in the developing world.
However, with the judicious use of proxy terms —
such as community action, self-help initiatives, local
mutual aid groups, social activism and so on — we
believe that we have been able to capture the essence
of the nature and power of volunteerism in its diverse
forms.
Turning now to some of the significant features
of the Report, we start by underlining that volunteerism
is a very old tradition. It is a basic expression of human
relationships that are deeply rooted in long-standing
beliefs and community practices in every region. It is
about people’s desire to participate in their societies
and to feel that they matter to others. It is about
motivation that goes beyond self-interest. In Africa, it
is harambee and ubuntu; in Latin America it is minga
and mutirão; in Asia it is shramadana, gotong royong
and bayanihan; in the Arab region it is tatawa’a and
naffir; in the United States it is neighbouring and barnraising; and in the United Kingdom, it is active
citizenship. The act of volunteering is well-known
throughout the world, even if the word as such is not.
While ancient in origin, with its central values of
solidarity and feelings of connectedness with others,
the message that we want to convey in the Report is
that volunteerism in its many forms is as vibrant and as
contemporary as ever.
The Report begins by examining the values that
underpin volunteerism. We look at the various ways
volunteerism is manifested, and we address the often
challenging task of measurement. We also examine
some of the new opportunities to volunteer that have
emerged in recent times.
Technological developments are opening up
spaces for people to volunteer that have no parallel in
history. People can relate to one another globally and
more rapidly than ever before. The interest of the
private sector in supporting volunteerism in the

11-62097

workforce is a growing feature of corporate social
responsibility. We are seeing the diversification of
forms of international volunteering associated with
expanded opportunities for travel, combined with more
leisure time for some, as well as the growth of
volunteering by diaspora communities.
Four core chapters of the Report focus on how
volunteerism contributes to areas of key concern to the
United Nations. We first look at the ways people
engage in volunteerism to achieve sustainable
livelihoods. We then consider how volunteerism serves
as a pathway to inclusion for those members of the
population that feel excluded on the grounds of, for
example, age, gender and disability. We go on to
consider how, through volunteer action, people
exposed to disasters are able to manage the risks
associated with such events, not only at the response
stage but also in the preparation, preparedness and
recovery stages. Finally, we look at the diverse ways in
which local populations engage in volunteerism to
prevent and recover from violent conflict.
What is clear from the studies quoted and the
examples provided is that local people make a vital
contribution through volunteer action in each of those
fields, and that the common threads running through
such actions are such values as solidarity and
cooperation. What also comes through clearly is the
reciprocal nature of the volunteer act, with both the
giver and receiver benefiting, as Flavia Pansieri
pointed out in her statement this morning. This flies in
the face of the oft-encountered stereotypical view of
volunteerism as being only a gift from those who are
better off to those who are worse off.
The Report argues for a move away from treating
volunteerism as a charitable act based purely on
altruism and towards a position that accepts a mix of
motivations. Those include a desire to participate, to
contribute to meeting the needs of others or a cause
and to derive some benefit oneself in the process.
Making that conceptual leap from a gift relationship to
a reciprocal relationship is the first step in gaining a
true understanding of the dynamics of volunteer action,
and therefore being able to develop meaningful and
supportive strategies.
The Report also offers a word of warning.
Volunteerism is not a panacea. It should not absolve
Governments and other actors of their responsibilities.
Moreover, supporting volunteer action is not free of

13

A/66/PV.73

cost. Budgets are needed to provide infrastructure,
which may include research, training, transportation,
efforts to build management capacity and the
introduction of legal and fiscal provisions. While
sympathetic to the notion that too much intervention
can destroy the very motivations that drive people to
volunteer, the Report does not subscribe to the purist
view that Governments should adopt a hands-off
approach. Governments and other stakeholders have
important roles to play in ensuring an environment
conducive for volunteerism to flourish.
As the Report was evolving, it became clear that
there were important spin-offs from volunteerism that
were not captured by focusing only on traditional
development categories. We were seeing studies
pointing to volunteerism’s significant impact on the
well-being of individuals and their communities.
Interest in well-being as a part of the development
equation is not new. There is a quote in the Report of
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld back in 1975
that refers to development being a value-loaded,
cultural process that encompasses well-being.
But there does now appear to be real interest and
intent in many developed and developing countries
about quality-of-life issues. That is relevant in the
context of poverty. The Report stresses that the
income-poor are not defined by their poverty alone.
They strive to achieve well-being, in the sense of
“feeling good and doing well both physically and
emotionally” for themselves and for their communities.
Evidence is growing that income-poor people
have notions of well-being that are as vivid and valid
as those living in better economic circumstances.
Bhutan showed leadership in its adoption some time
ago of gross national happiness as a fundamental goal.
Bolivia and Ecuador have placed at the centre of their
constitutions the notion of “buen vivir” or “living
well”, in the sense of harmonious coexistence among
their populations and with the environment. China,
Thailand, Canada, the United Kingdom and other
countries are experimenting with well-being and
happiness indexes. Well-being is central to the
Organization
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development global project on measuring the progress
of societies.
Underlying these and other initiatives is the sense
that gross domestic product alone fails to capture many
factors that contribute to human well-being and

14

societal progress. That is the message of the influential
2009 Stiglitz Commission on the Measurement of
Economic Performance and Social Progress quoted in
the Report. It argues that what we measure shapes what
we collectively strive to pursue, and that what we
collectively strive to pursue determines what we
measure.
Where does volunteerism come in? In the Report,
we discuss one ground-breaking multi-stakeholder
study aimed at improving understanding of well-being
in Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Peru and Thailand. Some of
the key areas identified by people as impacting on their
well-being were the scope to participate and to take
effective actions, make positive social connections, and
have a sense of self-worth. In Bangladesh, being
benevolent and altruistic led to well-being. In Ethiopia,
it was giving advice and resolving disputes. In Peru
and Thailand, it was about helping one another.
We demonstrate in the Report the ways in which
volunteerism is one important channel for people to
interact, to engage and to feel the sense of belonging
that is at the core of well-being. It is not only at the
level of the individual that volunteer action impacts on
well-being. We report that communities with high
levels of volunteerism are better able to build up
collective resilience to withstand the shocks and
stresses to which the income-poor are particularly
exposed.
In our conclusions, we state that while
recognition of volunteerism has been growing in recent
times, especially since the International Year of
Volunteers in 2001, the phenomenon is still
misconstrued and undervalued. Misperceptions about
the nature and contribution of volunteerism abound,
despite contradictory evidence from empirical studies
cited in the Report. We describe aspects of the
paradigm shift that is needed if the true role of
volunteerism is to be properly appreciated.
Elements of what the Report refers to as a
“dominant paradigm” include, for example, the notion
that most volunteering takes place through formal
non-governmental organizations, usually in the
developed world. In fact, people also engage in
volunteerism through public and private-sector
organizations, as well as informally through local
groups. They also volunteer spontaneously outside any
formal or informal structure. Volunteerism, as I

11-62097

A/66/PV.73

mentioned, thrives in the developing world, even if the
terminologies may not be familiar everywhere.
Another misperception highlighted in the Report
is that volunteerism is the preserve of the well-off and
educated. Yet research points clearly to the fact that
people at all levels volunteer. Indeed, volunteer action
is a vital resource in poor communities. Women are
often perceived as making up the bulk of volunteers,
yet empirical studies point to there being a fairly
balanced female/male participation in volunteerism,
although with some pronounced gender bias as regards
the different areas in which women and men volunteer.
Yet another misperception raised in the Report
relates to the view that young people are increasingly
disaffected from volunteering and are turning to more
materialistic and self-centred activities. In fact, there is
ample evidence that young people the world over are
today very much engaged, but they are increasingly
choosing less formal channels to volunteer, often
related to new technologies.
The State of the World’s Volunteerism Report
aims to dispel those and other misperceptions and to
raise levels of awareness as to what volunteerism is
and what it contributes. That is critical, we argue, to
bringing volunteer action to the fore as a powerful and
universal renewable asset that needs urgently to be
incorporated into current mainstream policies and
programmes for peace, and into the emerging
development architecture that takes well-being into
account. The Report complements the extensive list of
recommendations included in successive General
Assembly resolutions since 2001 with respect to the
actions that Governments, the United Nations system
and other stakeholders can take to enhance the
environment within which volunteerism can flourish.
In its concluding chapter, the Report argues for
urgent and focused action to bring volunteerism into
the mainstream. The end of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDG) cycle is approaching and
considerable effort is needed to sustain progress where
it is being achieved, and to overcome obstacles where
they have been identified. Support for volunteerism
can help get the MDGs on track. We also reflect on
discussions taking place in various forums as regards
options for the development architecture in the
post-2015 period, building on what has been achieved
so far.

11-62097

The Report is optimistic that volunteerism will
assume a higher profile as societal cohesion and
quality of life issues come closer to centre stage. The
concluding words of the Report are that the moment
has come to ensure that volunteerism is an integral part
of any new development consensus. We very much
hope that with the publication of the Report, one of our
planet’s most universal assets, the generosity of its
people, will be properly recognized and drawn upon to
help meet the challenges.
I would like to end by recognizing the vision and
the courage of UNV’s Executive Coordinator, Flavia
Pansieri, in taking up the challenge of commissioning
the Report in the first place. I would also like to extend
my appreciation to UNV for having provided me the
opportunity to lead the writing process, and to the
entire Report team and many UNV and other
colleagues, including many volunteers, whose hard
work and dedication ensured that the Report came
together in the way it has, and on time.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 66/67 of 5 December 2011, I now give the
floor to the United Nations Volunteer in Timor-Leste.
Ms. Fujita: First of all, I would like to express
my sincere appreciation to everyone who gave me this
great opportunity to speak before the General
Assembly for the tenth anniversary of the International
Year of Volunteers. My name is Shoko Fujita and I
work as a United Nations Volunteer (UNV) Child
Protection Officer with UNICEF Timor-Leste.
About six months ago, I left Japan for TimorLeste. Since then, every moment has brought me new
surprises and discoveries, particularly when I have
travelled to districts and met with children there. At the
same time, I have continued asking myself what I can
do to make a difference to children’s lives in TimorLeste. Working as a Volunteer has given me the chance
to learn and grow every day.
Before coming to Timor-Leste, I worked with the
Japan Committee for UNICEF for almost five years.
Every time I read and heard about the story of children
who were victimized by sexual abuse and exploitation
in developing countries, it gave me a sense of urgency
to do something to protect them from such violence.
Thus, I decided to pursue the opportunity to make use
of my knowledge and to work much closer to children
on the ground.

15

A/66/PV.73

I joined UNV as part of the Hiroshima
Peacebuilders Center Program for Human Resource
Development in Asia for Peacebuilding, which is
commissioned by the Japanese Ministry for Foreign
Affairs to develop the human resources of civilian
peacebuilders. There are 15 Japanese participants and
15 of other nationalities. Most of them are now
actively working with different United Nations
agencies in different countries. They have high
aspirations and a strong will to work as volunteers, and
having such colleagues is highly motivating and
encouraging to me.
In Timor-Leste, the Government has a strong
commitment to protecting and promoting children’s
rights at the national and district levels. For example,
in every district there is a Vulnerable Persons Unit,
under the National Police of Timor-Leste, to
investigate specific cases involving child and female
victims. In addition, with the support of UNICEF, the
Ministry of Social Solidarity has placed Child
Protection Officers in each district.
Despite such efforts, many children in TimorLeste are still vulnerable to violence, abuse,
exploitation and neglect. As a UNV Child Protection
Officer, I work first of all on reclassifying crimes based
on the penal code and the development of common
database tools to register cases involving children. That
is to promote better coordination among child
protection actors, including police and Child Protection
Officers, by establishing a case-tracking system.
Secondly, to address the issue of violence against
children, particularly sexual abuse, I have started
preparing a nationwide advocacy campaign for next
year. Sexually abused children often have difficulty
talking about what has happened to them, due to its
sensitive nature. I expect that the advocacy campaign
to stop violence against children will not only raise
awareness in communities but also promote awareness
among children themselves in order to encourage child
victims to report incidents to the police or childprotection actors and to let them know that they have
the right to access social and legal services.
In conducting activities, I have learned that the
most important thing is partnership with people and
communities, which is really at the heart of
volunteerism. One good example, which clearly
illustrates the importance of community participation,
was an event celebrating the World Day of Prayer and

16

Action for Children held on 20 November. The World
Day of Prayer and Action for Children is a global
initiative to mobilize religious communities to work
together for the welfare of children. The event included
a mass celebrated by the Bishop of the Diocese of Dili
to deliver the message that violence against children
must stop.
Many children in Timor-Leste experience violent
disciplining at home, such as being beaten and slapped.
We want to change those practices, and involving the
Bishop of Dili and faith-based organizations has had a
great impact, causing social and behavioural changes
in communities. Also, through the friendly
participation of the National Commission for the
Rights of the Child and international and local
non-governmental organizations, the event successfully
brought together the President of Timor-Leste and
500 children and young people.
I was really impressed by the ability of the
Timorese people to make things happen, and it made
me realize that what I can do as a Volunteer is to
facilitate people’s participation in promoting the wellbeing of children in Timor-Leste. I am one of more
than 200 Volunteers currently serving in Timor-Leste,
addressing various development challenges through
community-based activities. The spirit of volunteerism
has suddenly spilled out into the communities of
Timor-Leste.
Now at the halfway point of my assignment as a
United Nations Volunteer, at the beginning of next year
I am going to implement a pilot campaign in the
Viqueque district to raise awareness about violence
against children. I am looking forward to visiting and
working with people in the communities.
Finally, I would like to express yet again my
gratitude to the United Nations Volunteers programme,
UNICEF, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Japan and
the people and communities of Timor-Leste.
The Acting President: In accordance with
General Assembly resolution 66/67 of 5 December
2011, I now give the floor to Mr. Flavio Ribeiro,
United Nations Volunteer in El Salvador.
Mr. Ribeiro: First of all, I would like to say that I
am very pleased and glad to be here. My name is
Flavio Lopes Ribeiro, and I am coordinating the
Brazilian team of United Nations Volunteers in
El Salvador. We are implementing a disaster risk

11-62097

A/66/PV.73

reduction and food security programme in a high-risk
area, which will benefit three communities and directly
help to improve the lives of more than 1,000 families.
Together with the local Government and schools, we
are involving the whole community and local
non-governmental organizations in the production of
knowledge products, schools, community gardens and
climate change adaptations through volunteer actions.

opposite, and here I am in the General Assembly of the
United Nations. Here I am working to relieve human
suffering, in close contact with people who are
deprived of food, who suffer violence, prejudice and
poverty. But when we are connected by spiritual and
human values, a true adventure begins and the joy of
being ourselves and using our ability to help other
people always leads us to amazing experiences.

The importance of our work became really
evident one month after we arrived in El Salvador,
when we watched tropical storm 12E devastate the
country. At that time, President Mauricio Funes
Cartagena had declared a state of emergency. Instead of
just waiting for that chaotic moment to end, we
decided to offer ourselves as volunteers to the Civil
Protection Committee, as we have some expertise in
disaster risk reduction and food security. We were
accepted by the local emergency team and started to
work with them.

That is what volunteers do. We donate our energy
and personal abilities as a small gift to the world, and
what we receive back is beyond words. Unfortunately,
I cannot describe the joy that fills my soul and
motivates me even more to work in the relief of human
suffering, but I can assure everyone that it is part of
human nature, and everyone here knows what I am
talking about, since all who are here today are
volunteers on some level in their own lives.

Though we had other commitments elsewhere, we
took the time to work as volunteers and help in
whatever way was needed. We were a team of four
volunteers. Our education expert worked on organizing
the transformation of schools into temporary shelters.
Our nutritionist worked making basic baskets for the
sheltered families. Our disaster risk reduction specialist
climbed the local volcano to analyse the risks of a
landslide. I worked on the assessment of losses and
damages in rural areas and helped the Committee with
its final report to the Government. Our volunteer work
was recognized in a public event last week, and we
received a certificate of gratitude from the mayor of
San Vicente, where we live.
But why do we do that? What are our motivations
to be volunteers and work in high-risk areas? I cannot
answer that question on behalf of all volunteers in the
world, but I am pretty sure that some of them will
recognize themselves in my words.
First of all, I have a deep commitment with
myself to always follow my vocation and express my
personal abilities, based on human values. That
commitment keeps me from doing anything just for
money, power or physical assets. What I do for a living
must always be in line with what I am. Many people
thought I was crazy and that I was going to be poor and
unsuccessful in my life, but it turned out to be the

11-62097

Another reason to work as a volunteer is because
I have an expansive concept of the home and family. In
the same way as I work at home fixing and cleaning to
make it a better place for me and my family to live
without expecting money or any recognition in return, I
work in the world. That is because I think of the whole
world as my own home and all human beings as my
family.
Even though I recognize the cultural and physical
differences among us, I know that, deep inside, we
have much more in common than those shallow and
external differences. As human beings, we are able to
make personal connections and forge bonds of love
with all other human beings. It may be easier to make
that personal connection with some and more difficult
with others, but is not a family like that? We
sometimes disagree because we want the same things
or opposite things, but is that not how we learn to share
with and respect our brothers?
In short, I am a volunteer because I want a better
world, and I know that we can only achieve it together.
A better world for me is not a mansion with fancy cars
in the garage, but a world free of poverty, hunger and
violence. I will keep working hard, with my brothers
and sisters, until I reach that objective. I hope that
inspiring people all around the world can help us to
work together for a common good.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

17
