VJ.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1. Commends the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in Chile for his report, prepared in accordance with Commission on Human Rights resolution 9
(XXXVII);
2. Reiterates its grave concern at the persistence and.
in some respects, the deterioration of the human rights situation in Chile, as stated by the Special Rapporteur, and
particularly:
(a) The disruption of the traditional democratic legal
order and its institutions by the maintenance and expansion
of emergency legislation and the promulgation of a constitution that fails to reflect a freely expressed popular will and
clearly hampers the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of the Chilean people and allows interference with such
rights and freedoms;
(b) The intensification of practices such as arbitrary
detention and confinement in secret places, often accompanied by torture and inhuman or degrading treatment
which, on occasion, result in unexplained deaths;
(c) The persecution, intimidation and imprisonment, as
well as the banishment and forced exile, of a number of
persons who participate in trade union, academic and cultural and humanitarian activities;

3. Reiterates also its great concern at the fact that the
remedies of habeas corpus or amparo prove to be not effective owing to the fact that the judiciary in Chile does not
fully exercise its powers in this respect and performs its
functions with utmost restrictions;
4. · Urges the Chilean authorities to respect and promote
human rights in accordance with their obligations under
various international instruments and, in particular, to take
the following concrete steps that could enable the Commission on Human Rights to consider terminating the mandate of the Special Rapporteur:
(a)

To put an end to the state of emergency. under

which continued human rights violations occur, and to restore the democratic institutions and constitutional guarantees formerly enjoyed by the Chilean people:
(b) To put an end to arbitrary detentions. physical or
psychological intimidation and prosecution of persons who
exercise their right to freedom of expression and opinion.
including the right to petition;
(c) To respect the human rights of persons detained for
political reasons and to separate them from those detained
for criminal offences;
(d) To take effective measures to prevent torture and
other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment resulting, inter alia, in unexplained deaths and to prosecute
and punish those responsible for such practices;
(e) To investigate and clarify the fate of persons who
have disappeared for political reasons. to inform the relatives of those persons of the outcome of the investigation
and to prosecute and punish those responsible for such
disappearances;
(j) To restore fully trade union rights, especially the
freedom to form trade unions which can operate freely without governmental control and can exercise fully the right
to strike;
(g) To guarantee the freedom of assembly and association, and the freedom of Chilean citizens freely to enter
and leave the country, and to end the practice of banishment
applied to nationals, a practice which amounts to forced
exile from the country;
5. Urges once more the Chilean authonttes to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur and to comply with
their obligations under various international human rights
instruments;

189

6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
thirty-eighth session to study thoroughly the report of the
Special Rapporteur;
7. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to extend
the mandate of the Special Rapporteur for another year and
requests the Commission to report on the human rights situation in Chile, through the Economic and Social Council,
to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
JO I st plenary meetinK
16 December /98/

36/158.

Situation of refugees in the Sudan

The General Assembly,
Reca//inK its resolution 35/ I 81 of 15 December 1980 on
the situation of refugees in the Sudan,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/5 of 4 May 1981.
HavinK heard the statement delivered by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees before the Third
Committee on 16 November 1981, iw
TakinK note of the ever-increasing number of refugees
arriving in the Sudan,
AppreciatinK the measures which the Government of the
Sudan, a least developed country. is taking in order to provide shelter, food and other services to the growing number
of refugees in the Sudan,
RecoKnizing the heavy burden placed on the Government
of the Sudan in caring for the growing number of refugees
and the need for adequate international assistance to continue its efforts to render assistance to the refugees,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General 140
containing the findings of the sectoral follow-up missions
which have so far been completed;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation with
the relevant agencies, to arrange for the completion of the
remaining technical follow-up missions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the donor Government,
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations, the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for their valuable assistance
rendered to refugees in the Sudan;
4. Appeals to all Member States, international organizations and voluntary agencies to render the maximum possible financial, material and technical assistance to the
Government of the Sudan in its efforts to provide all necessary service to the refugees;
5 _ Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation with
the High Commissioner. to submit a comprehensive report
to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1982 as well as to the General Assembly at its thirtyseventh session on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
/0/st plenary meeting
/6 December /98/

36/159.

Social aspects of the development activities of
the United Nations

The General Assemblr,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
l ')81 /24 of 6 May 1981 on the social aspects of the dcvelnpment activities of the United Nations,
1
''' O/licwl R1'cord.1 ofth,, (;,•naal Assem/Jlr, Thirtr-sixth S,·.uion. Third
Commiiiee, 50th rneetin1'!, para., 2-20
'"' A:1hi216 and Add.I.

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

190

Mindful of the fact that the recommendations contained
in the report of the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Social
Aspects of the Development Activities of the United Nations141 will be further discussed at the first regular session
of the Economic and Social Council in 1982, in accordance
with Council decisions 1981/175 and 1981/176 of 23 July
1981, in which the Secretary-General was requested to prepare and submit comments on the feasibility, programme
and co-ordination implications, as well as the resource implications, of the main recommendations submitted by the
Ad Hoe Working Group,
1. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in the light
of its above-mentioned decisions, to give at its first regular
session in 1982 due consideration to the implementation of
the recommendations contained in the report of the Ad Hoe
Working Group on the Social Aspects of the Development
Activities of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, under the agenda
item entitled ''Report of the Economic and Social Council''.
a report on the implementation of the relevant decisions of
the Economic and Social Council pertaining to the recommendations contained in the above-mentioned report.
JO I st plenary meeting
16 December /98/

36/160.

Measures to improve the situation and ensure
the human rights and dignity of all migrant
workers 142
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the permanent validity of the principles and

standards embodied in the basic instruments regarding the
international protection of human rights, in particular in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 143 the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 144 the International Covenants on Human
Rights 145 and the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, 146
Taking into account the principles and standards established within the framework of the International Labour
Organisation and the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, and the importance of the task
carried out in connection with migrant workers and their
families in other specialized agencies and in various organs
of the United Nations,
Reiterating that, in spite of the existence of a body of
principles and standards already established, there is need
to make further efforts to improve the situation and ensure
the human rights and dignity of all migrant workers and
their families,
Recalling its resolution 34/ 172 of 17 December 1979, in
which it decided to create a working group open to all
Member States to elaborate an international convention on
the protection of the rights of all migrant workers and their
families,
Recalling also its resolution 35/ 198 of 15 December 1980,
in which it renewed the mandate of the Working Group on
the Drafting of an International Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Their Families
and requested it to continue its work,

Having examined the progress made by the Working
Group during its intersessional meeting held from 11 to 22
May 1981 and the contributions of various Governments, 147
Having also examined the report of the Working Group 148
during the current session of the General Assembly,
I. Takes note of the report of the Working Group on
the Drafting of an International Convention on the Protection
of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Their Families
and expresses its satisfaction with the substantial progress
that the Working Group has so far made in the accomplishment of its mandate;
2. Decides that, in order to enable the Working Group
to complete its task as soon as possible, the Working Group
shall hold again an intersessional meeting of two weeks'
duration in New York, in May I 982, immediately after the
first regular session of the Economic and Social Council;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to transmit to Governments the report of the Working Group so as to allow the
members of the Working Group to continue their task during
the intersessional meeting to be held in May 1982, as well
as to transmit the results obtained in that meeting in order
that the General Assembly may consider them during its
thirty-seventh session:
4. Also invites the Secretary-General to transmit the
above-mentioned documents to the competent organs of the
United Nations and to international organizations concerned, for their information, so as to enable them to continue their co-operation with the Working Group;
5. Decides that the Working Group shall meet during
the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly to continue and, if possible. to complete the elaboration of an
international convention on the protection of the rights of
all migrant workers and their families.
JO 1st plenary meeting
16 December /981

Assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/91 of 5 December 1980 and

36/161.

Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/54 of 24 July
1980,
Having heard the statements of the representative of the
Secretary-General and of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. 149
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia, 150 prepared pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/8 of
28 April 1980,
Taking note also of the appeal of the Secretary-General
in his note verbale of 11 November 1980,
Deeply concerned that the appeals of the Secretary-General. the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly have yet to meet adequate response,
l. Endorses once again the appeals of the SecretaryGeneral and the Economic and Social Council concerning
assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia;
2. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to continue his efforts to mobilize humanitarian

141

E/1981/3.
See also sect. X.B.4, decision 36/434.
143
Resolution 217 A (Ill).
144
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
145
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
146
Resolution 34/ I 80, annex.
142

14

See A/36/378 and A/J6/38."\.
See A/C.3136110.
14
" See Official Records of the General Assemb/_Y. Thirty-sixth Session,
Third Committee, 50th meeting.
"" A/35/360 and Con.I-."\.
'

148
