216

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

household work with paid employment and social
activities,
A ware that child-bearing should not be the cause of inequality and discrimination against women, and that childrearing demands shared responsibilities among women,
men and society as a whole,
Deeply appreciating the increasing participation of
women in political, economic, social and cultural life and
their contribution thereto,
I. Appeals to all Governments, international organizations and non-governmental organizations to recognize in
their activities the importance of all interrelated aspects of
the role of women in society - as mothers, as participants
in economic development and as participants in public
life - without underestimating any one of them;
2. Encourages such social and economic development
that would secure the participation of women in all
spheres of work, equal pay for work of equal value and
equal opportunities for education and professional and
vocational training, taking into consideration the necessity
of combining all aspects of the role of women in society;
3. Appeals to Governments, international organizations and non-governmental organizations to promote the
creation of conditions that would enable women to participate as equal partners with men in public and political life,
in the decision-making process at all levels and in the
management of different spheres of life in society;
4. Appeals to Governments to recognize the special
status and social importance of motherhood and to take,
in the context of their special abilities and conditions, all
necessary measures to promote the protection of motherhood, including maternity leave with pay, and to provide
security for their jobs as long as necessary, so as to allow
women, if they so wish, to fulfil their role as mothers without prejudice to their professional and public activities;
5. Also appeals to Governments to promote the establishment of appropriate facilities for child-care and education of children as a means of combining motherhood with
economic, political, social, cultural and other activities of
women and thus to provide assistance to women in integrating fully into their societies;
6. Recommends to the World Conference to Review
and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, to
be held at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985, that it take
duly into account, in reviewing and appraising the
achievements of the Decade and in formulating future policies in this field, all aspects of the role of women in
society.
JO I st plenary meeting
I 4 December 1984

39/124.

Participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 37/63 of 3 December 1982, by
which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Participation
of Women in Promoting International Peace and Cooperation,
Recalling its resolution 38/ l 05 of 16 December 1983, in
which it requested the Commission on the Status of
Women to consider what measures might be necessary in
order to implement the Declaration,
Believing that further efforts are required to eliminate
discrimination against women in all its forms and in every
field of human endeavour,

Wishing to encourage the active participation of women
m promoting international peace and security and cooperation,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/ 16 of 24 May 1984, in which the Council took into
account the fact that millions of women were still experiencing untold sufferings and violations of human dignity
resulting from different forms and manifestations of colonialism, foreign domination, apartheid and racial
discrimination,
Conscious of the need to implement the provisions of
the Declaration,
I. Pledges its determination to encourage the full participation of women in the economic, social, cultural, civil
and political affairs of society and in the endeavour to promote international peace and co-operation;
2. Invites all Governments to take the necessary measures to ensure wide publicity for the Declaration on the
Participation of Women in Promoting International Peace
and Co-operation and the implementation thereof;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
adequate steps to ensure that publicity is given to the
Declaration;
4. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, the International Labour
Organisation, the World Health Organization and other
appropriate bodies within the United Nations system to
consider adequate measures to implement the Declaration;
5. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women,
as the preparatory body for the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, to consider measures which may be necessary to
implement the Declaration in the context of forward-looking strategies for the advancement of women for the period
up to the year 2000;
6. Decides to consider the further implementation of
the Declaration at its fortieth session, in the light of the
report of the World Conference to be held at Nairobi from
15 to 26 July 1985, under the item entitled "United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace".
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/125.

Arrangements for the future management of
the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/133 of 16 December 1976,
containing the criteria and arrangements for the management of the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women,
Recalling also its resolution 36/129 of 14 December
1981, in which it decided that the Fund should continue
its activities beyond the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Stressing the urgency of determining at its current session the most effective arrangements for continuing the
activities of the Fund beyond the Decade in view of the
need for ensuring the long-term stability of the Fund,
Recalling further its resolution 38/106 of 16 December
1983, in which, inter alia, it decided that, when considering the reports of the Secretary-General on the future of
the Fund, all possible options would be reviewed in depth,

VI.

Reaffirming that the Fund has a unique contribution to
make to the achievement of the goals of the Third United
Nations Development Decade, and even beyond it.
Recognizing the important actual and potential contribution by women to development, as evidenced in the forward-looking assessment of the activities assisted by the
Fund and the crucial role of the Fund as a specialized
resource base for development co-operation, and the need
for continued assistance to activities directly benefiting
women,
Considering, accordingly, that it is of paramount importance to establish a future organizational framework that
will secure the ability of the Fund to act as a catalytic agent
on the main United Nations development co-operation
system,
Considering also the innovative and experimental activities of the Fund directed to strengthening both governmental and non-governmental institutional capacities to
ensure access for women to development co-operation
resources and their full participation at all levels in the
development process,
Stressing that general questions of development and
access of women to development resources have, as a
common objective, to create conditions which will
improve the quality of life for all.
Welcoming the completion of the forward-looking
assessment of the activities assisted by the Fund and the
findings and conclusions with regard to women and development and their implications for technical co-operation
agencies and organizations, 145
Conscious of the highly specialized professional competence of the Fund in the area of development activities for
women and the need for strengthening that competence,
Aware of the broad range of linkages of the Fund with
national Governments, national women's groups, nongovernmental organizations and women's research institutes, besides its close co-operation with United Nations
development
agencies.
including
the
regional
commissions,
Taking into consideration the moderate size of the Fund
and its continued need to draw on the operational capacity
of other agencies and, in this regard, expressing its appreciation to the United Nations Development Programme for
its continuing technical and resource assistance to the
Fund,
Expressing appreciation to the Department of International Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat and
its Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian
Affairs for their contribution to the work of the Fund
during its initial operational years,
Taking note of the reports of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade
for Women on its fifteenth and sixteenth sessions, referred
to in the report of the Secretary-General 146 prepared in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 38/106,
Taking note also of the reports of the Secretary-General
on the Fund, 147
I. Decides that the activities of the Voluntary Fund for
the United Nations Decade for Women shall be continued
through establishment of a separate and identifiable entity
in autonomous association with the United Nations
Development Programme, which will play an innovative
and catalytic role in relation to the United Nations overall
system of development co-operation;
14.1 See A/39/569. sect. II.
146 lh1d.. sect. Ill.

217

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Endorses the modalities for the arrangements
between the Fund and the United Nations Development
Programme for the future management of the Fund. as
contained in the annex to the present resolution, and
decides that these arrangements shall enter into force at
the latest on I January 1986;
3. Reaffirms the criteria laid down in its resolution 31 /
13 3 on the use of the resources of the Fund and the guidelines established on the advice of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women, emphasizing the use of these resources fix
technical co-operation benefiting women;
4. Requests the Consultative Committee at its seventeenth session, to be held from 25 to 29 March 1985. to
propose an appropriate future title for the Fund;
5. Stresses the need for close and continuous workmg
relationships between the Fund and the bodies, organs and
organizations of the United Nations system concerned
with women's issues and development co-operation. in
particular with the Department of International Economic
and Social Affairs of the Secretariat and its Centre for
Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the contributions to
the Fund made by Governments and non-governmental
organizations, which have a vital role to play in maintaining and increasing the financial viability of the Fund and
the effectiveness of its work;
7. Notes with concern that contributions to the Fund
have not been sufficient to enable it to respond to all the
deserving requests for technical assistance that it has
received;
8. Urges, accordingly. Governments to continue and,
where possible, to increase their contributions to the Fund,
and calls upon those Governments that have not yet done
so to consider contributing to the Fund;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation
with the Consultative Committee at its seventeenth session, to report to the General Assembly at its fortieth session on the arrangements he has made with the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme for
the future of the Fund;
10. Requests that the Consultative Committee monitor
the process of implementing the arrangements for the
management of the Fund contained in the annex to the
present resolution and that the Committee's views on this
matter be reflected fully in the annual report on the Fund
to the General Assembly, particularly in its initial years.
101st plenary meeting
14 December /984

ANNEX
Arrangements for the management of the United Nations
De•elopment Fund for Women
I The United Nations Development Fund for Women (llNIFEM).
hereinafter referred to as "the Fund". is hereby established as a separate
and identifiable entity in autonomous association with the United Nations
Development Programme. The Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, hereinafter referred to as "the Administrator".
shall be accountable for all aspects of the management and operations of
the Fund. There shall be a Consultative Committee to advise the Administrator on all policy matters relating to the activities of the Fund 111 accordance with paragraph 13 below. The following arrangements for the management of the Fund shall appJ.
147 A 14 146 and Corr I and .\Jd. I. A 39·569 and Add.I and A 39 ) 7 I

General Assembly~ Thirty-ninth Session

218
I.

TRANSFER OF EXISTING RESOURCES, SOLICITATION AND
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLEDGES AND COLLECTION OF
CONTRIBUTIONS

2. The Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women and
its subsidiary Supplementary Trust Fund, which was established by a
memorandum of understanding between the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Administrator on 25 June 1980, are hereby liquidated and their assets transferred to the Fund.
3. Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and other donors may contribute to the Fund.
4. The Fund shall be included among the programmes for which funds
are pledged at the annual United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities. The Administrator shall assist with the mobilization of
financial resources for the Fund. The contributions to the Fund and the
bank accounts into which they are deposited shall be in accordance with
the applicable Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations
Development Programme.
II.

OPERATIONS AND CONTROL

5. All operations of the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade
for Women are hereby transferred to the Fund.
6. The Administrator, in consultation with the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women,
shall appoint a Director of the Fund, hereinafter referred to as "the Director", bearing in mind the relevant qualifications and experience with technical co-operation, including those benefiting women. The Administrator
shall appoint the staff of the Fund in consultation with the Director, pursuant to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations and the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
7. The Administrator shall delegate the management of the Fund and
its administration, including responsibility for the mobilization of
resources, to the Director, who shall have the authority to conduct all
matters related to its mandate and who shall he accountable directly to the
Administrator.
8. The operations of the Fund shall be conducted taking into account
the innovative and catalytic nature of its development co-operation activities for women and its existing criteria and operational procedures. The
present procedures of the Fund, including those governing the identification, formulation, approval, appraisal, execution and evaluation of projects
established in accordance with the requirements set out in the criteria
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 311133 and on the
advice of the Consultative Committee, shall remain in force. Subiect to the
arrangements for the management of the Fund, the regulations, rules and
directives of the Umted Nations Development Programme shall be applied
to the operations of the Fund.
9. The resources of the Fund shall be used mainly within two priont,
areas: first, to serve as a catalyst, with the goal of ensuring the appropriate
involvement of women in mainstream development activities, as often as
possible at the pre-investment stages; secondly, to support innovative and
experimental activities benefiting women in line with national and regional
priorities. Fund resources should be a supplement to and not a substitute
for the mandated responsibilities of other United Nations development cooperation organizations and agennes, including the Umted Nations Devel
opment Programme.
I 0. All the administrative and programme support costs of the Fund
shall be met from its own resource,
11. The regional bureaux, other orgamzational urnts and field office, of
the United Nations Development Programme shall continue to assist the
operations of the Fund, inter alia, by Joint programming missions to ensure
the involvement of women in technical co-operation activities financed b;
the United Nations Development Programme and by supporting the project cycle activities of projects financed by the Fund. For its part, the Fund
shall participate in existing machinenes for co-ordination of technical cooperation at headquarters and field levels.
12. The proposed bienrnal budget for the admirnstrative costs of the
Fund shall be reviewed initially by the Consultative Committee prior to its
submission by the Administrator for approval by the Governing Council of
the United Nations Developmcn1 Programme
14 8 Reporr o( !he World ( , ,nfi-rl'IIU' of the [ ·n11ed Na/ions Dc,·adc /or
Women: f,'a11ality. Devclopmc and /'race. ( ·openhai:en. 14-30 ]11/1· /980

(United Nations pubhcat1on,;. ,., N,, F.80.I\' 1 and corngendum) ,·hap 1.
sect. A

Ill

fHf l'ONSULTAllVE COMMITTEE AND THE RELATIONSHIP
OF THE FUND TO OTHER ORGANIZATIONS

11 The President of the General Assembly shall designate. with due
regard for the financing of the Fund from voluntary contributions and to
equitable geographical distribution, five Member States to serve on the
( ·onsultative Committee for a penod of three years. Each State member of
the Consultative Commmee shall designate a person with relevant expertise and experience in de,·elopment co-operation activities, including those
benefiting women, to serve on the Committee. The Committee shall advise
the Admmistrator on all matters of policy affecting the activities of the
Fund. including the application of the criteria set forth hy the General
.\ssembl; in respect of the use of the Fund.
14. The Fund shall establish and maintain close and continuous workmg relationships with ,nher United Nations organs, m particular the
Department of International Economic and Social Alfairs of the Secretariat
and its Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs, the
regional commissions, the United Nations Children's Fund, the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities and the lnternat1onal Research and
framing Institute for the Advancement of Women, as well as through the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination with the specialized agencies
and other United Nations entitles concerned, in particular the lnternat10nal Fund for Agricultural Development. Co-operation shall also be
established for the sharing of information with the Commission on the Status of Women and other relevant global and regional intergovernmental
hod1es concerned with development and with women. As appropnatc, the
activities of the Fund may be drawn to the attention of the Committee on
the Elimination of Discnmination against Women.
IV.

f{ff'ORTING AND AUDITING

I i. The Director shall prepare substantive and financial progress
reports on the use of th<" Fund for the Administrator to submit to the Consultative Committee.
16. Taking into account the advice of the Consultative Committee, the
Administrator shall submit to the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme an annual report on the operations,
management and budget of the Fund. He shall submit a similar report to
the General Assembly, to be referred to the Second Committee for rnnsiderat1on of its technical co-operation aspects and also to the Third
(·ommittee_

I'. The Commiss10n on the Status of Women shall also be provided
with the annual repo11, referred to in paragraph 16 above.
18. The Administrator shall be responsible for reporting all the financial transactions of the Fund and shall issue annual tinancial statements in
accordance with the hnancial Regulations and Rules of the l lnited
Nations Development Programme.
19. The Fund shall be subject to the internal and external auditing procedures provided for under the financial regulations, rules and directives of
the Untied Nations Dl'velopment Programme.

39/126.

Improvement of the situation of women in
rural areas

l'hc Cicneral Assembly,
Bearing in mind the objectives of the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Recalling its resolution 35/136 of 11 December 1980, in
which it endorsed the Programme of Action for the Second
Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 148
Recalling also its resolution 37 /59 of 3 December 1982
on the improvement of the situation of women in rural
areas,
Reaffirming the importance attached in the Programme
of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women and in the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 149 as well
as in the International Development Strategy for the Third
llnited Nations Development Decade, 150 to the need to
improve the status of women and ensure their full partici149 Resolution 34 I Sil, annc,
1'iO Resolution .15 5r, annex
