VII.

Consciaus of the need to promote progress towards
the ful! implementation of the Declaration with respect
to American Samoa,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achicvcd as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to NonSelf-Governing Territories and reiterating its conviction
that the dispatch of such visiting missions is essential
for securing adequate and first-hand information in
regard to thc conditions prevailing in thosc Tcrritories
and to thc views, wishes and aspirations of the p:::oples tlrerein with respect to their futurc status,
Mindful that American Samoa requires the continued
attention and assistance of the Unitcd Nations in thc
achievement by its people of the objectives cmbodicJ
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
A ware of the special circumstances of thc geographical location and economic condilions of American Samoa, and stressing the necessity of diversifying
its economy as a matter of priority in ordcr to reduce
its dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to American Samoa; 10
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implcmentation of the Dcclaration with respect to American Samoa;
4. Calls upan the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Powcr, in consultation with the freely elected representatives of the peoplc,
to continue to take all the necessary steps to 'ensure
the full and spcedy attainment of the goals set forth
in the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
5. Urges the administering Power to continue its
efforts to ensure that the culture and identity of thc
people of the Territory continue to be retlected in the
Government and administration of the Territory and
preserved to the fullest extent;
6. Urges the administering Power to continue to
foster close relations and co-operation with neighbouring is'.and communities;
7. Calls upan the administering Power to take ali
possible steps to diversify the economy of Amcricc1n
Samoa and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic dcvelopment for the Territory;
8. Welcomcs the positive attitude of thc administering Power with respect to thc receiving of United Nations visiting missions and reques:s the Chairman of
the S?ecial Committee to continuc his consultations
with a view to the dispatch of such a mi,,sion to thc
Territory;
9. Urges thc administcring Power, with the cooperation of the Govcrnment of American Samoa, to
safeguard the inalienable right of the people of thc
Territory to the enjoymcnt of thcir natural resourcc.,
10 !bid.,

163

Resolutions adopted on the reports oí the Fonrth Committee

Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1), vol. III, chap. XXI.

by taking •effcctive measures which guarantee the right
of the peoplc to own and dispose of those natural
resources and to establish and maintain control of
thcir future dcvelopment;
1O. Requests the administering Power to continue
to cnlist the assistancc of the specialized agencies :md
othcr organizations within the United Nations systcm
in accckrating progress in ali sectors of thc national
life in American Samoa;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to scek the best ways and means for the implementation of the Declaration with respect to American Samoa,
including the possibie dispatch of a visiting mission
in consultation with the administering Powcr and in
acco¡dance with the wishes of the peoplc of the Tcrritory, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-third session on the implcmentation of the present
resolutinn.

83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/2.'i.

Question of the Solomon Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Solomon lslands,

Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Speoial Committec on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 11
Having heard the statement of the administering
Powcr, 1~

Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Dcclaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countr,ies and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the Unitcd Nations
relating to thc Territory,
Recalling also its resolution 31 / 46 of 1 December
1976 on the queslion of the Solomon lslands,
Noting with satisfaction that an agreement was
reached at a constitutional conference, held in London
from 6 to 16 September 1977, between the administering Powcr and the Solomon Islands delegation, lcd by
its Chicf Minister, whereby the Territory will achieve
independence in J uly 1978,
Noting w:th satisfaction that the Government of the
United Kingdom of Grcat Britain and Northcrn lreland
will continue to provide as~istancc to the Tcrritory
after indcpendence,
1. Approvc:. the chapter of the report of the Spccial
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on thc Granting of l11dcp-:ndene-:: to Colo:lial Countrics and Peoplcs rclating to
tll•; Solomon Islands;
2. Reafjirms the inalienable right of the people ot
the Solomon lslands to self-determination and independcncc in ,1ccordancc with the Declaration on the Ciranting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and PeopLs;
1 t ¡ bid .. chap. XVI.
12 lbid., Thirty-second Session,

ing, paras. 12-21.

Fourth Committee, 12th meet-

General Assembly-Thh-ty-secon<l Session
~------------~--

164

3. W elcomes the comprehensive way in which thc
Government of the Solomon Islands has approached the
preparation oí a sound political and economic foundation for independence, which is to be achievcd in
July 1978;
4. Requests that further steps be taken towards
diy,ersifying the economy of the Solomon lslands and
that the administering Power continue to enlist the
assistance of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, as well as of
regional bodies, in the devclopment and strengthening
of the economy of the Territory;
5. Requests the Special Committec to keep the
situation in the Solomon Islands under review.
83rd p/enary meeting
28 November 1977

32/26.

Question of the New Hebrides

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the New Hebrides,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,13
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to the Territory, including General
Assembly resolutions 3290 (XXIX) of 13 December
1974, 3433 (XXX) of 8 Deccmber 1975 and 31/51
of 1 December 1976,
W elcoming the participation of France, as an administering Power, in the work of the Special Committee
relating to the Territory,
Noting the joint statemcnt of the administering
Powers issued on 21 July 1977, 11 as well as their joint
statement of 26 March 1977 ,1"
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland relating to developments in the New Hebrides,rn
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to the New Hebrides,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to colonial
Territories and reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of such a mission to the New Hebrides is essential
for securing adequate and first-hand information in
regard to the conditions prevailing in the Territory and
to the views, wishes and aspirations of the peoplc
therein with respect to their future status,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Spccial
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Inde1 3 [bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1), vol. I, chap. IIT, ancl vol. lll, chap. XIII.
14 A/32/172, anncx.
15 A/32/99, annex.
16 Official Records of the General Assernbly, Thirty-second
Session, Fo11rth Comrnittee, 12th meeting, paras. 12-21.

pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to thc New Hebrides; 17
2. Reafjirms thc inalienable right of the people of
the Territory to self-determination and indepcndence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms the territorial integrity ami national
unity of the New Hebrides;
4. W e/comes the joint commitment of the two administering Powcrs to independence for the New
Hebrides and urges them to continue their efforts towards the early independence of the Territory, in full
consultation with the people of the Territory;
5. Requests the administering Powers to take all
appropriate steps to strengthen the economy of the New
Hebrides, to continue taking steps on a priority basis
to unify the administration of the Territory and to
work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development so as to ensure that economic and
social development keeps abreast of political development;
6. Requests the administering Powers to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the Uniited Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of the Territory;
7. Urges the Governments of France and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ircland to
continue to co-operate with the Special Committee and
to consider permitting access by a United Nations visiting mission to the New Hebrides, and to report on this
aspect to the Special Committee when it next considers
the question of the New Hebrides;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to the New Hebrides,
including the possible dispatch of a visiting mission in
consultation with the adminisúering Powers, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/27.

Question of Brunei

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Brunei,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on thc Granting of Independencc to Colonial Countries and Peopks, 18
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
as well as other relevant resolutions and decisions of
~he Un\ted Nations relating to the Tcrritory, including
m particular the consensus on the question adopted
by the General Assembly on 13 Decembcr 1974,1\1
17 /bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.l ), vol. 111, chap. XIII.
18 Jhid., chap. XV.
rn /bid., Twcnty-ninth Sessiun, S11pp/e111ent No. 31 (Al
96:< 1 ), p. 117, item 23.
