125

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

General and of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon;
2. Approves the calendar of conferences and meetings for 1975 as set forth in the report of the SecretaryGeneral;
3. Decides that no conferences or meetings other
than those covered by the calendar of conferences for
1975 shall be convened, except under special or unusual circumstances;
4. Reaffirms for application in 1975, as appropriate, the provisions of paragraphs 9 and 10 of its resolution 2609 (XXIV);
5. Decides that subsidiary bodies of the General
Assembly should not under ordinary circumstances
create new standing bodies or ad hoe sessional or intersessional bodies which require additional resources
without the approval of the Assembly and requests the
other principal organs of the United Nations to take a
similar decision with regard to their respective subsidiary bodies;
6. Endorses the recommendations regarding interpretation services contained in chapter VII, section 4,
of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit, subject to
the related comments of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;

II
I. Decides to establish, on an experimental basis
and subject to review at its thirty-second session, a
Committee on Conferences composed of twenty-two
Member States;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly,
after consultations with the Chairmen of the regional
groups, to designate Member States, on the basis of an
equitable geographical balance, to serve on the Committee for three-year terms;
3. Decides that the terms of reference of the Committee on Conferences shall be:
(a) To submit for the approval of the General
Assembly the pattern of conferences and changes to be
made in that pattern as required, bearing in mind the
provisions of paragraph 12 of resolution 2609 ( XXIV);
( b) t'o propose for adoption by the General Assembly, in accordance with the pattern of conferences, the
annual calendar of conferences;
( c) To act after appropriate consultations on behalf of the General Assembly in dealing between sessions with requested departures from the calendar of
cor1 ferences;
(d) To recommend to the General Assembly means
to ensure the optimum apportionment of conference
resources, facilities and services, in order to maximize
their efficient and effective use and, in this respect, to
consider the feasibility of a quota system to allocate
resources among various fields of activity;
(e) To advise the General Assembly on the current
and future requirements of the Organization for conference services and facilities;
(f) To advise the General Assembly on means to
ensure improved co-ordination of conferences within
the United Nations system, including conference services and facilities, and to conduct appropriate consultations to that end;
4. Requests the Committee on Conferences to take
into account, as appropriate, the report of the Joint

Inspection Unit, as well as the comments of the Secretary-General and of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon, and relevant statements made by Member States in the Fifth
Committee.
2324th plenary meeting
18 December 1974

3352 (XXIX). Employment of women by the secretariats of organizations within the United
Nations system

The General Assembly,
Recalling Article 8 of the Charter of the United
Nations as well as its resolution 2716 (XXV) of
15 December 1970 on the programme of concerted international action for the advancement of women and
the objectives and minimum targets to be achieved
during the Second United Nations Development Decade
set forth in the annex to that resolution, particularly
those concerned with the increase in the number of
women participating in public life at the international
level,
Noting with appreciation that the reports of the
Secretary-General on the composition of the Secretariat submitted to the General Assembly at its twentysixth38 and twenty-eighth 3 ~ sessions included some information on the employment of women in senior and
other Professional positions in the secretariats of organizations within the United Nations system,
Noting also that the report of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research entitled The Situation of Women in the United Nations4° confirms the
imbalance in the proportion of women at the higher
levels and gives statistics showing the unequal progress
of women and men staff members in terms of promotion in the Secretariat,
Concerned that these reports reveal an unsatisfactory
situation which calls for specific measures and programmes in order to achieve an equitable balance between the number of men and women, p3rticularly in
senior and policy-making positions, including those of
Under-Secretary-General and Assistant Secretary-General,
I. Requests the Secretary-General as well as the
executive heads of all organizations within the United
Nations system to take all necessary measures in order
to ensure, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, bearing in mind in particular Article 101,
paragraph 3, of the Charter, that an equitable balance
between men and women staff members, particularly
in the positions described above, be achieved before
the end of the Second United Nations Development
Deca_de at all levels in the United Nations system;
2. Urges the Secretary-General as well as the executive heads of all organizations within the United
Nations system, in order to obtain this objective, to
give increased attention to the recruitment and promotion of women as well as to the assignments given to
them;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General as well
as the executive heads of all organizations within the
United Nations system to report to the General Assem:18 A/8483.

39 A/9120 and Corr.I and 2.
4<.l UNIT AR publication, RR

No. 18 (1973).

126

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session

bly at its thirtieth session on steps that have been taken
to give effect to paragraphs l and 2 above;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue
to include in his reports on the composition of the
Secretariat submitted to the General Assembly comprehensive data on the employment of women in the
secretariats of organizations within the United Nations
system so as to indicate clearly the nature of posts and
types of duties performed by women at frofessional
and policy-making levels and their nationality composition, bearing in mind the principle of equitable geographical distribution;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to report on the status of women employees in the General
Service category in the secretariats.
2324th plenary meeting
18 December 1974
3353 (XXIX). Amendments to the Staff Regulations and Staff Rules of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3007 (XXVII) of I 8 December 1972 relating to the desire to ensure that, in
accordance with Article 8 of the Charter of the United
Nations, no restrictions are placed on the eligibility of
men and women to participate in any capacity and
under conditions of equality in the work of the Secretariat and the further desire to avoid any discrimination
between staff members on grounds of sex,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on differential treatment based upon sex under the
Staff Regulations and Staff Rules of the United Nations 41
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 42
I. pecides that, with effect from I January 1975,
regulations 7.1 and 9.4 of the Staff Regulations of the
United Nations shall be amended to read as follows:
"Regulation 7.1
"Subject to conditions and definitions prescribed
by the Secretary-General, the United Nations shall
in appropriate cases pay the travel expenses of staff
members, their spouses and dependent children."
"Regulation 9.4
"The Secretary-General shall establish a scheme
for the payment of repatriation grants within the
!11aximum rates and under the conditions specified
m annex IV to the present Regulations.";
2. Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1975,
annex IV to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations
shall be amended by the substitution of the word
"spouse" for the words "wife, dependent husband"
where they occur;
3. Ta~es note of the changes made by the SecretaryGeneral m the Staff Rules of the United Nations for
the year ending 30 June 1974, as set forth in his
report. 43
2324th plenary meeting
18 December 1974
41 A/C.5/ 1603.
42

Official Records of the Ge11crn/ A.1·.remh!v. Tw<'m1·-11i111h
Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/9608 and Add.·l-23J. document
A/9608/ Add.5.
4 ~ A/C.5/!600.

3354 (XXIX). Report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board to the General Assembly and
to the member organizations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund for 1974, 44 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, 45

I
ADJUSTMENT OF BENEFITS IN RESPECT OF
COST-OF-LIVING CHANGES

Decides to revise the system of adjustment of benefits in payment contained in section I of General
Assembly resolution 3100 (XXVIII) of 11 December
1973 and previous resolutions on the same subject,
with effect from 1 January 1975, in accordance with
the recommendations of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board contained in annex V to the Board's
report to the Assembly for 1974, provided that no
beneficiary who opts for the consumer price index
system and whose benefit commenced before I January
1975 shall receive more as a result than if the benefit
had commenced on 1 January 1975;

II
AMENDMENTS TO THE REGULATIONS OF THE
UNITED NATIONS JOINT STAFF PENSION FUND

1. Decides that the Regulations of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund shall be amended,
without retroactive effect, as set forth in annex Vil to
the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board, it being understood that the amendment to
article 36 shall become effective from l January 1975,
and that supplementary article A shall become operative
when pensionable part-time service has been defined in
the manner suggested by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions in paragraph 29
of its related report;
2. Further decides that, in accordance with para·
graph 55 of the report of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Board and paragraph 28 of the report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, article 9 of the Regulations of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund shall be
amended, so that representatives of the five geographical
regions may work in the Committee of Actu:iries at
the same time, with effect from 1 January 1975, in
such manner that the Committee shall be increased to
five members;

III
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

Approves expenses, chargeable directly to the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, totalling
$2,112,400 (net) for 1975 and supplementary expenses
totalling $96,800 (net) for 197 4 for the administration
of the Fund, as estimated in annex I II to the report
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board;
41 Official Records r•f the General A.,semMy, Twe11r_,·-11i11th
Session. S11pplemen1 11/o. 9 (A/9609).
4 :; A19879.
