TllIR

T’Y-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

31 AUGUST

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2027)

Adoption

of the agenda

pay

..............................

......................................

1

The situation
in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
tile United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)
... . . . .. ......
.. .. ... ... .. .. ... ..
. .. ....
. ....

sIPV.2027

1

tho ir

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The
adopted
Security
adopted

resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2027TH
Held in New York

MEETING

on Wednesday,

President: Mr. Jacques LEPRETTE (France).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela,

31 August

1977, at 3 pm.

exists a unanimously adopted framework in General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was endorsed by the
Security Council in its resolution 365 (1974). There can be
no doubt that we must continue to strive to implement that
resolution. There is, in fact, no alternative at present. It is
necessary, therefore, to persist in our efforts to do so;
otherwise, the credibility of the United Nations will be
placed in jeopardy and the authority of the Security
Council weakened.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2027)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)
The meeting was culled to order at 3.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)
I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken this morning, in
conformity with Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey to take places at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Christoplzides
(~ypvprus),Mr. Papoulias (Greece) and Mr. Tiirkmen (Turkey)
took places at the Council table.
2. Mr. JAIPAL (India): Mr. Presideni, I should like to
extend to you the felicitations of my delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We feel sure that, with your diplomatic skill and
wide experience, you will gui’de our deliberations to
success. We should like to assure you and your successor of
the co-operation of my delegation.
3. This is the fourth year we have discussed the question
of the situation in Cyprus, for the solution of which there

4. However, what is significant is that the framework for a
settlement of the Cyprus question is both objective and fair
and was accepted by all the parties concerned. Yet, why is
it that there has been little progress despite the good offices
of the Secretary-General’? Is it because the SecretaryGeneral is not being given the diplomatic support he should
by way of supplementing his own efforts? Is it because the
powers that be are directing their efforts to other pressing
problems so that the Cyprus question has suffered from
inevitable neglect’?
5. It seems to us that the nature of the Cyprus question in
quantitative terms is relatively small--in numbers, in size
and so on-and one would have thought that it would have
been resolved by now. Apparently we have all been nursing
the hope that the talks between the two communities
would
lead somehow automatically to solutions of all
outstanding questions. However, that hope has not been
fulfilled .
6. It is not my delegation’s intention to analyse the causes
or to apportion blame. But one thing is clear, that is, both
Greek and Turkish Cypriots seem to be still somewhat
overburdened by the weight of pasi memories and past
bitterness. We wish they could now put their past behind
them and look forward into their common future of
coexistence in freedom and on a footing of equality. A vital
requirement for that future is, of course, that the outstanding questions, both constitutional and territorial, should be
settled through negotiations. And, for the negotiations to
have a fair chance of success, it is necessary that neither
party should resort to any unilateral action, however
justified it may be, since it would upset the existing
situation, thus creating new problems rather than resolving
the existing ones.
7. In recognition of the danger of unilateral action
interfering with the negotiating process, the Security
Council has adopted, in no less than seven resolutions since
1974, operative paragraphs which have urged the parties
concerned to act with the utmost restraint to refrain from
any unilateral or other action likely to affect adversely the

Repubhc of China for the exemplary manner in which he
presided over our work during the month of July. Under his
presidency, the Council adopted decisions of major political
significance, in particular the recommendation for admission to the United Nations of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam.

prospects of negotiations for a just and peaceful solution
and to continue and accelerate determined co-operative
efforts to achieve the objectives of the Council.
8. Now, today, we have heard allegations concerning
certain actions and alterations in Varosha which are
unilateral in character and which, it is claimed, will deal a
mortal blow to the bi-communal negotiations. It seems to
me that it was always understood by the Council that
changes which affect one party would not be carried out by
the other, except as part of the negotiated territorial
settlement. That is the ordinary and natural meaning of
paragraph 3 of resolution 401 (1976) which I just quoted,
and that paragraph was accepted by the parties concerned.
Any deviation, therefore, from that understanding, unless it
has the approval of all the parties concerned, would have to
be regarded as unilateral and as contrary to the intent of
the Council resolution.

15. The Romanian delegation followed attentively the
statements made this morning in the Council by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus, Mr. Christophides,
by the representatives of Greece and Turkey and by
Mr. Celik. Those statements, concerning in particular the
modern part of Famagusta, highlighted a situation which
might be deleterious to the efforts towards a peaceful, just
and durable settlement of the Cyprus problem and, at the
same time, give rise to profound concern in that area and
throughout the world.
16. As is well known, ever since the outbreak of the
Cyprus conflict, Romania has always spoken out for respect
for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus, as well as for the immediate
withdrawal of all foreign troops stationed on the territory
of that country, and the cessation of all foreign interference
in its affairs. Only on that basis will it be possible to reach
solutions consistent with the interests of the entire Cypriot
people and of peace in the region.

9. A question of principle is involved: the impermissibility
of unilateral action. The Security Council’s authority and,
indeed, the effectiveness of the good offices of the
Secretary-General will come into question if unilateral
action is freely permitted. If the Council desires to have its
unanimously adopted resolution implemented, then it must
have the active and willing co-operation of the concerned
parties; to that end, it must restrain the parties from taking
unilateral action pending the conclusion of the bicommunal
talks. It seems to me, therefore, that unilateral action is
incompatible with co-operation with the Council.

17. The situation before the Council today reflects once
again the absence of significant progress towards a settlement of the fundamental aspects of a conflict which
constitutes a dangerous hot-bed of tension in the region.
The resolutions adopted by the Security Council and the
General Assembly, to which Romania attaches special
importance because they lay down the principles and define
the framework for solution of the Cyprus crisis, are very far
from being implemented.

10. That Varosha is in the Turkish Cypriot zone is not in
dispute. But the fact remains that changes in the sealed
sector have to be settled through negotiations and, therefore, pending negotiations, unilateral action should clearly
bc avoided.
P

:--.

11, As for the action to be taken by the Council, it is clear
to my delegation that the Council should reaffirm its
previous resolutions and call upon the parties concerned to
desist from such unilateral action as would adversely affect
the success of the bi-communal negotiations, which success
is vital for an over-all settlement.

18. As a Balkan country, Romania is deeply interested in
the establishment and development of relations of close
co-operation and good neighbourliness among all the
Balkan countries in order to transform the region into a
zone of peace and fruitful co-operation. Referring to that
part of the world, the President of Romania, Nicolae
Ceaugescu, recently stated:

12. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (irzterpretation fkxn French):
Mr. President, I should like, first of all, to associate my
delegation with the condolences expressed by you to the
delegation of Cyprus on the death of Archbishop Makarios,
President of the Republic of Cyprus.

“Romania devotes particular attention to the development of bilateral and multilateral co-operation in the
Balkans. . We are of the view that the establishment of
new relations in the Balkans, far from being detrimental
to any country or group of countries, would directly
serve the interests of peace, co-operation and security in
Europe and in the whole world. As regards the situation
in that region, Romania considers it of particular importance that a political solution should be found to the
situation in Cyprus, a country with which we have good
relations of friendship and co-operation based on respect
for the independence and integrity of that State, its
neutrality and the guarantee of conditions necessary for
the peaceful coexistence of its two communities.”

13. Mr. President, I take particular pleasure in welcoming
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August and in extending to you the
warmest congratulations of the Romanian delegation. My
country has long-standing relations of friendship and is
developing mutually advantageous co-operation with your
country, France. I should also like to express my satisfaction for the excellent relations between our delegations
both in the Security CounciI and in other United Nations
bodies. While wishing you complete success in the accomplishment of your lofty tasks, I should like to assure
you of the full support of the Romanian delegation.

19. Our constant concern is all the greater since the
situation involves a country located in a neighbouring
geographical area, a country with which we have relations

14. I should also like to convey my cordial and sincere
congratulations to Ambassador Chen Chu of the People’s
2

of friendship and co-operation. It is therefore natural that
my country has always emphasized the need for a political
settlement of the Cyprus situation through negotiations
between the two communities; we are convinced that it is
possible to reach such a solution of the Cyprus problem,
which is an essential element for peace and co-operation in
that region of the world.

Socialist Republics, Leonid llyich Brezhnev, and the President of the French Republic, VaICry Giscard d’Estaing:
“The two parties were gratified at the benefits which
France and the Soviet Union have derived from the
development of co-operation between them and from the
contribution which that co-operation has made to improvement of the situation in Europe and throughout the
warld.” /See S/12362, anwx I. /

20. In the efforts to settle the Cyprus problem, we regard
as a positive development the high-level meetings which
have taken place and the communiqub which was issued in
connexion with them. We wish to pay a warm tribute to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, and to his Special
Representative, Mr. PBrez de Cudllar, thanks to whose
efforts it was possible to organize those meetings as well as
a new series of intercommunal talks.

Allow me to express the conviction that, under your
guidance, the Council will effectively resolve the question
which is now before it. Our delegation is ready to render
any assistance that may be necessary.
25. We should like also to voice our gratitude to the
representative of China for the work he performed as
President of the Council for the month of July.

21. The pursuit of those efforts is now more imperative
than ever so that we may arrive at a solution of the conflict
in the framework of a constructive political dialogue. The
Council should encourage the resumption of intercommunal negotiations under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral with a view to establishing for the Republic of
Cyprus a state structure that will respond to the aspirations
and basic interests of all Cypriots. But, in order for those
negotiations to be resumed, it is, of course, necessary for
the parties concerned to act in conformity with Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions which, inter diu,
call upon them “to act with the utmost restraint ,to refrain
from any unilateral or other action likely to affect
adversely the prospects of negotiations for a just and
peaceful solution”. We believe, therefore, that the Council
should also consider measures that would ensure the
implementation of those resolutions with the co-operation
of all the parties concerned.

-I’ 1
I

26. The Soviet delegation wishes to take this opportunity
to express its condolences on the passing of the I’resident of
Cyprus, Archbishop Maltarios, who made a major contribution to creating the State of Cyprus. to maintaining its
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, and to
implementing a peace-oriented foreign policy.
27. Having listened attentively to the statement of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus, Mr. Christophides
/2026th meeting], and the statements made by other
representatives, the Soviet delegation is compelled to
conclude that unjust delay in settling the Cyprus problem
increases tension in the Eastern Mediterranean and creates a
threat to the existence of an independent, unified Stale of
Cyprus. It is a pretext for acts such as those which are being
examined today by the Council.
28. For some years now, the Republic of Cyprus has
continued to be one of the hot spots in the world, and we
must once more note that the reasons Ibr the Cyprus crisis
have not yet been eliminated and that the main elements of
the Cyprus problem remain unresolved. The talks between
the Greek and Turkish communities in Cyprus aimed at
resolving the internal problems of the island have encountercd serious difficulties and not led to progress in resolving
the many aspects of the Cyprus problem.

22. The search for a settlement of the situation in Cyprus
requires the maintenance of a calm atmosphere in the
island; any further action contrary to the provisions of
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions would
tend to complicate the situation further and would create
new obstacles to intercommunal talks, thereby resulting in
a further intensification of tension in the Mediterranean
and Balkan arcas.
23. The Romanian delegation, for its part, is prepared to
support any step taken by the Council in that direction, as
well as any initiative aimed at facilitating negotiations
between the two communities to reduce and eliminate
tension and to find a solution to their common problems,
based on the principle of respect for the independence and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.

t
‘y
f
F

29. The situation in Cyprus has been exacerbated by
attempts to force on the Cypriots a solution which would
promote the interests of those circles which are making
plans to destroy the integrity of the State and even the
Republic itself, turning the island into a military strategic
bridgehead for NATO. Such designs are the main reason for
the situation which exists in Cyprus.

24. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Rcpublies) (interpretation jkom Russinn): Mr. President, first and
foremost, the Soviet delegation would like to congratulate
you, the representative of France, on successfully discharging the functions of Security Council President for this
month. I wish to note the fruitful development of relations
between our two countries. Indeed, as was underscored in
the France-Soviet Declaration signed at Rambouillet on 22
June by the General Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and President of
the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet

30. The resolutions and decisions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly designed to resolve the crisis in
Cyprus have not yet been complied with. It is quite clear
that this situation is extremely abnormal and, indeed,
dangerous. It is well known that, from the very outset of
the conflict in Cyprus, the question has been the centre of
attention at the United Nations. As has already been
mentioned today, the General Assembly, at its twentyninth session, examined the problem of Cyprus and
unanimously adopted resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was
3

later unanimously reaffirmed and endorsed by the Security
Council it1 its resolution 365 (1974). At its thirtieth and
thirty-first sessions,the Assembly adopted resolutions
339.5(XXX) and 3 I/I2 by an overwhelmingmajority.
31. The decisionstaken by the United Nationson CYPrus
contain major provisionsdealingwith the very basesfor a
solution of the problem of Cyprus. They affirm the
necessityof the independence,sovereigntyand territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus,respectfor its political
non-alignment,the immediate withdrawal of all foreign
troopsand military personnelfrom the territory of Cyprus,
non-interferencein its internal affairsandthe return of the
refugeesto their homes.Nevertheless,these crystal-clear
specificdemandsof the Llnited Nations,which expressthe
will of the overwhelmingmajority of MemberStates,have
not been met. The Soviet Union considersthat the
decisionsof the United Nations on Cyprus should be
fulfilled in toto.

35. Mr. ?.AMPHUL, (Mauri?ius) (interpretctl’on from
Fmxh):
Mr. President, allow me first of all to perform a

very happy task by extending to you my delegation’s
congratulationsupon your assumptionof the presidencyof
the Security Council. Our countries have very old ties, and
it is with the utmost sincerity that I hail in you the
distinguishedrepresentative of the culture to which so
many of us have remained faithful. It is also with the
greatest confidencethat my delegationseesthis debate on
sucha complex questionbegin in the Council today under
your presidency.Before turning to the considerationof this
question, 1 should like to pay a particularly well-deserved
tribute to your predecessor,AmbassadorChen Chu of the
People’s Republic of China, for the competence and
wisdom with which he guided our work during the month
of July.

36. The title of the question that is onceagainbefore the
Council-“The situation in Cyprus”-obviously remindsus
of the founder of that State, who unflagginglystruggledfor
its independenceand riskedhis life for its unity. I speak,of
32. We have several times stated our willingnessto
course, of His Beatitude Archbishop Makarios, whose
co-operate with other States in the interest of a just
settlementof the crisisin Cyprus. The Soviet Union views untimely death hasprofoundly touchedus. I shouldlike to
the situation in Cyprus as a complicatedand dangerous take this opportunity to reiterate to the delegation of
Cyprus the condolenceswhich my Governmenthasalready
focal point of tension and favours the exclusion of any
conveyedto its Government.
foreign interference in the affairs of Cyprus and the
withdrawalfrom the islandof all foreigntroops,sothat the
37. I think that it wasmost usefulfor the Council to have
i:itemal affairs of Cyprus can be resolved taking due
account of the interestsand rights of both communities met fairly quickly this morning at the request of the
Cypriot Government. We thus had an opportunity to listen
without any attempt to force anexternal solutionuponthe
to the divergent views expressedby the parties directly
Cypriots. We are in favour of reestablishinga spirit of
mutual trust and co-operationbetweenthe two commu- concerned.It was with particular interest that my deleganities and we considerthat the searchfor a solutionshould tion iistened to the statement madeby the Minister for
be basedon unswervingrespect for the independence, Foreign Affairs of Cyprus, Mr. Christophides [2026th
rneetirzg/. It seemsto me, from what was said by the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
representativeof Cyprus, that illegalsettlementshave been
Cyprus. Recent events have convincingly confirmed the
establishedthrough unilateral action. For my part I believe
positionof the Soviet Governmentthat the solutionof the
Cyprusproblemrequiredthe convening,assoonaspossible, that those settlements,regardlessof size,are not conducive
to the resumptionof intercommunaltalks likely to leadto
of a representativeinternational conferenceunder United
Nationsauspices.
a negotiated peacefulsolution. I would evengo so far asto
say that, in any case,this is an initiative whosedangerous
33. The importanceand urgency of finding a solution to
consequencesshould not be underestimated,for settlethe Cyprus question were once more emphasizedin the
mentsof that nature invariably becomepcrrnanentand are
Soviet-YugosiavcommuniquCof 19 August, which was then faits accomplis.The history of events in that region
issuedin connexion with the visit to the Soviet Union of
shows that such settlements, once established,develop
PresidentTito. It isstatedin that communiquC:
progressively and give rise to a potentially explosive
situation.
“Both sideshavepointed out the needfor an immediate
solution to the problem.of Cyprus. They unswervingly 38. Weshouldtherefore appealto thosewho, by unilateral
and thoughtlessaction, took sucha responsibility, so that
support the independence,sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and its policy of
they will renouncewithout delay the continuanceof those
non-alignment.They arc in favour of the withdrawal of
activities which, however insignificant they considerthem,
al1foreign troops from the territory and the granting to
are, in our view, fraught with danger.The concern that WC
the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot populationsof
are experiencing today is not new, as we can see from
the right to decide their own fate and to put in order
paragraph3 of resolution 410 (1977) which the Security
their affairs.”
Council adopted on 15 June 1977 and which reads as
follows:
34. The Soviet delegationconsidersthat the duty of the
Security Council is to foster as111uc1~ aspossibleefforts at
“Urgex the parties concerned to act with the utmost
ensuring that the decisionsof the United Nations are
restraint by refraining from any unilateral or other action
CoJJlphd with. The partiesconcernedshouldact with the
likely to affect adverselythe prospectsof negotiationsfor
utmost restraintandrefrain from unilateralor other actions
a just and peaceful solution and to continue and
which could have a negative effect on the prospectsfor a
acceleratedeterminedco-operativeefforts to achievethe
peacefulsetllemcnl.
objectivesof the Security Council”.
4

39. I believe that, in the present circumstances, the
Council, acting unanimously and with the greatest insistence, should appeal to the parties directly concerned to
implement the provisions
and spirit of resolution
365 (1974) of 13 December 1974, by which it endorsed
General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX), and of resolution 3 l/12, which the General Assembly adopted on 12
November 1976. It is to be hoped that such action will pave
the way for a satisfactory settlement of this protracted
crisis.

46. There is an attempt to present the problem of Cyprus
as a dispute between Greek and Turkish Cypriots. I am sure
that if that were the case, the problem of Cyprus would not
have been heard either in the General Assembly or in the
Security Council, and the problem is, of course, a very
serious one. In fact, the Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim,
referred to the problem of Cyprus as being one of the most
serious problems in the world today, and I am cert.ain that
he would not have referred to it in that way if it were just
an internal dispute between Greek and Turkish Cypriots.

40. The PRESlDENT (interpretation from French): The
representative of Greece has asked to speak in exercise of
his right of reply and 1 now call on him.

47. This morning it was also said that no settlement of
Maras-that‘ is, Famagusta-was
under way: the Greek
Cypriot representative’s claim on which this present recourse is based. It was also said that there was no massive
settlement. Well, I am sure that the facts regarding the
settlement are known to the Secretariat, and if members of
the Council and you, Mr. President, wished to ask the
Secretariat, it would certainly confirm that there had been
settlement in one of the sectors of the new city of
Famagusta. Of course, this is just the beginning, because, as
I said this morning, it is one of the favourite tactics of
Ankara to follow what is called “salami” tactic. It is one of
the favourite tactics of Ankara to proceed, not to the
solution of the Cyprus problem step by step, but through
step-by-step tactics to bring about the dissolution of the
Republic of Cyprus.

41. Mr. PAPOULIAS (Greece): In my statement at -this
morning’s meeting I pointed out specific facts in Cyprus
and specific violations by the Turkish side of General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions. In his answer,
the representative of Turkey made some broad allegations
against my country which I shall answer in all sincerity.
42. There is no denying that the junta regime was guilty of
an attempted crime against the Republic of Cyprus, but this
crime, apart from being unsuccessful, was short-lived. It
lasted only a few days and no Turkish Cypriot suffered
during that brief time, But it was seized by Turkey as the
pretext it had been waiting for to invade Cyprus. That,
however, does not justify the commission of immeasurably
greater crimes against the people and the Republic of
Cyprus and their continuance ad inJLirzi&m. The adoption
of a whole series of United Nations resolutions on the
question of Cyprus is indisputable proof of world opinion
on that.

48. It was also said this morning that the Turkish Cypriot
side and Turkey were always ready and willing to start
negotiations with a view to finding a realistic solution to
the Cyprus problem, and the Government of Cyprus and
the Greek Cypriot community were accused of not being
sincere, of not wanting the negotiations and of creating
obstacles to them, I informed the Council this morning
of what had been Turkey’s attitude in the negotiations, and
I believe that many countries around this table must be
aware of our position at the latest Vienna talks and that of
the Turkish Cypriots, But, at the same time, it was said that
we did not want the negotiations, that we were the ones
who were creating obstacles to the negotiations and that
“the Turkish Cypriot side is always ready and willing to
start negotiations with a view to finding a realistic solution”
f2026th meeting, para. 701.

43. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I now
call on the representative of Cyprus who has asked to speak
in exercise of his right of reply.
44. Mr. CHRISTOPHIDES (Cyprus): This morning, the
Council heard the views of Turkey expressed by both
Ambassador Tiirkmen and Mr. Celik who, I regret to say, is
performing here the role of a mouthpiece of Ankara. There
is no need, of course, to remind the Council that Mr. Celik
is, appearing here under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, and thus as an individual, I should like to reply
to certain points that were raised in the course of
statements made this morning.

49. I can do no better than to read from a letter from the
Greek Cypriot representative at the talks, Mr. Papadopoulos, to Ambassador Javier Perez de Cuellar, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus:

45. It has been said that Famagusta is under the administration of the so-called Federated State of Cyprus. I think
that that was a statement made by both Mr. Ca’gayangil
and the representative of Turkey. One should, I think, ask:
What is this so-called Federated State to which they
referred? It is, in fact, the part of the territory of Cyprus
that has been the victim of invasion and of the expulsion of
its indigenous majority from their homes and properties in
which colonizers from Turkey are being massively implanted. The result of this multiple, I should say international, crime, committed in violation of international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions on
the question of Cyprus is what has been called the Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus.

“My side has noted persistent attempts by Mr. Denktas
and other Turkish leaders to put forward ill-founded
contentions concerning the matter of the succession to
the office of President of the Republic and to try to
connect such contentions, in a most irrelevant manner,
with the process of the Cyprus intercommunal talks
which are being carried on under the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
“I have had the opportunity of discussing this situation
with the Acting President of the Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Spyros Kyprianou, and it is our view that our stand
on the issue of the talks should be restated for the sake of
avoidance of any misunderstanding or false impressions.
5

“The Greek Cypriot side remains firmly committed to
the process of such talks, as it has been created under the
aforesaid resolutions.

And on 15 August:
“It is the Turkish Cypriots’ final and historic decision
not to negotiate with a community which will call its
leader the President of Cyprus.”

“We insist that the talks should be meaningful and
substantive”-and
I am sure no one here will disagree with
that-‘&and we further hold the view that it should be
publicly and officially declared, so that it wjll become
generally accepted by all bona fide persons, that the
Turkish side’s attitude towards the talks and its refusal to
put forward concrete proposals on all aspects of the
problem, and particularly the territorial aspect, is the sole
cause which prevents the talks from being meaningful and
substantive.

Then a representative of the Turkish Cypriots-I
the press representative-said

think he is

“The Turkish Cypriot side will not talk, negotiate,
discuss or reach an agreement on any issue with the Greek
Cypriots.”
On 17 August, Mr. Denkta? stated:

“My side considers the recent tactics of the Turkish
side, to which I have referred above, to be nothing else
than an attempt to avoid and frustrate the resumption of
meaningful and substantive negotiations, whilst it utilizes
the intervening period for the creation of further faits
accomplis such as the settlement of Turks in the Greek
part of Famagusta Town.

On 24 August he stated:

“I would like to put it clearly on record that my side is
ready to continue with the talks as envisaged in the last
Vienna communiqud and requests that the SecretaryGeneral and yourself will spare no effort to make the
Turkish side return to the negotiating table for the third
meeting of the current series of talks in Nicosia, as
already previously scheduled, hoping that this time the
negotiations will become really meaningful and substantive.”

And, he said:

“Today there is no question of resuming the intercommunal talks.”

“If the Greek Cypriot leader to be elected next month
is declared President of all Cyprus and he is accepted by
the world as such, the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus
may close its borders. . , . [Another measure] would be
to break off the intercommunal talks.”

“We have already announced that if, after the 10
September elections, the Greek Cypriot leader elected is
declared President, we will break off the intercommunal
talks. We can wait for the United Nations to adopt a
resolution before we implement our decision on the
closure of the borders.”

I should like to add that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has for a long time now been trying to
call to the negotiating table the Turkish Cypriot representative, who has, however, been refusing on one pretext or
another or even not replying to the Special Representative.

So the talks are dead, according to Mr. Denktag. Of course,
the closing of the borders would depend on the resolution
of the Council. Referring to the Cypriot interlocutor, he
said:

50. The attitude of the Turkish side in the talks is also
made very clear by recent statements. Perhaps many
statements were made earlier, but I have before me only the
recent statements of Mr, Denktag. The first I shall quote is
dated 16 July last:

“Mr. Papadopoulos is making statements about the
talks. What is his authority?
The person who had
appointed him as the negotiator has died.”

“Because of the negative attitude of the Greek
Cypriots, I do not think that the intercommunal talks will
resume in the forthcoming days.”

So it is evident that what was said this morning by the
representative of Turkey and his mouthpiece was for the
consumption of the Council.

Another statement, dated 21 July:

51. Before I come to the problem of human rights, I think
it right to quote from an article in The Guardian yesterday.
It concernsthe colonization of Famagusta.It states:

“It is of no use to resume the Cyprus intercommunal
talks so long as the world does not accept the existence of
two separate Governments in the island.”

‘C. . . Yet f!yprus remains a moral issue as well as a
purely political mess.. . . Turkey for centuries hasbeen
an expansionist power. The Ottoman Empire is not so
long gone. In the summer of 1974, the Greek Cypriots
madea fatal mistake. . . . Though there was no immediate
threat to the Turkish Cypriot minority . , . Ankara
invaded Northern Cyprus with mainland emigrants,. . .
and now Varosha-a resort that every peaceplan envisages
would be returned to Greek hands- . . . Ankara has
settled the North. Ankara hasrefusedmeaningfulnegotiations. Ankara . . . is moving peopleinto Varosha. , . . The
settlement of Varosha, indeed, will be a calculated snub

This statement was made on 10 August:
“If the man to be elected by the Greek Cypriots is to be
recognized as the President of Cyprus, the Turkish
Cypriots will not resume the intercommunal talks.”
On 13 August, Mr. Denkta? stated:
“At this stage, any contact with the Greek Cypriot
community and the resumption of the talks are out of the
question until the situation is clarified.”
6

to Washington. . , . Can a country invade another under
the West’s nose and get away with it? Is might right?
And if might is not right, what is Mr. Carter going to do
about it? ”

54. Of course, we all know that Mr. Demirel has not
changedhis ordersand that he is not allowingthe Greek
Cypriots or indeedthe Turkish Cypriots to circulate or go
back to their homesand lands.In addition, we know now
that they are proceedingeven to further violations of
humanrightsby goingaheadandexpropriatingthe houses,
land, shopsand hotels of the Greek Cypriot peoplefrom
Famagusta.

s?. Another very disturbing point is that I did not hear
Qr. Tiirkmen say this morning that they were not goingto
proceed further with the colonization of the new city of
hmagUSta. On the contrary, accordingto what he said,the
way is left open for the step-by-stepcolonization of the
new city of Famagusta.

55. The PRESIDENT(interpretation
on the representativeof Turkey.

53. Mr. Tiirkmen also referred this morning to a question
of humanrights. There is an Englishproverb-and I do not
h)W whetherit is the samein Turkish-that thosewho live
in &SS houses should not throw stones.With regardto the
violation of human rights in Cyprus, I could do no better
than simply refer to an article which appearedin T/2e
~%/?dayTz’rnesof 23 January last. I will only refer to the
leadingarticle in The S’unday Times. Of course,TheSz&ay
Times is neither the Greek Cypriot or Greek mouthpiece
nor a newspaperthat hasno respectin the world. It states:

from

French):

I call

56. Mr. TURKMEN (Turkey): It is not my intention to
reply in a polemical spirit to either Mr. Papouliasor
Mr. Christophides,as I think Mr. Celik will give the necessary answersto what Mr. Christophideshasjust said, but I
want to dispela seriousmisconception.This misconception
is that Turkey has no interest in the settlement of the
Cyprus problem or that Turkey is trying to prevent a
settlementof the problem.That is what Mr. Christophides
said. That is a very wrong assumption.It is contrary to
logic. Why shouldTurkey not be interestedin a settlement
of the Cyprus problem’?Turkey derivesno economicor
political benefit from the present situation. It has no
strategicinterestin Cyprusat all. The only interestTurkey
hasin Cyprusis identified with the interestsof the Turkish
community itself, the security and the well-beingof the
Turkish community. It is for this very reasonthat it is not
Turkey but the Turkishcommunitythat is negotiatingwith
the Greek community. It is contrary to reasonto assert,as
Mr. Christophidesdid, that the Greek Cypriot community
is not negotiatingwith the Turkish community but with
Turkey through a mouthpieceof Ankara. That is a very
viciousand erroneousattitude andit shouldbecorrectedif
we want the intercommunaltalksto succeed.

“On pageten of today’s issue,we publishsomeof the
details from a report about allegedTurkish atrocitiesin
Cyprus. The report is the work of the Human Rights
Commissionof the Council of Europe, It is a horrendous
indictment against Turkey and its soldiersand civilians
sent from the mainland to the Turkish areasof Cyprus.
The memberGovernmentsof the Councilof Europemust
decidenext month whether or not to accept the report. If
they do accept it, and it is difficult to see,on the
evidence,how they can avoid doing so, then Turkey will
stand condemnedbcforc the bar of Europeanandindeed
world opinion.
“The first thing to be clear about is that thesewrong
doings are the work of the Turks from the mainland.
Turkish Cypriots harbour a credible senseof pastgrievance against the Greek Cypriot majority on the island.
But they know that they can and musteventually live, as
they have done for centuries, in peacewith their Greek
neighbours. The invaders from the north are another
matter altogether. The Government in Ankara, as well as
Turkish public opinion itself, must be brought to seethat
Turkish bchnviour in Cyprus is a blot upon the good
name and reputation of the Turkish people themselves.
‘Turks are extraordinarily civilised people,’ Mr. Demirel,
the Turkish Prime Minister, saidlast week.
“The Prime Minister can, of course, sustainthis claim
by producing counter evidence for the period of the
EuropeanCommissionreport. But there are other stepsof
itnmediate relevance to the people in northern Cyprus
today. Fle shouldissueorders-and seethey areobcyedfor the protection of humanrights. And he shouldpermit
free access(denied even to Turkish Cypriots) to all parts
of northern Cyprus, These would be measuresof good
intent. The new Presidentof the United States,WOO has
pledgedhimself to defend human rights, shouldencourage Turkey in this; his moral fervour and humanity will
be an important element in reassertingthe need for
America’sNATO alliesto observeirreduciblestandardsof
conduct.”

57. Mr. Christophidesquoted some statementsto the
effect that the Turkish community did not envisagea
resumptionof the intercommunaltalks. Such statements
are made very often by both sides,but we should also
carefully considerthat there is no other alternativeto the
talks, and it shouldbe the duty of the Security Councilto
encouragethe two communitiesto resumethe intercommunal talks under the good offices of the SecretaryCcneral.
58, The PRESIDENT(interpretation Porn French): I am
informed that Mr. Celik, who wasinvited by the Security
Council underrule 39 of the provisionalrulesof procedure,
would like to make a further statement.I call 011 him to
take a placeat the Counciltable andto makehisstatement.
59. Mr. CELIK: It is with great reluctance that 1 have
asked for the floor for a secondtime. As I stated this
morning,it wasnot my intention to answereachand every
point raisedby the representativeof the Greek Cypriot
administration,but, ashe referredto someissues
which are
very critical and of grave importance for the Turkish
Cypriot sideand for the future of tbc talks and the future
of Cyprus, I thought it appropriateto make a clarifying
statementregardinghis referenceto governmeni,especially
in the context of the resumptionof the talks and the
negotiationswhich are supposedto be carried out by the
two communitieson an equalfooting astwo equals.

7

60.
! hnve to put on record here that there is no
government, de j&to or constitutional, as far as we are
concerned, that can represent the whole of Cyprus. There
arc two separate administrations. The fact that there are
two separate autonomous administrations has been confirmed by the Geneva Declaration of 30 July 1974, which
was signed by Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom as
the guaranteeing Powers [see S/11398].
This is the situation that has prevailed since then.

61. The separate administrations in the island have been in
existence since 1963, the date when the Turkish Cypriot
mctnbers of the Government and of the Mouse of Representativcs were ousted from their offices by force of arms and
prevented from carrying out their duties jointly with their
Greek colleagues. Therefore, this is something that must be
taken into account in the context of statements tnade by
my President, Mr. Denktag, and quotations made here from
them.
62. Naturally, the statements made by Mr. Denktagalthough out of context here-are an expression of the
strong feeling of the Turkish Cypriot cotnmunity on the
question of the equal status of the two sides. We are very
jealous of this ecluality, and we feel it is a must to recognize
the equal status of the two communities, otherwise there
will be no possibility or chance of a fair settlement.

63. Since the Greek side regards Cyprus as a Greek island,
it considers that the usurpation of powers as the Government of Cyprus is something that should be permanent; it
has turned down sincere proposals by our side for a joint
administration and for running common services jointly,
and it gives no chance for a normalization that would pave
the way for a settlement.
64. Those who are here today posing as the Government
of Cyprus and pretending to represent us should themselves
be in the dock to answer questions about, among other
things, the loss of hundreds of Turkish Cypriot lives, the
destruction of thousands of homes and the division of the
island into two communities of which they are today
complaining very strongly. Before they accuse us of
anything, they should instead admit their faults and try to
be as realistic as possible in the careful handling of matters
so necessary for a settlement in the island.
65. I hope that in the process of the new reorganization
now under way in the south of Cyprus the new people who
take office will be more realistic in their approach to the
Cyprus question.
The meetingrose

8

at 4.45p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section.
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
or write
to: United

DES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
ddpositaires
clu mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
A : Nations
U&s.
Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
ICAK

IIOJIY’IHTh

dOM0

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHMSK

OPI’AHH3AUNH

I’UBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
c&in
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas.
Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00

(or equivalent

and distributors
Natio’ns,
Sales

UNIES
et les agences
ou adressea-vous

OWbEAHHEHHhLX

NACIONES

HAl$HR

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijaso

in other

currencies)

y casas distria: Naciones

77-700014eptember

1978--2,200
