------ ----

General Assembly-Sixth
SeHion
_____________________________
_______________________
_

i
pr()gress 01 dependent, colonial or semi-colonial
i"·or,ks to a position of equality with Member States
uf lhe United Nations,
Cunsidl'ring that resolution 494 ( V) adopted by the
General Assembly on 20 N ovcmher 1950 requests the
appropriate organ~ of the United Nations to consider
those portions of the Secretary-General's memorandum
with which they are particularly comerned,
Considering that, under Article 76 b of the Charter,
the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship
System are to promote the political, economic, social
and educational advancement of the inhabitants of the
Trust Territories, arnl their progressive development
towards self-government or independence as may be
appropriate to the particular circumstances of each
Territory and its peoples and the freely expressed
wishes of the peopl<:, concerned, and as may be provided by the term"> of each trusteeship agreement,
Considering that the ( ;en era I Assembly on 18 J anuary 1952 adopted 4 a re.";olution on the participation of
Non-Seli-Governi11,r Territories in the work of the
Committee on In f,;rmation from Non-Self-Governing
Territories. 5
Considering that the direct association of the indigenous inhabitants of the Trust Territories in the work
of the United Nations and of the specialized agencies
is an effective measme of promoting the progress of
the indigenous inhabitants of those territories towards
a position of equality with Member States of the
United Nations,
1. Notes that special provisions exist in the constitutions of some of the specialized agencies and of the
regional commissions of the United Nations permitting, on the proposal of the Administering Member concerned, the admission to those agencies and commissions of N on--Sel f-Governing and Trust Territories as
"associate memlwrs";
2. Commends the practice referred to in the preceding paragraph;
3. Invites the Trusteeship Council to examine the
possibility of associating the inhabitants of the Trust
Territories more closely in its work and to report the
results of its examination of this problem to the General Assembly at its seventh regular session.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.

555 ('\71). The Ewe and Togoland unification
problem
The General Assembly,
Noting that, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 441 (V) of 2 December 1950, the Trusteeship Council has devoted a special chapter 6 of its annual report to setting forth the steps undertaken in
• See resolution 566 (VI), p. 60.
'The General 1\,sembly decided, by resolution 569 (VI),
p. 63, that the .Special Committee on Information transmitted under Artick 73 e of the Charter should henceforth
be known as the "Committee on Information from Non-SelfGoverning Territories".
'See Official Raarc!s of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Supp/emmt NIJ'. 4, part f, chapter IV.

;__

connexion with the Ewe an<l Tngoland unification
question,
Noting in particular the endorsement 7 by the Trusteeship Council of the decision of the Administering Authorities concerned to terminate the activities of the
Standing Consultative Commission and to establish a
Joint Council for Togoland Affairs to advise them on
matters of common concern to the two Trust Territories, and to assist in harmonizing development in
these Territories,
Noting that the Trusteeship Council also recommended8 that the two Administering Authorities ensure that the scope of re~ponsibilities of the proposed
joint council be sufficiently broad to enable it to exercise its functions with re~pect to all questions of common concern to the people nf the two Trust Territories,
including questions of political, economic, social, educational and cultural development,
Noting that the Trusteesbip Council further recommended9 that the method of determining the composition and selecting the members of the joint council be
such as to ensure, if possible, the participation of the
major groups in the two Trust Territories,
Having e:rnmincd the arrangements made by the two
Administering Authorities concerned for the establishment and operation of the joint council as set out in
document A/C.4/198,
Having considered the oral representation 10 made in
regard to these arrangements by the representatives of
the All-Ewe Conference, the Joint Togoland Congress
and the Comite d<· /'unite togolaise,
1. N ates the objections raised by those representatives against the proposed arrangements in respect of,
firstly, their inadequacy as a means of solving the Ewe
and Togoland unification problem and, secondly, their
failure to ensure equitable and democratic representation of all sections of the population;
2. N ates with concern, from the statements made
by those representatives in amplification of petitions
received from the Trust Territories, the atmosphere of
tension which appears to exist in the Territories as a
result of the delay in arriving at an adequate solution,
and notes also the statements 11 in a different sense made
by the representatives of the Parti togolais du progres
and the Union des Chefs et des populations du nord du
Togo sous administration fran,aise;
3. Notes further the comments 12 of tl1e twu Administering Authorities concerned on the observations
of the petitioners;
4. Urges the two Administering Authorities concerned and the peoples involved to exert every effort
to achieve a prompt, constructive and equitable settlement of the problem, taking fully into account the
freely expressed wishes of the people concerned;
5. Recommends to this end that the Administering
Authorities consult fully with the various parties and
groups concerned before constituting the proposed joint
'See Trusteeship Council resolution 345 (IX).
• Ibid.
'Ibid.
,. See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Fourth Committee, 226th, 228th, 229th, and 234th meetings.
11
Ibid., 233rd meeting.
"Ibid., 229th and 233rd meetings.

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Fourth Committee

council, with a view to devising satisfactory procedures
for the election of representatives to the council;
6. Recommends that the Administering- Authorities,
in consultation with the representativl':; of the peoples
concerned, extend the functions and powers of the joint
council to enable it to consider all aspects of the Ewe
and Togoland unification problem ancl to make recommendations thereon :
7. Recommends, in view of the urgency of this
problem, that the Trusteeship Council devote more intensive attention to all aspects of it affecting the two
Trust Territories;
8. Recommends further that the Trusteeship Council, at its tenth session, arrange for the dispatch to the
Trust Territories concerned of a special mission, or
alternatively, for its next periodic visiting mission to
these two Trust Territories to de·vote sufficient time to
the problem to study it thorougl. 1.". including the functioning of the proposed joint co111 ·ii, and to submit to
the Trusteeship Council a deta ilt,, report thereon, including specific recommendatiun~; 11 · :eh shall take full
account of the real wishes and 11,;,·, ,'.',1s of the peoples
concerned;
9. Requests the Trusteeship Council to instruct the
mission so dispatched to submit its report to the Council for consideration at its eleventh session;
10. Requests the Trusteeship Council to submit to
the General Assembly at its seventh regular session a
special report covering all aspects of the problem.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.
556 (VI). Dissemination of information on the
United Nations and on the International
Trusteeship System in Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Considering that it is essentia1 that the peoples of
Trust Territories should receive adequate information
concerning the p11rposes and operation of the United
Nations and of the International Trusteeship System
in particular,
Noting that the Trusteeship Council has instructed 13
the visiting missions to investigate on the spot the best
means of disseminating such information,
1. Recommends that the Administering Authorities
of Trust Territories take all appropriate steps to disseminate information on the United Nations, and on
the International Trusteeship System in particular,
among the population and in the schools, and report to
the Secretary-General details of such steps;
2. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council include in its annual reports to the General Assembly all
particulars supplied on the subject, together with its
remarks.
361st plenary meeting,
18 January 1952.
557 (VI). Educational advancement
Territories

in

Trust

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the speedy educational advancement
of the inhabitants of Trust Territories is essential for
11

See Trusteeship Council resolution 311 (VIII).

57

the attainment of the objectives of the International•
Trusteeship System,
Recognizing that the United Nations has a ~pec_ial
responsibility towards the inhahitanb of the Terntones
under the International Trusteeship System,
Desirous of giving all possible assistance to the edt!cational advancement of the illhabitants of these Terntories,
Recalling that, by resolution 110 (V) of 19 J_uly
1949, the Trusteeship Council urged that all possible
steps be taken to make available to qualified s_tudents
from Trust Territories fellowships, scholarships and
internships which have been or may be establi~hed by
the United Nations or by its specialized agencies, and
recalling that by the same resolution the Council invited the Administering Authorities to give full publicity with rega_rd to all fell?wshi_ps, schola1~ships and
internships available to the mhab1tants of 1 rust Territories,
1 Invites Member States of the United Nations to
make available, to qualified students from Trust Territories fellowships, scholarships and internships, and to
notify the Trusteeship Council concerning the avai_lability of such fellowships, scholarships and internsh1ps
in public as well as private institutions;
2. Invites the Trusteeship Council to request the
Secretary-General, having in mind the procedures of
the Expanded Programme of Tech~ical Assista1;c~ and
the machinery of the Technical Assistance Admm1stration, to make such arrangements as may be necessary
to ensure the efficient administration of all offers of
scholarships, fellowships and internships for inhabitants
of Trust Territories that may be made;
3. Requests further that the Trusteeship Counc!l
invite the Administering Authorities concerned to avail
themselves of such scholarships, fellowships and internships in accordance with procedure to be devised ~nd
give full publicity with regard to such fe!lowsh1ps,
scholarships and internships in their respective Trust
Territories;
4. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to give all appropriate
assistance in the implementation of the present resolution;
5. Requests the Trusteeship Council to report with
regard· to these matters to the General Assembly at its
next regular session.
361st plenary mreting,
18 January 1952.
558 (VI). Attainment by the Trust Territories
of the obj~tive of self-government or independence

The General Assembly,
Considering that in the case of only one Trust Territory, namely Somaliland under Italian administration,
the Trusteeship Ag-reement provides, in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 289A (IV) of 21
November 1949, for a specific period of ten years at
the end of which the Trust Territory shall be an independent sovereign State,
Considering that under Article 76 b of the Charter
one of the basic objectives of the International Trustee-
