A /75/PV.100

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

100th plenary meeting

Thursday, 2 September 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 70 (continued)
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Draft resolution (A/75/L.128)
The President: Today is a symbolic day for the
General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, as this is
its 100th plenary meeting.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/75/L.128.
I give the floor to the representative of South Africa
to introduce the draft resolution.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of myself and my co-facilitator,
Ambassador Francisco Duarte Lopes, the Permanent
Representative of Portugal.
At the outset, I want to thank you, Mr. President,
for entrusting us with the responsibility of serving
as co-facilitators and conducting intergovernmental
consultations on the scope, modalities, format and
organization of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action, which will be held on 22 September under

the theme of “Reparations, racial justice and equality
for people of African descent”.
The twentieth anniversary of the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action gives us an opportunity to
place racial equality at the centre of our global and
national agendas. The Declaration and Programme of
Action represent a major milestone in articulating the
harms done by racism and racial discrimination and are
described by the United Nations as the international
community’s blueprint for action to fight racism both
historically and today, with an important emphasis on
the structural forms of racism and racial discrimination
that require urgent attention to this day.
Draft resolution A/75/L.128, presented for
adoption today, is a procedural text outlining the scope,
modalities and format of the high-level meeting. It
provides a similar format to that of the 2011 high-level
meeting — an opening plenary meeting followed by
two consecutive round tables from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m.,
in an effort to enable a greater number of Member
States to address the meeting. In recognizing the
critical contribution of stakeholders across sectors in
eliminating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance, the draft resolution seeks to
bring together Governments, academia, civil society,
the private sector and other professional groups to align
their agendas and actions towards achieving common
goals. We would like to take this opportunity to thank
Member States for their support, active participation and
constructive engagement during the three constructive
informal consultation meetings that we convened.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-24124 (E)

*2124124*

A/75/PV.100

Paragraph 10 of the draft resolution, which relates
to civil-society organizations and non-governmental
organizations, was discussed at length, and we
acknowledge the sensitivities. We tried to find
potentially consensual language for Member States’
consideration, and subsequent bilateral discussions
were also held. In view of that, we resorted to including
language that has previously been adopted by consensus
or has received significant support in recent modalities
resolutions, while taking into account the importance
of the role played by civil society in the specific context
of the implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Platform of Action. We are counting on Member States
to support the draft text presented by the co-facilitators
without amendments.
Once again, we thank all delegations for their active
engagement throughout the process.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.128, entitled “Scope,
modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/75/L.128?
Draft resolution A/75/L.128 was adopted (resolution
75/320).
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers for explanations of position on the resolution
just adopted, I would like to remind members that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Komara (Guinea): As the representative of
the Republic of Guinea, Chair of the Group of 77 (G77) and China for this year, I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the G-77 in explanation of our position on
the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution 75/320,
entitled “Scope, modalities, format and organization
of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”.
At the outset, I would like to express the Group’s
gratitude and appreciation to Ms. Mathu Joyini
and Mr. Francisco Duarte Lopes, the Permanent
Representatives of South Africa and Portugal, and
their teams for their able conduct of the substantive
2/8

02/09/2021

and productive negotiations throughout the process.
As a result, we have adopted this modalities resolution,
paving the way for the important commemoration of
the twentieth anniversary of the Durban Declaration
and its Programme of Action.
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
the Group’s unwavering support for the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action as a milestone
document in preventing, combating and eliminating all
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance. Twenty years after its adoption, the
Durban Declaration still provides a comprehensive and
holistic road map for addressing and putting an end to
racism and racial discrimination throughout the world.
The members of the G-77 and China stand united
behind the values, principles and actions outlined in
the Declaration, and invite all delegations to consider
its twentieth anniversary as an opportunity to rise in
solidarity against racism and racial discrimination,
whose consequences have been even more troubling in
the aftermath of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
As a result of intense negotiations, consensus
was reached on all but one paragraph of the
resolution — paragraph 10 — on which the G-77 and
China presented an alternative proposal. Paragraph
10 sets out the modalities on the participation of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) without
consultative status in the Economic and Social Council,
providing for Member States’ consideration of their
participation on a non-objection basis and for a final
decision by the General Assembly.
While the Group of 77 and China believe that the
modalities outlined in the resolution reflect a balanced
and adequate approach to celebrating the twentieth
anniversary of the Durban Declaration, and support the
participation of every segment of civil society in that
important event, we are compelled, however, to express
our disappointment with the language in paragraph 10,
which reflects neither the package deals previously
suggested by the co-facilitators nor the initial
amendment to the paragraph presented by the G-77 and
China. In that regard, the Group would like to recall
its position on paragraph 10. We suggested deleting the
latter part of paragraph 10, that is, the phrase “final
decision by the Assembly”, and the footnote associated
with that paragraph, so that the participation of NGOs
without consultative status in the Economic and
Social Council would be based on previously agreed
consensus-based language. That alternative was aimed
21-24124

02/09/2021

on the one hand at ensuring the participation of such
NGOs and on the other at striking a balance among the
various views on the role of the General Assembly in
the decision pertaining to their participation. We still
believe that if approved by all Member States, it would
have offered a consensus consideration of paragraph
10 and opened a new path for agreed language on the
issue of the participation of NGOs without consultative
status, which the Group fully supports.
We also want to point out that the co-facilitators had
attempted to find alternative suggestions to paragraph
10 by suggesting further amendments to another
paragraph in the resolution, paragraph 7, and proposing
different language for paragraph 10, reflecting the
agreed consensus-based language that was adopted in
the previous modalities resolution, resolution 65/279,
for the tenth anniversary of the Durban Declaration.
Despite our own proposal and position on paragraphs
7 and 10, the G-77 and China have shown flexibility
and were willing to support the two package deals
suggested by the co-facilitators. We regret that despite
our support for the various alternatives, paragraph 10
does not reflect or accommodate the concerns of the
G-77 and China.
Finally, while joining the consensus on the adoption
of this important resolution and looking forward to the
celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the Durban
Declaration and its Programme of Action, the Group of
77 and China would like to register their concerns and
position as expressed in this statement on paragraph 10.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes the
adoption of resolution 75/320, on the scope, modalities,
format and organization of the high-level meeting
of the General Assembly to commemorate the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action. We are grateful
to the delegations of Portugal and South Africa for
coordinating the negotiations.
However, we would like to clarify our position
regarding one organizational aspect of the event.
We believe that the wording of paragraph 10 of
the resolution, establishing the parameters for the
participation of non-governmental organizations, is not
in line with the General Assembly’s rules of procedure
and working methods or its established practices for
holding such events.

A/75/PV.100

We welcome the contributions of civil society in
combating racism. The efforts of non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and academia are
particularly important and urgently needed for the
full implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action. At the same time, we believe
that the participation of civil-society representatives
should not run counter to the very legal nature
of the United Nations and the organization of
intergovernmental processes. This issue does not
apply solely to this particular event. It is rather
related to a fundamental issue, that of preserving the
intergovernmental basis for cooperation and work
within the United Nations. In view of this, the Russian
Federation cannot support the wording of operational
paragraph 10 of resolution 75/320 and wishes to distance
itself from the consensus on it.
Mr. Pilipenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Back in 2001, Belarus was one of the 170 countries
participating in the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance. At the event’s solemn opening in Durban,
the late Kofi Annan, the-then Secretary-General, said,
“We are here to learn, not to celebrate. We are
here to share experiences, perspectives and
assessments — of how far we have come, and
how much further we must go if racism is to be
defeated.” (A/CONF.189/12 (Part III), annex II)
We believe those words are fully applicable to
the high-level meeting on the twentieth anniversary
of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
whose modalities we confirmed today. However, a
number of contradictions emerged during the work on
the resolution (resolution 75/320), and we have some
comments on that.
First, certain countries — including some
that previously boycotted the work of the Durban
Conference and subsequent related events in various
years — have already said publicly that they will not
participate in the event in September. And yet a group
of those countries have been working actively on the
modalities, peremptorily and categorically imposing
their opinion on the organization of an event in which
they ostentatiously plan not to participate.
Secondly, some Member States continue to take
steps that consistently undermine the sovereignty of
independent States, on the pretext of broadening the
representation of non-governmental organizations

21-241243/8

A/75/PV.100

within the United Nations system. Anyone who is
against that approach is immediately branded a hater of
non-governmental organizations and an opponent of the
participation of civil society in the work of the United
Nations. We completely disagree with such approaches
and views. We believe that States in the international
arena represent every one of their diverse societies’
interests, while taking into account each country’s own
unique situation. The dialogue with civil society plays
an important part in the formation of sovereign States’
positions in the United Nations system and should be
conducted at the national level.
We regret that some States are not prepared to
hold constructive discussions on this issue and to
seek compromise. In that regard, we feel obliged to
dissociate ourselves from operative paragraph 10 of the
modalities resolution.
Mrs. Xu Daizhu (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action mark an
important milestone in the international fight against
racism. China has been dedicated since the very
beginning to combating all forms of racism. We actively
support and participate in all relevant international
efforts to eliminate racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.
China supports the initiative on holding a highlevel General Assembly meeting on 22 September to
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action and adopt a
political declaration. We hope that the international
community will further consolidate the consensus on
the issue with a view to eliminating racism in all its
forms as soon as possible. In that connection, China
joined the consensus on resolution 75/320. At the
same time, China supports the statement made by the
representative of Guinea on behalf of the Group of 77
and China in explanation of their position regarding
operative paragraph 10 of resolution 75/320. We regret
that the position of the Group of 77 and China was not
taken into account in the text.
China greatly values the efforts and contributions
of civil society, including non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), in eliminating racism and
racial discrimination. We are in favour of NGOs’
regular and orderly participation in United Nations
events and welcome their positive contributions to
the work of the United Nations. Experience in recent
years showed that Member States could have reached
4/8

02/09/2021

a consensus on the question of a no-objection basis
regarding the participation of NGOs in high-level
meetings of the General Assembly, thereby ensuring
their effective participation in United Nations activities
while maintaining the Assembly’s intergovernmental
nature. However, since the beginning of the year, some
countries have repeatedly ignored the existing rules and
institutional arrangements regarding the participation
of NGOs in General Assembly high-level meetings and
have deliberately challenged the Assembly’s practices
regarding the no-objection basis, which took years to
shape. That has seriously damaged consensus and unity
among Member States.
China continues to have serious concerns regarding
operative paragraph 10 and dissociates itself from it.
We call on Member States to continue to hold broad
and in-depth discussions, seeking maximum consensus
and unity. At the same time, we are ready to continue
holding open and constructive consultations with all
parties to ensure that NGOs can participate actively in
the work of the United Nations and play a part while
maintaining General Assembly rules and practices.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
I would like to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Francisco Duarte Lopes, Permanent
Representative of Portugal, and Ambassador
Mathu Joyini, Permanent Representative of South
Africa, who ably and patiently conducted the
discussions and negotiations on resolution 75/320 in
informal consultations.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 70.
Agenda item 134
Sexual exploitation and abuse: implementing a
zero-tolerance policy
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/754)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.129)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.129.
Mr. Attelb (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
my delegation, I would like to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.129, entitled “United Nations action on sexual
21-24124

02/09/2021

exploitation and abuse”, submitted by Egypt under
agenda item 134.
Egypt held a number of informal consultations on
the draft resolution in the past month, during which we
listened to Member States’ observations and opinions
and received their suggestions, which have enriched the
current text.
In that context, it is my pleasure to convey to
the Assembly that in accordance with the silence
procedure, we have reached consensus on the current
text of the draft resolution. I would be remiss if I did not
express my thanks and appreciation to all delegations of
Member States for their active, positive and constructive
participation during the consultations. As a result, we
were able to agree by consensus on the draft resolution
we are adopting today. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank all the delegations that sponsored
the draft resolution, in a manifestation of our collective
commitment to preventing sexual exploitation and
abuse and addressing them whenever they occur.
Egypt submitted the draft resolution based on its
commitment to supporting the efforts of the United
Nations to implement its zero-tolerance policy on acts
of sexual exploitation and abuse, in a continuation of
the Egyptian initiative that has maintained this item
on the Assembly’s agenda of the General Assembly
through the submission of resolutions 71/278, 72/312
and 73/302, all on the theme of “United Nations action
on sexual exploitation and abuse”. In that regard, I
would like to present the most salient objectives and
points of the draft resolution before us today.
First, draft resolution A/75/L.129 builds on the
momentum of previous resolutions and aims to promote
United Nations efforts to comprehensively prevent and
address acts of sexual exploitation and abuse throughout
the entire United Nations system, at Headquarters and
in the field, including agencies, funds, programmes,
peacekeeping missions, special political missions
and non-United Nations troops mandated by the
Security Council.
Secondly, the draft resolution takes a balanced
approach that strongly condemns such heinous acts by
individuals, whoever the perpetrators may be. It calls
for urgent measures to address such acts and achieve
justice. Neither does it neglect the important role of
individuals within the United Nations, especially
within peacekeeping troops, who make great sacrifices
for global peace and stability.

A/75/PV.100

Thirdly, the draft resolution places the victims of
sexual exploitation and abuse at the heart of United
Nations efforts and concerns in order to urgently and
appropriately guarantee support and protection for
the victims and to hold the perpetrators of such acts
accountable. It also calls on the Secretary-General to
develop the means to monitor and follow up efforts to
support victims throughout the entire system.
Fourthly, the draft resolution establishes
comprehensive accountability at all levels, including the
leadership level, at Headquarters and in the field, as well
as affirming the positive contribution of accountability
in combating sexual exploitation and abuse.
Fifthly, the draft resolution refers to the
ramifications of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
which has increased the risks of sexual exploitation
and abuse and affected the Organization’s ability to
investigate allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse.
It calls on the Secretary-General and Member States
to prioritize preventive efforts, ensure harmony and
consistency between policies and practices and include
information on the pandemic’s impact related to the
Organization’s efforts in this area in the SecretaryGeneral’s next report.
Last but not least, the draft resolution prioritizes
preventive efforts to eliminate sexual exploitation
and abuse and advocates cooperation between
Member States and the United Nations to that end,
including through the exchange of experiences and
best practices. Accordingly, the draft resolution
emphasizes the importance of predeployment training
on the tasks mandated to peacekeeping operations for
greater awareness of this issue and for ensuring such
training’s effectiveness.
My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report (A/75/754) on special measures for protection
from sexual exploitation and abuse, which includes
important information on the Secretariat’s efforts to
implement the zero-tolerance policy throughout the
United Nations system. It also includes statistics on
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse in each of
the peacekeeping missions, special political missions
and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
as well as among partners and non-United Nations
international troops. Those indicators should be
well understood so as to avoid a selective, unilateral
perspective that focuses on limited categories and
ignores others.

21-241245/8

A/75/PV.100

02/09/2021

Based on its responsibility as one of the major troopand police-contributing countries in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and given its commitment to
the zero-tolerance policy on acts of sexual exploitation
and abuse, Egypt has joined the Secretary-General’s
initiative for leaders and has voluntarily pledged to
combat sexual exploitation and abuse. We have also
taken a number of national protection measures designed
to improve the selection and training of Egyptian
troops participating in peacekeeping operations. And
Egypt’s role does not stop there. We also participate
actively in capacity-building in Africa and the Arab
region through the training courses organized by the
Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding and develop relevant
training material that according to United Nations
reports generally makes Egypt’s efforts to prevent and
address crimes of sexual exploitation and abuse some
of the best among Member States.
We need both international and national efforts to
eliminate the scourge of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Egypt will therefore continue to work with Member
States to that end. We are sure the Assembly would agree
that it is important to implement the draft resolution we
are about to adopt and to work together to renew our
collective commitment to preventing and addressing
sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as to continuing
the dialogue to strengthen those efforts by providing
every kind of support for the victims of such acts,
including the legal, psychological and medical support
that can address their psychological and social impact.
In conclusion, I would like to once again thank
the General Assembly for convening this meeting and
the Member States that supported the draft resolution
through their active participation in the negotiation
process. I also thank all the countries that have
sponsored the draft resolution, and call on those that
have not yet done so to join them in support of its
important principles and values.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.129, entitled “United
Nations action on sexual exploitation and abuse”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the
6/8

following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/75/L.129: Angola, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Chile, China, Costa Rica,
Djibouti, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Israel, Jordan,
Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal,
Nigeria, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, the
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.129?
Draft resolution A/75/L.129 was adopted (resolution
75/321).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
for explanations of position on the resolution just
adopted, I would like to remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Vasquez Muñoz (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Egypt for submitting this important
resolution (resolution 75/321) on United Nations action
on sexual exploitation and abuse. Given the priority
that my country attaches to the issue, we joined the
consensus on its adoption. We regret, however, that our
main national priorities were not reflected in the final
text, despite my delegation’s efforts and constructive
participation during the negotiation process. I would
like to highlight the following four points.
First, in line with its feminist foreign policy,
Mexico believes that we cannot achieve prosperous
or just societies without gender equality. Equality
presupposes a life free of violence and discrimination
in all their forms, particularly for women and girls,
in all their diversity, who have historically been the
primary victims. It was therefore critical for Mexico
that the text include a survivor-centred approach and
acknowledge them as survivors of sexual exploitation
and abuse, as their testimony and voices encourage
other victims of such degrading acts to report them,
thereby contributing to raising awareness of this form
of violence and the attention it urgently requires.
Secondly, Mexico also regrets that the final text
did not include a gender and human rights perspective,
despite the fact that it is essential to include that
perspective in order to emphasize the fact that women
are the main victims of this type of violence and that
the treatment of cases must therefore be differentiated
21-24124

02/09/2021

and based on the highest human rights standards. That
is why my delegation proposed language during the
negotiations to address the issue comprehensively and
cover the right of survivors to reparations for the harm
caused by such acts. Those reparations must always be
effective, timely, accessible and respect the dignity of
survivors, while preventing their re-victimization.
Thirdly, we do not agree that a text seeking to
establish measures to eradicate sexual exploitation
and abuse throughout the United Nations system,
including agencies, funds and programmes and their
implementing partners, should be limited to the scope of
peacekeeping operations, given that the system extends
far beyond them. Sexual abuse can occur anywhere. We
must therefore work to ensure that all areas of United
Nations operations are safe and free of violence.
Lastly, Mexico believes that until we include these
elements, we cannot say that our culture is striving
to completely eradicate sexual exploitation and abuse
within the entire United Nations system. It is important
not only to work to eradicate them but also to stress
preventive approaches that can make a reality of the
right to a life free of violence for all people, especially
women and girls.
Mexico is firmly committed to advancing gender
equality and ensuring the welfare of women in all their
diversity. In future we look forward to more substantive
and constructive discussions that can comprehensively
address the challenges in this area.
Mr. Kennedy (United States of America): The
United States reaffirms its commitment to effectively
addressing sexual exploitation and abuse, including
within the United Nations system. We strongly support
the zero-tolerance policy of the United Nations
and the Secretary-General’s efforts to strengthen
its implementation.
Sexual exploitation and abuse is a scourge. It inflicts
devastating harm on individuals and communities,
particularly the vulnerable communities that the United
Nations is mandated to protect and support in their
recovery from crisis or conflict. It also undermines
the legitimacy of the United Nations itself, as well as
the effectiveness of United Nations field operations,
including peacekeeping missions, agencies, funds and
programmes, especially when those responsible are not
held accountable.

A/75/PV.100

The United States supports the recognition
in resolution 75/321 that protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse requires a multifaceted approach
that includes a survivor-centred response and prevention
approaches that attack the root causes and contributing
factors of sexual abuse and exploitation, meaningfully
responding to incidents of sexual abuse and exploitation
when they are reported and ensuring accountability,
including for senior management officials.
We are disappointed that the resolution does not
recognize the importance of addressing survivors of
sexual abuse and exploitation. The terms “victim” and
“survivor” each have their place and serve different
purposes. While the term “victim” is a legal definition
necessary and most frequently utilized within the justice
system, “survivor” is used as a term of empowerment
to convey an individual’s resiliency and capacity to
recover and thrive. Both are important and should have
their place in the resolution. United Nations action must
recognize the vital importance of a survivor-centred
approach to sexual exploitation and abuse that treats
survivors with dignity and respect, protects privacy and
confidentiality, supports their needs and wishes and
their capacity to make decisions about interventions,
and places their safety, welfare and rights before other
considerations. The United States also supports the
authority of the Secretary-General to take the necessary
measures to implement the zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse. We look forward to
the Secretary-General’s analysis of shortcomings
and possible solutions aimed at improving the United
Nations system’s response, including through existing
systems such as the gender-based violence response and
prevention programmes, service mapping, information
management and referral pathways.
Lastly, the United States would like to express
its deep concern about the lack of progress on sexual
exploitation and abuse in negotiations in the Fifth
Committee in recent years. The Fifth Committee,
not the plenary meetings of the General Assembly,
is the designated body for discussing the SecretaryGeneral’s report on special measures for protection
from sexual exploitation and abuse. It is a forum where
all Member States have the benefit of support from the
Secretariat and sufficient time for negotiations. All
Member States must dedicate themselves to action in
the Fifth Committee in the resumed session. We must
all continue to do our utmost to eradicate this heinous

21-241247/8

A/75/PV.100

phenomenon wherever it may exist within the United
Nations system.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.

8/8

02/09/2021

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 134?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

21-24124
