S/PV.9354

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9354th meeting

Wednesday, 21 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Osei-Mensah
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-17941 (E)
*2317941*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan,
Tajikistan and Uzbekistan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; and Ms. Shabana Basij-Rasikh,
co-Founder and President of the School of Leadership,
Afghanistan.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Ms. Otunbayeva.
Ms. Otunbayeva: We as the United Nations
continue to face a complicated situation in Afghanistan.
The restrictions imposed on 5 April against Afghan
women working for the United Nations place a question
mark over our activities across the country. We have
been given no explanations by the de facto authorities
for that ban, and no assurances that it will be lifted. We
will not put our national female staff in danger, and we
are therefore asking them not to report to the office.
At the same time, we have asked all our male national
staff performing non-essential tasks to stay home to
respect the principle of non-discrimination. Finally, we
are steadfast: female national staff will not be replaced
by male national staff, as some de facto authorities
have suggested.
We welcome resolution 2681 (2023), which both
condemned the ban and stressed the critical importance
of a continued presence of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
other United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
across Afghanistan.
We must all remind the de facto authorities of their
continuing responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations. Afghanistan, as a State, committed
2/27

21/06/2023

to those obligations as one of the earliest members of
the Organization in 1946. They include the obligation
to respect the privileges and immunities of the United
Nations and its officials, including Afghan women
who work for us. The April ban specifically targets the
United Nations. The Taliban ask to be recognized by
the United Nations and its Members, but at the same
time they act against the key values expressed in the
United Nations Charter.
The ban against Afghan women working for
the United Nations adds to earlier restrictions
placed on Afghan women and girls by the de facto
authorities — including a ban against women
working for non-governmental organizations or
for other diplomatic entities; a ban preventing girls
from attending non-religious secondary and tertiary
educational institutions; and a ban against girls and
women visiting public parks, baths and gyms. Those
and other edicts limit the physical movement of women
and girls and their participation in economic, social and
public life.
The de facto Taliban authorities must rescind those
bans to enable the United Nations to continue its full
support to the people of Afghanistan. My colleague
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs will provide additional details in a separate
briefing today on how the bans affect the humanitarian
sector, as well as on the overall humanitarian situation.
But I would also like to emphasize the human effects of
those bans.
UNAMA, in collaboration with UN-Women and
the International Organization for Migration, has just
released report on the situation of Afghan women. The
report, which is available on the UNAMA website,
documents the distressing toll the bans are taking on
women’s physical and mental health and on their sense
of security.
Another unfortunate effect of the bans is that they
obscure some of the other more positive achievements
that have taken place under the de facto authorities.
One of those is the growing evidence that the Taliban’s
ban on opium cultivation, announced in April last
year, has been effectively enforced in many parts of
the country. According to initial media reports, the
cultivation of opium has decreased significantly. At the
same time, the opium economy has helped sustain parts
of the rural economy in Afghanistan. Donors should
consider allocating funding to alternative livelihood
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

programmes that address the specific needs of farmers
affected by the ban.
The Afghan economy remains stable, albeit at a low
equilibrium. The World Bank reports that inflation is
declining and that the exchange rate remains steady.
In part, that is due to the welcome reduction in highlevel corruption. The de facto authorities continue to
report the collection of sufficient revenues to finance
Government operations, including paying civil service
salaries. According to the de facto authorities, that
includes approximately 500,000 civil servants who had
been working under the Republic. That macroeconomic
stability, however, coexists alongside severe household
poverty. According to the World Bank, 58 per cent
of households struggle to satisfy basic needs. United
Nations humanitarian efforts continue to address the
needs of the nearly 20 million people who need some form
of assistance. Afghanistan, I would remind members,
remains the world’s largest humanitarian crisis.
United Nations cash shipments, required for
humanitarian operations, are expected to decrease as
donor funding declines. That could begin to have a
negative effect on monetary stability. I would like to
draw the Council’s attention to the United Nations
Strategic Framework for Afghanistan, which we
will issue next week and will update and replace the
Transitional Engagement Framework from last year. It
outlines the range of activities the United Nations could
carry out in Afghanistan between now and 2025 if the
necessary enabling environment were to be provided by
the de facto authorities.
Such an enabling environment requires greater
transparency and accountability. Politically, the Taliban
regime remains insular and autocratic. The composition
of the de facto Government is entirely male, and almost
totally derived from the Taliban’s Pashtun and rural
political base. We have noted efforts and mechanisms
towards consultation by the de facto authorities at
the local level that acknowledge the pluralism of the
country and that at times have had a moderating effect
on some Taliban policies. But the general trend is one of
a centralization of power by an unaccountable central
authority. One of the key issues raised at the meeting
of Special Envoys convened by the Secretary-General
in Doha in May was the need for inclusive governance.
There is widespread concern that a lack of inclusivity
and participatory governance will lead to instability.

S/PV.9354

On counter-terrorism the picture is mixed. The
de facto authorities are making concerted efforts to
counter the Islamic State-Khorasan Province (ISILKP). Despite that, attacks targeting both the de facto
authorities and the civilian population have taken
place. Most recently, in Badakhshan on 6 and 8 June,
two attacks targeting the de facto authorities killed or
wounded at least 63 people, including 14 killed and 49
wounded, the majority of whom were civilians. ISIL-KP
claimed both attacks. Indiscriminate attacks by ISILKP, such as the use of improvised explosive devices
in populated areas and attacks deliberately targeting
civilians, constitute serious violations of international
law and must cease.
We have taken note of the recent annual report (see
S/2023/370) by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team. The report contains information on
other terrorist groups operating in Afghanistan and
their relationships with the de facto authorities. We
note the report’s observation that the existing sanctions
procedures are obsolete and should be updated to reflect
the realities in Afghanistan today.
While the end of the armed conflict has greatly
reduced the number of civilian casualties since the Taliban
came to power, the United Nations Mine Action Service
in Afghanistan estimates there to be approximately
100 casualties per month from unexploded ordinance.
Unfortunately, the de facto Directorate of Mine Action
Coordination has suspended its cooperation with the
United Nations for technical reasons, which we are
trying to resolve. Without United Nations support, the
sector operates with limited technical capacity and
monitoring. Discussions continue with the de facto
authorities to lift the suspension as soon as possible and
enable us to provide full support within our mandate to
that vital sector.
Finally, we are greatly concerned by Afghanistan’s
vulnerability to climate change. Years of drought
have compounded the effects of conflict and poverty.
Climate change is fostering population displacements
inside Afghanistan that could be destabilizing. In
order to address Afghanistan’s lack of water and
consequent food insecurity, the de facto authorities
have begun to dig a canal that will divert water from
the northern Amu Darya River, raising concerns among
neighbouring countries. Overall, the need to mitigate
the effects of climate change requires a more specific
dialogue between the de facto authorities and the
international community.

23-179413/27

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

In my regular discussions with the de facto
authorities, I am blunt about the obstacles they have
created for themselves by the decrees and restrictions
they have enacted, in particular against women and
girls. We have conveyed to them that, as long as those
decrees are in place, it is nearly impossible that their
Government will be recognized by members of the
international community. Based on our discussions
with many interlocutors across the country, it is also
clear that the decrees are highly unpopular among
the Afghan population. They cost the Taliban both
domestic and international legitimacy, while inflicting
suffering on half of their population and damaging
their economy.
Despite the bans, I believe that the international
community can do more to ensure the future stability
of the Afghan economy in a way that directly improves
the lives of Afghans. That is particularly important in
the light of a likely significant decline in funding for
the humanitarian response this year.
I welcome the visit now being undertaken by the
Special Coordinator, Mr. Feridun Sinirlioğlu, who
is currently in Afghanistan. We look forward to his
recommendations. I would also like to highlight the
importance of continuing the momentum established at
Doha in May by holding a subsequent meeting in the
same format before the end of the year. We have begun
consultations on the timing and content of that meeting.
Despite the problems I mentioned, we have
established reliable and effective working channels of
communication with the de facto authorities, and we
have identified, as I described, greater opportunities
for cooperation that could build mutual understanding
and improve the lives of the Afghan people. We have
a mandate to engage on the Security Council’s behalf,
and we will continue to do so. We could do much more,
however, if the Taliban were to rescind its punishing
restrictions on its female population.
The President: I thank Ms. Otunbayeva for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Basij-Rasikh.
Ms. Basij-Rasikh: I am glad to have this opportunity
to speak to the members of the Security Council today.
My name is Shabana Basij-Rasikh. I am the Head of the
School of Leadership, Afghanistan (SOLA). We were
based in Kabul from 2008 through 2021, and we have
been operating SOLA in Rwanda since August 2021
4/27

21/06/2023

and the return of the Taliban. We educate Afghan girls
at the secondary level, up through high school. To my
knowledge, we are the only legally operating school
that is doing that anywhere on the planet.
I did not ever think that I would have to make a
statement like that during my lifetime. I did not ever
think that the Taliban would be in the position to
bring back the darkness I lived in as a child in the
1990s — a child attending secret schools run by brave
women in Kabul, a child living in fear because I was
an Afghan girl, one of many, who wanted an education.
Nothing more than that; we just wanted to go to school.
And for that our families and our teachers risked
everything — I mean everything — so that we could
learn. What I say to the Council today I say because I
stand on the shoulders of those giants of my childhood.
I am the inheritor of the bravery of Afghan women,
and men too, who kindled fires in the darkness of our
nation as the world’s attention drifted away.
Those fires are burning even now. Secret schools
have reopened in Kabul and in the provinces. My
school, SOLA, forced into exile, is thriving in Rwanda,
a nation that has been such an extraordinary host. We
have just concluded our admissions season for the new
school year, which will begin this fall. Historically,
we have never received more than 300 applications in
any given year. But not this year; this year we received
nearly 2,000 applications from students in Afghan
communities spread across the world. Two thousand
Afghan girls. Two thousand Afghan families. Two
thousand fires in the darkness. And each one represents
the unquenchable and unconquerable desire for access
to the basic human right of education. It is our task, the
world’s task, to ensure that those flames never go out.
I say to all of us assembled here today — nations that
share borders with Afghanistan, that have fought wars
within Afghanistan and that work in public and private
to find a path forward for Afghanistan — that their
histories and approaches are different, but ultimately
their interests are the same. They want what I want. I
feel safe in saying that it is what every Afghan woman
and man wants. What we want is summed up in a single
word. That word is “stability.” And what makes that
word possible is education.
Everything spirals up from the schoolroom.
Everything. Economic prosperity. Improved public
health. A replanting of the soil in which extremism
grows, replacing the seeds of hate with the hope
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

and possibility that comes when girls are given the
opportunity to learn, when girls are given the certainty
that they matter. The secret to a stable Afghanistan, a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan, is no secret at
all; it is educated girls. Educated girls who become
educated women who raise more educated girls and
boys. Educated girls who become educated women,
independent women, women who chart their own
course, a course that elevates their families and their
nation and the world.
All of us know that international borders do not
contain the threat of extremism. But neither do they
contain the benefits brought by those women and girls.
Those are benefits that the whole world can share. And
it begins with education and the girls who fight for it.
The rising spiral starts in the classroom. The virtuous
circle carries a society to its absolute potential. What
can we do, all of us here today, to ensure that it will
always spin? I have two recommendations.
First, the international community must ensure
that the Internet always remains open and accessible
within Afghanistan. When girls cannot go to school, we
as educators can bring school to them. And our classes
are only a smartphone and an online connection away.
Our classrooms exist in the palm of a girl’s hand, and
the world opens up before her eyes. The Taliban say
that women and girls should remain hidden behind
the walls of the home. I say we beat them at their own
game. Behind those household walls, we create online
classrooms. In those closed physical spaces, we unfold
endless digital opportunities. I am not here to make
commercial pitches or product recommendations. But
it should be no secret to anyone that there exist costeffective means of ensuring reliable Internet access
anywhere on Earth, including inside Afghanistan,
and those means must be pursued. Afghan educators,
innovators and our allies will do the rest.
My second recommendation is this: the international
community must ensure that Afghan refugees,
particularly female refugees, have access to quality
education in their nations of residence. Afghans have
found refuge in our neighbouring nations and in nations
across oceans. Some of those here have been hosting us
for a long time, for the 40 years of war that wracked my
country and for even longer. Some have been hosting
us only since the fall of Kabul, not quite two years ago.
Some who neighbour Afghanistan — and I speak with
great frankness — are hosting families of prospective
SOLA students, families who have voluntarily gone

S/PV.9354

into exile so that their daughters might have a chance
to learn.
What unites everyone here is the reality that the
members of the Afghan diaspora are not, and must not
be seen as, a burden. What we are are human beings
with great human talents. Space must be allowed for
opportunities to flow into diaspora communities, and
those opportunities should be driven by qualified
educational institutions allowed by host nations to
operate within those communities. SOLA has done
that in Rwanda, and our model can be one for others to
follow, all of us reaching Afghan girls in exile so that
each girl not only contributes to the benefit of her host
nation, but also becomes an educated Afghan woman,
ready to return home to Afghanistan, ready to take up
the challenge of rebuilding our beautiful country.
I have said it before, and I will say it again: borders
do not contain the threat of extremism. And borders
do not contain the benefits brought by educated girls.
The decisions made here decide the path of the spiral
in which my homeland spins —down deeper into
darkness, or up, rising, into tomorrow’s hope.
I would like to end with this. I am a proud Muslim
woman. I know very well that Prophet Mohammed
spoke openly and clearly about the importance of
education. All Muslims know that, and all of us must
be familiar with the Prophet Mohammed’s Hadith that
tells us “seek knowledge, even as far as China”. With
all respect to the members from China who are here
with us today, the Prophet was not speaking literally;
he was urging us as Muslims to pursue education even
if we had to go to what was, at that time, the ends of the
Earth to find it. I myself have gone as far as Rwanda,
and so have my students. Other Afghans have gone to
other nations. All of us are seekers. And with the eyes
of the world watching, all of us will find what we seek.
The President: I thank Ms. Basij-Rasikh for
her briefing.
I shall now make a statement as the representative
of the United Arab Emirates.
I thank Special Representative Otunbayeva
and Ms. Basij-Rasikh for their very insightful and
moving remarks.
Throughout the past six months, the Security
Council unanimously adopted three resolutions on
Afghanistan. Maintaining that unity remains crucial
going forward. The United Arab Emirates, alongside

23-179415/27

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

21/06/2023

Japan as co-penholders, will continue to strive for the
consensus that we have seen on Afghanistan, because it
is through our unity that we can make a difference on
the ground.

the political dynamics of the situation in Afghanistan.
That is why it is more important than ever that the core
humanitarian principles of neutrality, impartiality and
humanity continue to drive those efforts.

Today I will focus on the four areas where the
United Arab Emirates believes that we can solidify
our efforts.

Thirdly, security, counter-terrorism and counternarcotics is another issue where we share a collective
interest. All of us agree that there cannot be a security
vacuum. The latest report (see S/2023/370) of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
provides a sobering assessment. The assertion that
Afghanistan’s soil will not serve as a safe haven for
threats against other nations has been one of the most
fundamental demands by the Council and must remain
so. That message needs to be part of every dialogue
that the United Nations has, and part of the Security
Council’s strategy for Afghanistan. It must also be part
and parcel of the discussions between international
actors with the de facto authorities.

First, we must continue to insist on the inclusion
of women and girls in Afghan society. That starts with
education. We must see progress on the provision of
education at all levels and up to internationally expected
standards and benchmarks. That is non-negotiable,
as we heard from our civil society briefer today. On
a practical level, there are real concerns that the latest
decision by the Taliban requiring the handover of
educational programming will result in subsequent
donor funding withdrawal and the eventual collapse
of the educational system. That would be a tragedy,
not only for women and girls but the entire country,
whose prosperity relies on a well-educated workforce.
Online interim efforts and interim support measures
by neighbouring countries should be encouraged and
funded. We must safeguard women and girls’ access
to the Internet across the country, as it is the only
space where they currently move freely. And today it
is providing life-changing support for the education of
girls in the country.
Secondly, the impending humanitarian crisis in
the country must remain a joint concern for Council
members. By removing women as actors in the delivery
of humanitarian aid, the Taliban are not only limiting
equal access to life-saving aid, but they are also
weakening the ability to prevent, address and respond
to sexual abuse and the exploitation of aid beneficiaries.
That is inexcusable. Last week the Council adopted
landmark resolution 2686 (2023), which recognizes
that gender discrimination and acts of extremism can
contribute to driving conflict. The resolution urges all
of us to speak up against such extremist ideologies.
The work by and for women is crucial at a time when
humanitarian needs are at their highest.
Meanwhile, the Taliban are making it increasingly
difficult for humanitarian organizations to carry out their
functions. As we have said before, our recommendation
is that the humanitarian aid space must remain fully
depoliticized. Humanitarians cannot become a political
bargaining chip. We need to confirm our commitment
that humanitarian actors are compartmentalized from
6/27

Fourthly, none of those actions can be realized unless
the Afghan economy is revived. The economy cannot
be sustained on humanitarian aid alone. Revitalizing
the Afghan economy is the only sustainable pathway
forward. That demands the creation of favourable
conditions for foreign investment and trade, as well
as an educated and skilled workforce. There are some
promising signals in the Secretary General’s latest
report — on the management of the economy, curbing
corruption and limiting narcotics production. It is in our
joint interests that revenues from the narcotics trade not
be channelled to fund organized crime and terrorism.
As such, the progress that we see in that regard needs to
be encouraged and seized upon to make further gains.
Climate change is intrinsically linked to each of
those four challenges. By uniting on the push towards
mitigating and adapting to its impacts in Afghanistan,
we will reinforce our joint efforts to make progress in
each of those areas.
Those opportunities for unity among Council
members demand an integrated and coordinated
approach to address them. We welcome the appointment
of Ambassador Feridun Sinirlioğlu as United Nations
Special Coordinator for Afghanistan. The independent
assessment that we collectively mandated in March
provides an opportunity for all Afghan and international
stakeholders to participate in the much-needed,
inclusive conversation about Afghanistan’s future. We
strongly encourage all actors to engage with the Special
Coordinator in good faith, in pursuit of a more coherent
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

and integrated strategy on Afghanistan. I would also
reiterate that the mandate calls for consultations
with Afghan stakeholders, particularly women and
civil society. We look forward to the findings of the
independent assessment in November.
The United Arab Emirates firmly believes that
practical engagement must remain the core focus of the
international community and the work of the Security
Council. We welcome the engagement of international
actors who are using their contacts and leverage with the
de facto authorities to influence their decision-making,
as well as the Secretary-General’s continued leadership,
initiated by the formation of a Special Envoy group
that held its first meeting in Doha in May. As we said
before, disengaging now will result only in even more
severe consequences for the Afghan people.
The United Arab Emirates will continue its
engagement in a clear-eyed manner and continue
our work towards setting Afghanistan on a
positive trajectory.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to start by
thanking Special Representative Otunbayeva for
providing the Council with an update on the situation.
I also thank Ms. Shabana Basij-Rasikh for her valuable
and brave remarks. We need to keep in mind the fire in
the darkness, and we need to work together to stoke that
flame for the future of Afghanistan.
It is regrettable that we have seen so few positive
signs for the future of Afghanistan despite the repeated
calls by the Security Council and the international
community. The humanitarian needs are desperate, and
poverty is nearly universal. Humanitarian access has
been further constrained by a series of restrictions on
the ability of women to work.
We take note of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team’s report (see S/2023/370)
on the security situation in Afghanistan. We condemn
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including
the attack at a mosque in Badakhshan province earlier
this month, and we call on the Taliban to take thorough
anti-terrorism measures.

S/PV.9354

Hope is diminishing, particularly for women
and girls in Afghanistan. We re-emphasize the
indispensable role of women in Afghanistan’s future
and long-term development. We call on the Taliban
to heed the unified call of the Security Council, as
demonstrated in resolution 2681 (2023), swiftly reverse
the restrictions on women and girls and allow their full,
equal, meaningful and safe participation in society.
This will not only secure the welfare and dignity of
women and girls, but will also allow Afghanistan to
fulfil its potential and achieve long-term stability and
prosperity for itself and the region.
The international community should unite around
an integrated and coherent approach in addressing the
challenges faced by the Afghan people. We highlight
the important role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in coordinating humanitarian
assistance, monitoring the human rights situation
and promoting inclusive political dialogue. We also
commend the meeting of special envoys on Afghanistan,
held at the beginning of May in Doha. We need to build
on the takeaways from that meeting in pursuing patient,
pragmatic and principled engagement with the Taliban
in order to encourage them to change the course of their
policies in the direction desired by the Afghan people
and to widen spaces for the benefit of the people. At
the same time, we need to keep discussing our strategic
approaches in order to benefit the Afghan people and
contribute to the stability of the region.
We also welcome the appointment of Ambassador
Feridun Sinirlioğlu as Special Coordinator to lead
the independent assessment requested in resolution
2679 (2023). We await the opportunity to consider
the forward-looking recommendations on how best to
assist Afghanistan in this time of distress.
In conclusion, Japan will continue to support
the building of a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan, and we will continuously contribute to the
work of the Security Council for a better future for the
people of Afghanistan.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I thank Special Representative Otunbayeva and
Ms. Basij-Rasikh for their briefings.
Afghanistan is at a critical phase of transitioning
from chaos to order and needs the continued input and
attention from the international community and the
United Nations.

23-179417/27

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

In the light of the current situation, I wish to stress
four points.
First, dialogue and engagement must be maintained.
Engaging the Afghan interim Government with a
practical attitude is the fundamental way to enhance
understanding and mutual trust and address relevant
concerns. We are pleased to see that Afghanistan’s
neighbours and countries in the surrounding area
have always been at the forefront in that regard.
Since September 2021, Afghanistan’s neighbouring
countries have already held four meetings of Foreign
Ministers, the latest of which was held in Samarkand,
Uzbekistan, on 13 April. On 6 May China, Afghanistan
and Pakistan relaunched the Foreign Ministers dialogue
in Islamabad. Presided over by Secretary-General
Guterres, the meeting of special envoys on the Afghan
issue was held in Doha on 2 May.
On the basis of those activities, the international
community, generally speaking, does have consensus
on building an Afghanistan that is peaceful, stable
and prosperous and hopes to resort to dialogue and
engagement to help the Afghan interim Government,
build political inclusivity, govern with moderation
and build an open and inclusive political architecture.
We hope that the Afghan interim Government will
make positive efforts in the interest of the Afghan
people, meeting the expectations of the international
community, and realize independent and effective State
governance, including effectively ensuring the rights of
women to education and employment.
In order to promote dialogue and engagement,
it is necessary for the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) to
make a package of exemption arrangements for the
international travel of the relevant personnel of the
Afghan interim Government. The sanctions measures
imposed on the relevant personnel by the Council,
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), should also be
adjusted or lifted, in the light of the development of the
situation, in a timely manner.
Secondly, security and stability must be upheld.
Terrorist attacks still continue to take place in
Afghanistan, reminding us that terrorism remains a
major challenge facing the country. Terrorist forces,
including the Islamic State in Iraq and the LevantKhorasan Province, Al-Qaida and the Eastern
Turkistan Islamic Movement, also known as the socalled Turkistan Islamic Party, are colluding with each
8/27

21/06/2023

other and jeopardizing the security of the country, the
region and the world, at large. We hope the Afghan
authorities will take firm and strong measures to
combat all terrorism and to prevent Afghanistan from
again becoming a centre of gravity for terrorism.
Drug transactions could be a major source of
terrorist financing. We note with appreciation that
Afghanistan’s poppy-cultivation area has dropped
significantly this year. The international community
should support Afghanistan and help it develop
alternative crops, improve the economic structure and
curb the space for terrorist forces to exist.
Thirdly, socioeconomic development must be
promoted. The Afghan authorities value economic
development, and the national income has remained
stable, with some increase. Yet easing the humanitarian
crisis remains the most urgent priority.
As of now, this year’s United Nations humanitarian
response plan for Afghanistan is only 9 per cent
funded, with the gap exceeding $4 billion. We call upon
traditional donors to continue providing Afghanistan
with humanitarian assistance and keep United Nations
humanitarian operations functioning normally in
the country. It is unacceptable for developed donors
to significantly cut their aid to Afghanistan and to
link humanitarian aid to other issues. In the long
run, the international community should go beyond
humanitarian aid and offer more help for Afghanistan to
integrate into regional, economic and trade cooperation
and to embark on a path of economic independence and
sustainable development.
Fourthly, external constraints must be removed.
Due to the impact of unilateral sanctions — on items
ranging from food, drinking water, medicines and other
necessities, to cement, reinforcing steel bars and other
construction materials — Afghanistan is facing serious
shortages in supplies, and even more difficulties in its
economic reconstruction. We urge relevant countries to
lift unilateral sanctions on Afghanistan.
Particularly concerning is the fact that, since 2021,
$7 billion of Afghanistan’s overseas assets were frozen
by the United States. Until this day, not a cent has been
returned to the hands of the Afghan people. We urge the
United States to promptly return the assets concerned.
The United States must not delay doing so under various
pretexts and aggravate the suffering of the Afghan
people. We request that the Secretary-General attend
to this issue and request his Special Representative to
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

step up efforts and report to the Council on relevant
developments in a timely manner.
As Afghanistan’s neighbour, China has always
followed and cared about the situation in Afghanistan
and, not long ago, we issued our position on the Afghan
issue. To the best of its abilities, China will continue
to help Afghanistan’s reconstruction and development.
China looks forward to the early achievement of peace,
stability and prosperity in Afghanistan.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): At the outset, my delegation
expresses its condolences to the families of victims of
terrorist attacks perpetrated in northern Afghanistan
earlier this month. Brazil reiterates its condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral
Otunbayeva
and
Ms.
Basij-Rasikh,
President of the School of Leadership, for their
insightful — and as the President of the Security
Council said, touching — remarks.
The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations in Afghanistan sheds
light on critical areas of our political, humanitarian
and human rights efforts, and offers valuable
recommendations. We reaffirm Brazil’s support for the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
for the efforts of the international community aimed
at bringing peace, stability and development to the
Afghan people.
Brazil has consistently advocated the strengthening
of Afghanistan’s institutions and the promotion of
socioeconomic development, with the full inclusion of
Afghan women and minorities. We consider engagement
with the de facto authorities in favour of the Afghan
people to be an important aspect of this process.
At the same time, Brazil joins the international
community in calling on the Taliban to reverse their
exclusionary and discriminatory policies against
women and girls, in particular the ban on women’s
employment by the United Nations. Such policies stand
in stark contrast to the United Nations Charter and the
multilateral framework of human rights. They are also
profoundly detrimental to the future of Afghanistan.
We remain deeply concerned about the extremely
serious humanitarian situation in the country. It is
quite alarming that the number of people requiring
assistance rose by half a million in the first half of this

S/PV.9354

year alone, reaching a staggering 28.8 million by the
end of May. The revised humanitarian response plan
for 2023 is to be welcomed; its proper funding is vital.
In the face of such adversity, promoting food security
in Afghanistan becomes paramount, especially if we
consider that the country is grappling with its third
consecutive year of drought and the looming threat
of a devastating locust infestation that could severely
undermine wheat harvests.
On the economic landscape, we believe that stable
and appropriate regulatory frameworks and policies as
well as a robust private sector are key to Afghanistan’s
future. This is crucial to bringing in investment in
infrastructure and in addressing challenges in the
banking system to facilitate credit, as outlined in the
United Nations Development Programme’s Afghanistan
Socio-Economic Outlook for 2023. In this context, I
reiterate the importance of returning the Afghan assets
held abroad. We commend initiatives such as a recent
workshop spearheaded by the World Bank and aimed
at identifying avenues for bolstering both international
and domestic payment systems in Afghanistan.
In concluding, I reaffirm Brazil’s readiness to
continue working closely with other Council members
and others in favour of a future of peace, stability
and sustainable development for all Afghans, without
discrimination or exclusion of any individual or any
group. Our solidarity with the people of Afghanistan
remains resolute.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Otunbayeva and Ms. Basij-Rasikh for their briefings.
Let me also thank the entire the team comprising the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for its work in advancing the Security
Council’s goal of a stable, prosperous, inclusive and
secure Afghanistan.
The United States again condemns the Taliban’s
restrictions on women’s and girls’ ability to exercise
their human rights. These restrictions are indefensible.
They are not seen anywhere else in the world. We call for
the immediate reversal of these restrictions. Today we
do so on the heels of the Security Council’s unanimous
call for the same: in April, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2681 (2023), the third resolution on
Afghanistan adopted unanimously this year. Over 90
States Members of the United Nations co-sponsored the
resolution, which sent a clear message to the Taliban, to

23-179419/27

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

the Afghan people and to the world: we will not stand
for the Taliban’s repression of women and girls.
The Taliban continue to prevent women from
working for non-governmental organizations. National
female staff members remain unable to gain access to
United Nations offices, including those of humanitarian
organizations. The Taliban are choosing to jeopardize
the lives of millions of innocent Afghans who depend
on critical aid, and they are increasing the burden on
women-headed households that are already among
the most vulnerable. We support the United Nations
decision to continue operating in Afghanistan while
prioritizing the safety and security of all staff members.
The people of Afghanistan do not deserve to suffer
further as a result of the Taliban’s abhorrent decisions.
That is why we support a flexible and principled
approach that prioritizes non-discrimination, the
inclusion, safety and security of female staff members,
as well as the inclusion of women and girls as recipients
of assistance efforts. The Taliban’s grave restrictions
demand a strong response from Afghanistan’s
neighbours and the rest of the international community.
The continued deterioration of humanitarian
conditions in Afghanistan, in large part due to Taliban
interference in humanitarian operations, will lead
to more Afghans being internally displaced. This
displacement will increase the number of Afghan
migrant and refugee flows to neighbouring countries.
Addressing this issue will require creativity, attention
and energy from everyone. Thanks to generous donor
support and bold action, such as the humanitarian
exemption enshrined in resolution 2615 (2021), the
international community averted relief actors’ worst
predictions of widespread famine in 2021. However,
this year, we can already see the impact of reduced
international support for Afghanistan with the closure
of women-led non-governmental organizations, ration
cuts and reductions in the number of beneficiaries of
food assistance.
Despite obstacles and competing global priorities,
we cannot turn our backs on the Afghan people’s
growing humanitarian needs. As the world’s largest
humanitarian donor, the United States will continue to
do its part to support the people of Afghanistan.
We will also carefully watch the Taliban’s actions
on the commitments they have stated they will uphold.
We continue to expect the Taliban to allow unhindered
humanitarian access, safe conditions for aid workers of
10/27

21/06/2023

all genders and independent and impartial provision of
assistance. The Taliban must respect the human rights
of all Afghans. We look to the Taliban to codify those
principles in their policies and to demonstrate them
with their actions. As the meeting of Afghan special
envoys showed, so too does the rest of the world. We
thank the Secretary-General for hosting that meeting.
The United States underscores its strong support for
UNAMA’s comprehensive mandate, including its vital
reporting on human rights, particularly women’s rights
and empowerment work. UNAMA remains critical
to advancing the inclusion, peace and stability we all
agree is so important for Afghanistan and the region.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
make this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Ghana and my own country, Mozambique.
The A3 thanks Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and Ms. Shabana Basij-Rasikh, co-Founder
and President of the School of Leadership, Afghanistan,
for their important informative briefings.
The report of the Secretary-General under
consideration on the situation in Afghanistan and the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) provide us with an opportunity
to discuss the political, security, economic and
humanitarian situations in Afghanistan.
At the political level, we note that the restructuring
of the State apparatus continues, as evidenced by the
decision of the Taliban authorities to impose severe
restrictions on female national staff working for the
United Nations, as well as the new appointments and
recent reshuffles of senior civil servants, mainly men
affiliated with the Taliban.
The A3 wishes to state that the inclusion of women
in governance structures has not changed. In that
connection, we hold the view that the participation of
women in governance is critical for the development
and success of any nation. The A3 underlines the
need for greater efforts to be made to guarantee that
all Afghans, regardless of their ethnicity, social class
or gender, have the opportunity to fully engage in the
political process in the country.
We are advised of the payment of salaries to
civil servants, including women civil servants, most
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

of whom were asked not to report to work after the
Taliban took power. We urge the authorities to allow
civil servants, especially women, to resume their duties
and to contribute to the development of their country.
On the issue of the access of women and girls to
education, it is important to note that education is not
just a fundamental human right with strong roots in
Islam. Education is also a major factor for development.
Denying access to education for half of the population
will have a significant negative effect on the country’s
development and its capability to engage fully in the
global economy. Girls and women should be allowed
to reach their full potential. They should participate
fully in the social, economic and political life of
their communities. We therefore call on the Afghan
authorities to heed the numerous calls by the United
Nations and other organizations to allow women and
girls to resume their education.
On the security front, the situation on the ground
remains fragile. As a result, there has been an increase
in security incidents during the period under review.
We note that UNAMA continued to receive credible
allegations of human rights abuses and violations,
including against former Government officials and
members of the security forces, in violation of the
general amnesty announced in August 2021. We call
on the Taliban authorities to fully respect the general
amnesty announced in August 2021.
Illicit drug trafficking coupled with frequent
clashes between the opposition and security forces,
the presence of foreign forces on the Afghan territory,
as well as continuing border tensions, increase the
volatility of the situation on the ground. We commend
UNAMA’s work in combating the illicit trade, the
accumulation and the diversion of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, as well as explosive
materials, in Afghanistan and in the region.
At the subregional level, we note that tensions
between Iran and Afghanistan over water supply
resulted in an exchange of fire on the border at the
end of May. It is important for regional actors to
engage in a constructive dialogue and take steps to
de-escalate tensions between Iran and Afghanistan
over water supply.
The continuing violence in Afghanistan is having
an impact on the economic and humanitarian situation,
which has continued to deteriorate. Thus, on the
economic front, we are aware of increased revenue

S/PV.9354

collection, positive trade performance, reduced
corruption and increased eradication of opium poppy
fields. However, we note that projections indicate
that prospects for growth and poverty reduction are
limited, as investment in development is limited and
millions of Afghans depend on inflows of international
humanitarian assistance. In addition, the humanitarian
situation remains dire with unprecedented levels of
need in all 34 provinces. To date, there has been a
critical shortfall in humanitarian funding for 2023.
A lack of supplies and medicines, and of salaries for
health workers, is making life difficult for humanitarian
personnel. At the same time, drought, food insecurity
and malnutrition persist. More urgent support from
the international community is needed. Besides that,
landmines and other explosive devices continue to
wreak havoc on the civilian population, especially
children and women. The A3 welcomes the fact that
more than 9.2 square kilometres of contaminated land
has been cleared, as well as the campaign that has
sensitized 39,000 people, including 14,000 women and
girls, to the risks of explosive ordnance in communities
and areas of return.
In conclusion, Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique
commend the work being done by United Nations
personnel in Afghanistan under the leadership
of Special Representative Otunbayeva and by
non-governmental-organization
partners
under
extremely difficult conditions. We look forward to
receiving the report of the Special Coordinator pursuant
to resolution 2679 (2023).
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, for her briefing on the situation
in Afghanistan. The Russian Federation supports the
activities of UNAMA under her leadership within
the framework of the Mission’s mandated tasks. It is
encouraging to see that the United Nations remains
committed to maintaining its presence in Afghanistan
and providing the assistance that its people need. We
listened attentively to the statement by Ms. Shabana
Basij-Rasikh and welcome the fact that regional
stakeholders are also being given the floor today. We
have taken note of the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan, which was
issued yesterday, and would like to note the following.

23-1794111/27

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

21/06/2023

For almost two years now, since the hasty retreat of
United States and NATO troops and the Taliban’s rise
to power, Afghanistan and its people have been living
in a new reality, left to cope practically single-handedly
with old problems and new challenges. The grand
promises to build a long-awaited peace have in practice
turned out to be empty words. Against that backdrop, it
has become increasingly evident that the United States
and other Western countries, which essentially ruined
the country over the course of the past 20 years and
left its people to their fate at the most crucial moment,
have no interest whatever in a genuine settlement or in
the reconstruction of Afghanistan. How else can one
explain their unwillingness to provide real assistance
in resolving the unprecedented humanitarian and
economic crisis, under various manufactured and
hypocritical pretexts? We understand that our Western
colleagues simply no longer have time for Afghanistan,
because all of their attention is now focused on fighting
Russia on the Ukrainian battlefield. There is nothing
more American than invading a country under the
noble pretext of combating terrorism and then making
a total mess of it before abandoning its former wards to
the mercy of fate as soon as the priorities change.

Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)-Khorasan Province. We can
see that after 20 years of a foreign presence, the terrorists
have entrenched their influence in the country and are
deliberately destabilizing the situation by carrying out
more attacks and creating an atmosphere of fear and
despair. Their goal is clearly to present themselves
as an alternative force. Their victims are members of
religious and ethnic minorities, including women and
children, and more than 20 people lost their lives in a
wave of high-profile attacks at the beginning of June.
They also seek to undermine stability in Afghanistan’s
neighbouring States. Meanwhile, it is no secret that
ISIL is supported by external forces. The militants
themselves have confirmed that the group receives
funding from foreign intelligence agencies, and that
foreign terrorist fighters are present in their ranks. The
safety and security of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and humanitarian personnel
on the ground may also be threatened. While we note
the efforts of the de facto authorities, it is clear that
they are not enough to eradicate the threat completely.
Meanwhile, the prospect of terrorist activities spilling
over the country’s borders into other parts of Central
Asia remains very real.

Meanwhile, the United States and its NATO allies,
including by using the threat of sanctions, are trying
to erase the evidence from the history books of the
numerous war crimes committed by their militaries,
just as they are silent about the real reasons for their
lengthy stay in Afghanistan. In that context, our
Western colleagues’ loud protestations about the
country’s currently deteriorating situation and the
suffering of the Afghan people, including women and
girls, appear immoral, as do their calls for wielding
the cudgel of sanctions and upping the political and
economic pressure on the de facto authorities. They
lack the courage to admit that their preferred methods
long ago lost their effectiveness. The consequences of
such actions will only hurt ordinary Afghans and do
nothing to fundamentally change the situation on the
ground. However, we long ago ceased to be surprised
by that approach, and that is also well understood in
Kabul, which is seeking its own path of independent
development for Afghanistan without relying on
Western assistance.

The drug problem is also closely linked to terrorism.
It is obvious that in conditions of widespread hunger
and poverty and without comprehensive international
and regional assistance, Afghanistan will find it
difficult to cope with the challenges alone. Support for
Afghan farmers is more important than ever. However,
the United States Institute of Peace has published an
article with the telling title “The Taliban’s Successful
Opium Ban Is Bad for Afghans and the World”. How do
you like that?

We share the Secretary-General’s assessment of the
difficult internal political situation in Afghanistan. We
remain particularly concerned about the security risks
posed by the terrorist activities of the Islamic State in
12/27

We are maintaining our focus on the socioeconomic
situation in the country. We note the efforts by the
United Nations and regional organizations to provide
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan, especially the
selfless work of the humanitarian agencies and their
staff, who are ready to remain on the ground and help
Afghans in any circumstances. At the same time, we
see that those efforts are not enough. Western donors
continue to block United Nations efforts to extend aid
beyond the most basic needs with their total refusal to
support development and the reconstruction of schools,
hospitals, and roads between provinces and cities and
rural areas. We also continue to monitor developments
concerning the rights of all Afghans, including women
and girls, and the formation of a truly inclusive
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

Government with the participation of all ethnic and
political groups in the country.
Building a long-term and sustainable peace in
Afghanistan is impossible without continued patient
and pragmatic engagement with the new authorities on
a wide range of pressing issues. The effectiveness of
UNAMA’s work depends on a comprehensive approach.
Russia has consistently advocated for increasing
cooperation with Afghanistan towards achieving a
comprehensive settlement. We are working with our
regional partners to develop a common approach to the
situation in the country, and the Moscow format also
serves that goal. We note the potential of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group
in that regard. Also, we regularly coordinate our positions
on the matter within the framework of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Commonwealth
of Independent States. We participated in the meeting
organized by the Secretary-General with the Special
Envoys on Afghanistan in Doha on 1 and 2 May. In our
bilateral contacts with the de facto authorities we are
encouraging them to expedite the implementation of all
the objectives that have been announced to the world
and to deliver on the corresponding promises.
We continue to provide humanitarian assistance to
the Afghan people and to develop cooperation along the
socioeconomic track. We are interested in developing
pragmatic relations with Kabul, including with a view
to restoring the infrastructure of the enterprises that we
have built in the country.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Otunbayeva for her clear briefing and Ms. Shabana BasijRasikh for her extraordinary update shining a spotlight
on the importance and potential of girls’ education, and
for giving us hope in the possibility of seeing Afghanistan
spiral upwards towards hope.
But as we all know, since the Taliban’s takeover in
August 2021 the situation for the Afghan people has
been defined by humanitarian suffering, economic
hardship and a relentless assault on human rights.
The statistics speak for themselves. Two thirds of the
Afghan population are in need of humanitarian aid in
2023. Economic output has fallen by more than 20 per
cent since 2021. More than 2 million girls between the
age of 7 and 11 are unable formally to access secondaryschool education. The Taliban have issued more than
50 decrees restricting the rights of women and girls

S/PV.9354

and have impeded the ability of the United Nations to
deliver humanitarian assistance in a time of dire need.
The trajectory is negative, and our options are limited.
The Afghan people remain our priority. So how can we
collectively navigate the months ahead?
First, our commitment to providing support for
Afghans remains resolute. We support United Nations
efforts to provide assistance despite the challenging
context, while holding firm on the principle that there
should be no delivery of aid without the inclusion of
women. The United Kingdom has contributed well
over half a billion dollars to address the humanitarian
crisis in Afghanistan since April 2021. We call on other
Member States to step up their funding, noting that
the United Nations revised humanitarian appeal for
$3.2 billion for Afghanistan for 2023 is currently only
14 per cent funded, according to tracking by the Office
for the Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs.
Secondly, the international community should
remain united in its message to the Taliban. We have set
out our expectations in consecutive Security Council
resolutions on humanitarian access, cutting ties with
terrorists, respect for human rights and inclusive
governance. And in April we unanimously adopted
resolution 2681 (2023), condemning restrictions on the
rights of women and girls.
Lastly, those clear expectations should be matched
by clear consequences. While the Taliban continue
on their current path, progress towards international
recognition will not be on the table. Sanctions relief
will not come. We recognize that continued engagement
predicated on those fundamentals is the only way
forward. The Secretary-General’s meeting of special
envoys in Doha was a good first step. And we too look
forward to the independent review led by Ambassador
Feridun Sinirlioğlu. Afghanistan cannot be self-reliant
when 50 per cent of its population is excluded from
society, and history has shown that there can be no
stable or durable peace when large swathes of society
and ethnic groups are excluded.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the information provided by Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and Ms. Shabana Basij-Rasikh.
We have taken note of the information in the Special
Representative’s briefing. We commend the commitment
of the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan to taking on the growing challenges

23-1794113/27

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

on the ground and the clear and firm position of the
United Nations that no female staff will be replaced by
male personnel. In resolution 2681 (2023), adopted in
April, Ecuador and the other members of the Security
Council condemned the restrictions and discriminatory
measures against women in Afghanistan. But the
situation has deteriorated and the possibility of reaching
an understanding in the short term seems impossible.
Concerning the security challenges, we believe that
the terrorist acts attributed to the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant have an indiscriminate impact on the
civilian population. The violence continues to spread,
with growing numbers of people killed and maimed
by improvised explosive devices and clashes between
military personnel on the border between Iran and
Afghanistan. In the absence of an institutional presence,
the only way out lies in strengthening the coordination
of efforts between the relevant bodies within the
United Nations system, regional organizations and
neighbouring countries, with a view to preventing the
escalation of violence on the border, supporting the
fight against terrorism, violent extremism and drug
trafficking and preventing the area from becoming a
threat to peace and security in the region.
With regard to the diminishing respect for human
rights, our delegation condemns the extrajudicial
executions, arbitrary detentions, persecution and
torture of members of the political opposition and
officials of the previous Government. We also
condemn the continuation of institutionalized
policies of discrimination against women and girls
that restrict their right to education and to work and
seek to eliminate their inclusion and participation in
every area of public life. Turning to the precarious
humanitarian situation, the most recent update by
the Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian
Affairs warns that 28.8 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance and 15 million are at risk of
food insecurity, with the rates of undernutrition and
malnutrition on the rise. In the current situation, the
insistence on restricting humanitarian operations is
incomprehensible and inadmissible, as it increases the
vulnerability of children, widowed women heads of
household and the displaced, disabled and sick.
The coordinated efforts of the international
community must continue. We commend the measures
taken by the Secretary-General, such as the meeting that
brought together special envoys to explore initiatives
to resolve the multidimensional crisis in Afghanistan.
14/27

21/06/2023

We also applaud the implementation of the alternative
development programme of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, which supports small farmers in
replacing illicit crops with food crops and grazing for
small animals to strengthen the small-scale economy.
We encourage donors to continue their efforts to secure
funding for life-saving humanitarian assistance. In
a situation in which women’s ability to contribute to
economic growth is restricted, one alternative would
be to identify areas in which they can continue to
contribute to stimulate growth and their empowerment.
Lastly, Ecuador notes the initiatives of the regime’s
neighbouring countries and other countries of the
region, which have attempted to modify the restrictions.
We call for cooperating in every possible way in order to
continue prioritizing unconditional respect for human
rights and the inclusive and meaningful participation
of all segments of society, especially women. We
reaffirm our readiness to support all initiatives aimed
at restoring Afghans’ ability to live in dignity, security
and peace.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Special Representative
Otunbayeva for her briefing. I also thank Ms. Shabana
Basij-Rasikh, co-Founder and President of the School
of Leadership, for the courageous and poignant
briefing she delivered. Let me begin by underlining
our support for the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all United Nations and
humanitarian staff who continue to assist the people
of Afghanistan.
Afghanistan remains home to one of the world’s
largest humanitarian crises. The multidimensional
emergency throughout the country continues, with
two thirds of the country’s population in need of
humanitarian assistance. While 6 million Afghans
are on the brink of starvation, no strategic pathway
exists to address those desperate needs. Humanitarian
aid workers now find themselves working within an
increasingly restrictive and shrinking humanitarian
space, balancing principled humanitarian action
with the dilemmas of engaging with the Taliban and
adhering to policies set by the humanitarian donor
community. They require the greatest level of support
and flexibility when it comes to undertaking their vital
work in such a dire context.
Malta deplores the continued efforts by the Taliban
to codify gender segregation within Afghan society and
within the United Nations and humanitarian system in
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

the country. The de facto authorities have signed more
than 520 restrictive decrees since July 2022, to the
detriment of millions of Afghan women and children.
In recent visits to the country, the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan and the
Working Group on discrimination against women and
girls found that the Taliban are continuing to perpetuate
the most extreme forms of systematic gender-based
discrimination and generalized censorship through
restrictive edicts targeting women and girls and
by abolishing legal protections and accountability
mechanisms for gender-based violence. That must end,
as called for by the unanimously adopted resolution
2681 (2023). All the restrictive edicts must be reversed.
The fundamental rights of women in Afghanistan must
be realized. Women must be allowed back into the
workforce. Women and girls belong in the workforce,
including those employed by international aid agencies
and the United Nations, in line with the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations.
Women and girls must be allowed back in the
classroom. Women and girls belong in the classroom.
Women and girls must also have their right to education
secured and respected. The reports from UNICEF
noting that international education organizations are
being pushed out of the country are beyond troubling
and will leave millions of Afghanistan’s young
people — not just girls — without education.
The adoption of resolution 2681 (2023) was an
important step. We call on the Taliban to respect that
resolution and to be accountable to the international
community. In addition, we welcome the efforts by
regional organizations and the United Nations, including
the Secretary-General, to achieve positive results in the
realms of human rights and counter-terrorism, as the
regional terrorist threat has increased since the Taliban
returned to power, according to recent reports.
Malta reaffirms its full support for UNAMA and
its mandate. The Mission works towards an inclusive
Afghanistan, and its provision of support to its citizens
plays a vital role in the country. The protection of
United Nations personnel is paramount, and we
welcome the leadership’s assurances that the Mission
constantly assesses the scope and consequences of the
imposed bans and reviews their status. As the country’s
future remains alarmingly uncertain, we urge the
Taliban to adhere to the principles of the Charter and

S/PV.9354

international law and to respect the human rights of
Afghanistan’s citizens.
The Security Council must be steadfast in
demanding an immediate and unconditional revocation
of the Taliban’s regressive dictates and undertake
actions that will benefit the Afghan population through
this time of major humanitarian need.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Otunbayeva
for her briefing. I also thank Ms. Basij-Rasikh for
her powerful account. We could not agree more with
her about the fundamental role of education as the
foundation and the start of everything in a normal and
successful life.
It has been almost two years since the Taliban
took over Afghanistan. It is now in a humanitarian
calamity and is the only country in the world that walks
backwards. There is hardly any other example of a
country sliding back centuries in time in a matter of
months. The economy is deemed stable, but we wonder
what that means in real terms amid massive poverty,
suffering and destitution and, when as we speak, close
to two thirds of the population rely on life-saving aid
to survive. The sense of security the regime claims to
have imposed, including with their brutal and medieval
methods, cannot hide the fact that terrorist networks
are very much present, raising fears of the Taliban’s
rule might become again a harbour of terrorism. After
all, they have clearly shown that they are not bound
by their promises. In particular, the rulers have been
methodical in wiping away the achievements of the past
two decades by repressing or threatening the media
and critics of Taliban rule, forcing the closure of civil
society organizations and dismantling Government
offices meant to promote or uphold human rights. The
Taliban are again on the track of making Afghanistan
the medieval manifesto of human rights violations. It is
nowadays a black hole in the world — by the design and
choice of the Taliban. That is outrageous, and it will not
help the country to join the community of nations. It
only predicts more self-isolation and exclusion.
When we mention Afghanistan today, it resonates
with Afghan girls and women crying out for their rights.
It echoes their desperate call for help. Because if we ever
had any doubts, the Taliban have not changed over the
past two decades, but Afghanistan has changed — and
the women in the country have changed. Most of them
knew and enjoyed freedom and were educated. Many

23-1794115/27

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

had university degrees and were part of social life. Now
the ancestral women-haters have taken away everything
from them: their right to obtain education, as well as
their freedom to speak, work, travel and, recently, even
to help each other.
No other issue has received more attention than the
de facto authorities’ brutal assault against women. Their
misogyny and bigotry are second to none, and the depth
of their depravity is unparalleled. No one in the world
is more fearful of women’s rights and emancipation
than the Taliban. That seems to be their greatest fear
and threat — their nightmare. And as if that were not
enough, as we heard from the Special Representative,
now the Taliban wants to play the human resources
department for the United Nations. It would be risible
if it were not tragic.
We reiterate our condemnation in the strongest
terms of the Taliban’s repressive policies and call on
them to immediately reverse all despotic measures
against women and girls, not only because they
are wrong and run counter to the international
commitments of Afghanistan, but also because the
development advancement of any country depends on
the involvement and the role of women.
We deplore the de facto authorities’ failure to
comply with the repeated calls of the Security Council
and other international actors to reverse the measures
and policies that restrict the universal rights of women
and girls. Albania stands by the Afghans, who are
entitled the right to a normal life, including the right
to freely express their thoughts and to have their voice
heard in a representative and inclusive Government. We
look forward to the independent assessment mandated
by the Council and welcome the appointment of the
Special Coordinator.
Let me conclude by reiterating our support for the
work of UNAMA in fulfilling its important but difficult
mandate under extremely difficult circumstances. We
will continue to stand with the Afghan people and their
aspirations for equal rights and prosperity.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking Special Representative
Otunbayeva for her briefing and, above all, for her
invaluable work under very difficult circumstances. I
also thank Ms. Shabana Basij-Rasikh for her briefing,
which cannot leave anyone here indifferent. As she
said, she lived as
16/27

21/06/2023

(spoke in English)
“a child attending secret schools”.
(spoke in French)
And now, once again, a similar situation is unfolding.
As the Secretary-General concluded at the end of the
recent meeting of special envoys on Afghanistan, “it
is difficult to overestimate the gravity of the situation
in Afghanistan”.
Today’s briefing affirms the extent of the
multidimensional crisis. The oppression of women and
girls, while certainly not the only aspect of the crisis,
is the most glaring one. We have been able to assess
the scope of that during Switzerland’s regular missions
on the ground. The increasingly severe restrictions
imposed by the Taliban lead to the effective exclusion
of women and girls from public, political, economic,
cultural and social life. That in turn exacerbates the
suffering of the entire population of Afghanistan.
The Council has repeatedly condemned and called for
reversing these illegal, morally reprehensible and above
all economically disastrous measures. To date, although
resolution 2681 (2023) clearly calls for it, none of those
restrictions have been officially revoked. Switzerland
congratulates all the actors and non-governmental
organizations that have been able to retain a space to
continue their work. We encourage the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to
continue its commitment to the full, equal, meaningful
and safe participation of women and girls in public life.
In that regard, I would like to highlight three points
in particular.
First, with regard to respect for human rights and
international law, the Taliban’s blatant disregard for
human rights has tragic consequences not only for
women but for entire families and communities. That
lack of respect for rights also affects children. All
children, girls and boys alike, should be able to benefit
from access to a safe, quality education. We heard that
again today. Not only is that their right, but schooling
helps to reduce their vulnerability and is essential to
Afghanistan’s future stability and prosperity. And
we are dismayed by the Taliban-controlled Supreme
Court’s recent decision to impose the death penalty,
which is incompatible with respect for human rights and
human dignity. UNAMA has also reported numerous
cases of corporal punishment, whose prohibition is a
fundamental principle of international law. We therefore
encourage UNAMA to continue its engagement with
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

the Taliban to put an end to all such practices and thank
the Mission for that commitment.
Secondly, with regard to the economic situation,
while we note that it has stabilized at a low level,
the vulnerabilities of the population remain a cause
for concern. The Afghan economy’s capacity to cope
with those shocks is weak. We heard from the Special
Representative that she believes that the humanitarian
crisis is the worst such crisis in the world. Humanitarian
support and basic needs will therefore continue to be
essential. Switzerland would like to point out that the
Taliban are responsible for meeting the needs of the
Afghan population without discrimination of any kind,
and that they have to ensure that humanitarian aid and
basic services reach all in need. Switzerland welcomes
UNAMA’s close cooperation with all stakeholders to
find lasting solutions.
Thirdly, Switzerland is concerned about the negative
effects of climate change on Afghanistan and the region
and of environmental degradation. Recurring droughts,
desertification, floods and shortages of drinking water
are extremely damaging. The struggle for limited
natural resources can potentially create serious conflict,
both among communities and between Afghanistan
and its neighbours. And with almost half the Afghan
population suffering from acute food insecurity, there
is also an urgent need to mitigate the negative effects of
climate change in order to improve food security in the
long term. In that context, we welcome UNAMA’s work
with local communities to strengthen their resilience
and their management of climate-change-related risks.
Every society must include women and men without
discrimination, with the welfare of its entire population
as the measure of its common strength. There is an
urgent need to ensure greater respect for international
law and human rights for all Afghans. That includes
ensuring the active participation of civil society and
women’s organizations in every area, including the
independent assessment provided for in resolution 2679
(2023). I want to take this opportunity to welcome
the appointment of our former colleague and to wish
him good luck and success in a very difficult job.
Only a political solution will enable a resolution of the
crisis. Switzerland continues to support the Afghan
people — and we have taken the recommendations on
board — the United Nations and UNAMA in particular,
in those efforts.

S/PV.9354

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in French):
I too would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, and
Ms. Shabana Basij-Rasikh for their briefings.
The situation in Afghanistan remains very
worrisome. The Taliban continue to flout the demands
of the international community and the resolutions
of the Council, including resolution 2593 (2021), and
to maintain their policy of the systematic oppression
of women. France condemns in the strongest terms
the decision taken in April to ban Afghan women
from working for the United Nations. The continuing
increase in violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Afghanistan is unacceptable. We are also
concerned about reports of new restrictions imposed
on international non-governmental organizations in the
area of education.
The security situation remains worrisome. Terrorist
groups such as Da’esh and Al-Qaida have found safe
haven in Afghanistan. We are also closely monitoring
developments in the situation regarding drugs. All
of those challenges are interlinked. The exclusion of
Afghan women — half the population — is undermining
the country’s economic recovery and long-term stability
and creating a breeding ground for radicalization and
terrorism. France continues to call for a united response
from the international community. I would like to
emphasize four points in that regard.
First, the unanimous adoption of resolution 2681
(2023) and the broad support it received show that the
international community has not forgotten Afghan
women. We have made it a priority to continue to
demand that the Taliban reverse the decisions that are
hindering women’s daily lives, violating their rights
and restricting their fundamental freedoms.
Secondly, we continue to support the Afghan
people. Humanitarian aid for them is unconditional
and should remain so. France has contributed more
than €140 million since August 2021. In particular,
we are also providing medical aid, including through
the Kabul Mother and Child Medical Institute. The
European Union and its member States have responded
to the basic needs of Afghans in the country and in
the region with almost €2 billion since 2011. That aid
must also be delivered to all who need it, in accordance
with humanitarian principles and international law,
something that France will not compromise on.

23-1794117/27

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

Thirdly, we must collectively continue to underscore
that we expect concrete action from the Taliban, based
on the five demands we made in resolution 2593 (2021).
Lastly, we will continue to support the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and all United
Nations agencies and their partners working on the
ground for the benefit of the Afghan people.
The President: Recalling the Security Council’s
commitment under note S/2017/507 to making more
effective use of its meetings, I encourage all the
remaining speakers to limit their statements to no more
than three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Faiq (Afghanistan): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening us today and for your able
leadership. I also thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Otunbayeva for her briefing
and Ms. Shabana Basij-Rasikh for her touching and
very inspiring remarks. She is an icon and a symbol
of inspiration, resilience and valour for the millions
of Afghan women who are facing dark forces
in Afghanistan.
We appreciate the remarks of Council members
reaffirming their commitment to continuing to
support the fundamental human rights of the people
of Afghanistan, particularly women and girls, and
we thank them for their efforts to ensure peace,
stability and security in Afghanistan. We also thank
Member States, donors, United Nations entities,
non-governmental organizations and all actors for their
continued life-saving support, especially in response to
the humanitarian crisis.
We are nearing the two-year mark since the Taliban
came to power, and there is not the slightest ray of hope
for a positive future for the people of Afghanistan,
including the 28 million who are in dire need of
humanitarian assistance. Among them are millions of
Afghan refugees, internally displaced persons, disabled
people, young people and women and girls, who
comprise half of Afghanistan’s population.
In the past two years, the international community
has collectively engaged with the Taliban in dialogue
and discussion, hoping for a positive response to the
shared demands of the people of Afghanistan and the
international community. However, not only have the
18/27

21/06/2023

Taliban not met those demands, but they are in complete
denial, trying to justify their actions under the guise
of a distorted and self-interpreted version of religion
and culture.
On the international stage, they have resorted to
a policy of blackmail and extortion with the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
Nationally, they have returned to the draconian policies
of the 1990s, consolidating their power and authority
through acts of intimidation and repression, as well
as imposing restrictions and isolating the people of
Afghanistan. Two years on, the situation in Afghanistan
has not improved by any measure. What we are seeing
is a worsening of the situation from a humanitarian,
human rights, security and political standpoint.
The economic and humanitarian situation has
worsened, with the majority of the population deprived
of their basic needs and humanitarian assistance.
Ninety-seven per cent of the population lives in poverty,
with two thirds needing humanitarian assistance just
to survive. Twenty million people face acute hunger.
Unemployment is rising and the influx of migration
continues despite numerous ongoing challenges,
hardships and risks, such as drowning, being
persecuted, arrested or deported. Despite the Taliban’s
claims of increased national revenue collection from
taxation, customs and fees, there is no change in the
lives of ordinary people and no accountability and
transparency on the utilization and expenditure of the
national budget and domestic revenue.
The people of Afghanistan and the international
community share a common anguish. Nearly two
decades after women regained their rights, women
and girls in Afghanistan have again been banned
from receiving a quality education and from entering
amusement parks, gyms and sports clubs. Women have
been banned from working in NGO offices. They quite
literally have been wholly excluded from public office
and the judiciary.
Today Afghanistan’s women and girls face a gender
apartheid and gender persecution. They are required to
adhere to a strict dress code and are not permitted to
travel more than 75 kilometres without a male guardian.
The Taliban are systemically violating the rights of
women and young girls. Their practices are regressing
with time, and they are resorting to using draconian,
cruel and inhumane practices.
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

The people of Afghanistan look to the international
community to adopt a united and coherent approach
to respond to the increasing erosion of human rights,
ongoing arbitrary arrests, extrajudicial killings, forced
disappearances and the torture of former Government
officials and security forces, human rights activists,
journalists and protesters, as well as civilians, with
the pretext of them having links to the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant — constituting violations of the
Taliban’s amnesty decree and crimes against humanity.
Further, corporal punishments were carried out, often
in public, constituting torture and ill-treatment under
international law, in concert with a broader stifling of
media and civil society.
As per a recently released Amnesty International
report, the Taliban have directed collective punishment,
particularly upon communities where they have
established and deployed their forces. They have
retaliated against captured fighters and targeted the
civilian population to force submission and compliance,
especially those suspected of being associated with the
former Government.
The list of war crimes and violations of
international humanitarian law committed by the
Taliban is long — torture, extrajudicial executions,
hostage-taking, the intentional burning of civilian
homes, forced evictions and arbitrary deprivation of
liberty. However, beyond each individual act designed
to instil fear, this conduct, in sum, constitutes collective
punishment, which in itself is a war crime.
Many of those concerns were validated once again at
the meeting two days ago of the Human Rights Council,
on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan. The
Special Rapporteur, Afghan women activists, member
States and other participants spoke in detail about the
grave, systematic and ongoing human rights violations
in the country. We thank Special Rapporteur Richard
Bennett for highlighting what he rightfully referred to
as the suffocating plight of Afghan women and girls
resulting from the Taliban’s actions and policies, as
well as other human rights violations against broader
segments of society. At the same time, we hope to
see new and decisive measures by the international
community in order to ensure accountability for the
grave human rights violations.
The Taliban have broken their promises of trying
to be more inclusive, break ties with terrorist groups,
respect universal human rights and take measures that

S/PV.9354

prevent Afghanistan from posing a security threat to
other countries. As confirmed in the recent Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team report (see
S/2023/370), the Taliban continue to maintain links
to Al-Qaida, in addition to nearly 20 other terrorist
entities. The presence of foreign terrorist fighters
and the harbouring and relocation of Tehrik-e-Taliban
Pakistan to northern provinces of Afghanistan are
extremely alarming. Any forced evictions or attempts
to effect demographic changes based on ethnicity
or religion will trigger deep hostility and conflict in
the country.
The Taliban’s association with terror groups is not
a concern for Afghanistan’s neighbouring countries
only, but for the international community as well. It
is vital to ensure — at the regional and international
levels — a comprehensive, unified and coherent
counter-terrorism strategy, with zero tolerance for all
terrorist groups, without distinction or preferential
short-term approaches. There are no good or bad
terrorists. The people of Afghanistan have always been
the prime victim of terrorism, which is the antithesis of
human rights, independence and development.
Politically, the Taliban shut the doors for
inclusivity, engagement or dialogue with the people of
Afghanistan. The Monitoring Team report states how
the Taliban reverted to the exclusionary and autocratic
policies of the 1990s. The Taliban are not representative
of any particular ethnic group in Afghanistan, nor
are they representative of the true Islamic values and
cultural traditions of Afghanistan. However, their
discriminatory policies based on their extremist
ideology will result in increased societal and internal
tensions and further complicate and deepen the crisis
in the country.
The Taliban claims of counter-terrorism and
counter-narcotics are a paradox and a self-contradiction.
The Taliban’s senior leaders are involved in narcotics
and the production and smuggling of drugs, including
opium, heroin and methamphetamines, which have
become a significant part of Afghanistan’s illicit export
under the Taliban. Despite some speculation about
discord or disagreement within the Taliban, the majority
of the Taliban share the same extremist ideology on
human rights and women’s rights. In fact, there is no
plan to break the current national and international
impasse and take Afghanistan out of isolation. The
Taliban are content with taking advantage of the status
quo and continuing to utilize the funds and national

23-1794119/27

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

resources for their personal benefit, without taking
into account the interests of the people. The reality is
that all dissent and disagreement is over the division
of power and resources. The people of Afghanistan are
paying a heavy price for the imposed and forced rule by
an autocratic and extremist group.
Despite the difficult situation, the people of
Afghanistan are determined to overcome the crisis
and achieve a point of stability. We know that bringing
peace to our country is a responsibility that primarily
belongs to us, the people of Afghanistan. Over the past
two years, Afghans from all walks of life and age groups
inside and outside Afghanistan are tirelessly working
and raising their voices in defence of their rights,
hard-earned achievements of the past two decades and
national values.
In the past year, civil society, women and youth
groups and political movements and parties have
mobilized and begun organized political activity. While
various groups present diverse views on a solution,
the main objective is to come together with a national
agenda based on national unity. This effort will not
only continue, but it will also grow stronger in time.
However, I cannot stress how important it is for the
international community to play a larger role in helping
us overcome this crisis. A legitimate Government based
on the will of people is the need of the hour.
In the light of the current situation, we are of
the belief that the international community should
adopt a new, coherent and united approach towards
Afghanistan and principled engagement. In this regard,
we welcome the decision of the Security Council to
conduct an independent assessment aimed at ensuring
greater coordination and a more integrated international
approach and effort towards stability in Afghanistan.
We look forward to the outcome of the assessment,
which will be presented in November.
The decision to undertake an assessment and the
recent United Nations meeting on Afghanistan, hosted
by the Secretary-General and with the participation of
a broad group of special representatives from many
countries, including from within the region, have
raised hopes about a growing international consensus
on Afghanistan. We hope to see this momentum build
and grow stronger as we move forward. We believe that
ensuring participation by representatives of the people
of Afghanistan in the follow-up to the Doha meeting and
the adoption of a related road map aimed at achieving
20/27

21/06/2023

a comprehensive political settlement through national
dialogue are both vital for progress towards peace and
stability in Afghanistan.
Moreover, time and experience has proven that
dialogue and engagement — primarily with the Taliban
alone — has not yielded results. It is therefore now time
for the international community to begin structured
engagement with democratic political forces and help
find a concrete solution to the crisis. The democratic
political forces should be given the platform and
opportunity needed to help improve and eventually
stabilize the situation, based on the will of the people.
Additionally, and most importantly, international
efforts from now on should prioritize the start of a
political process towards a political settlement through
national dialogue. The crisis in Afghanistan is primarily
political in nature, and that requires a political solution.
So far, much of the international community’s attention
has been centred on human rights issues and the
humanitarian situation. While focusing on those and
other issues is important, the political component of
the dilemma should not be neglected. It would be most
preferable if the international community could unite in
creating an environment that is conducive to the start
of negotiations.
Yesterday we marked World Refugee Day, which
was an occasion to reflect on the plight of millions
of refugees around the world and to honour their
strength and resilience to overcome challenges and
difficulties. We wish to take the opportunity to call on
the international community, especially host countries,
to provide Afghan refugees with the support they need
and to ensure their protection, safety and well-being,
especially now, at a time where they are seeking refuge
abroad from difficulty and persecution in their country.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that
the current situation in Afghanistan and its security
challenges and threats are of great concern for the
people of Afghanistan and the international community.
Failing to address them will have grave implications for
the country, the region and the international community
at large. We therefore hope to see the international
community, and the Security Council in particular, act
with unity and consensus to prevent Afghanistan from
turning into a terrorist hub and to ensure a comprehensive
settlement that leads to the formation of a broad-based
legitimate political structure and system that reflects
the people’s aspirations and enjoys their support, so
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

that we can achieve long-term and sustainable peace,
stability and prosperity in the country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tajikistan.
Mr. Hikmat (Tajikistan): We thank the delegation
of the United Arab Emirates for organizing today’s
important briefing. We also thank our briefers.
On 15 August 2023, we will mark the second
anniversary of the Taliban coming to power as the de
facto authorities in Afghanistan. The situation in the
country today remains complicated and unpredictable
and is likely to deteriorate further. Moreover, a complex
of socioeconomic problems, widespread violations of
human rights, in particular of the rights of women and
girls, the continuing policy of ethnic discrimination
against the non-Pashtun population, and the lack of an
inclusive Government and human resources have led the
country into a severe political and humanitarian crisis.
According to United Nations estimates, overall
humanitarian needs in Afghanistan continue to
rise, with 28.3 million people estimated to require
humanitarian assistance in 2023. In this dire situation,
a travel ban on female aid workers was introduced,
forcing many organizations to pause operations and
severely affecting populations in need, especially
women and girls.
Indeed, of particular concern is the worsening
situation of women in Afghanistan. The announcement
in December 2022 of decisions to suspend women’s
access to higher education and employment in national
and international non-governmental organizations
further curtailed women’s and girls’ fundamental rights.
Extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrests and detentions,
torture and ill-treatment of other ethnic groups, in
particular individuals accused of affiliation with the
National Resistance Front in Panjshir province, as well
as against former Government officials, in violation
of the general amnesty announced in August 2021,
continue to be of great concern for us.
While the Taliban publicly insist there are no
foreign terrorist groups other than ISIL-Khorasan
in Afghanistan, according to our information, such
terrorist groups as Al-Qaida, Hizb-ut-Tahrir, the Eastern
Turkestan Islamic Movement, the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan, Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan and Jamaat
Ansarullah, are currently present in Afghanistan
and pose a serious threat to neighbouring countries.

S/PV.9354

We are also very concerned that the unprecedented
concentration of different terrorist groups next to our
borders is increasing day by day. Unfortunately, the
country’s ongoing political instability, inter-ethnic
conflicts, lack of effective governance and internal
power struggles provide an environment conducive to
these groups thriving and winning local support. The
relocation to the northern part of Afghanistan, an area
mainly dominated by non-Pashtun ethnic groups, of
terrorist-group members of the Pashtun ethnic group
and other foreign nationals further contributes to the
existing division and mistrust between ethnic groups
and worsens the already fragile security situation on
the border with Afghanistan.
In addition, despite the narcotics ban by the de
facto authorities in April 2022, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime has indicated that, to
date, enforcement levels in the country have not been
uniform. For instance, Tajikistan law-enforcement
agencies seized 4.2 tons of narcotics at the border
with Afghanistan in 2022, up from 2.4 tons in 2020.
In this context, we recall the proposal of the President
of Tajikistan, His Excellency Mr. Emomali Rahmon,
to establish a security belt around Afghanistan, which
would adopt a comprehensive set of measures to counter
security challenges and threats emanating from the
country and to foster the development of socioeconomic
conditions in border areas.
Tajikistan reaffirms its commitment to providing
humanitarian assistance and support to the Afghan
people during this challenging time. We will continue
to collaborate with international partners, including
regional organizations, to address the urgent
humanitarian needs arising from the evolving situation
in Afghanistan. Taking that into account, we have
offered our infrastructure to international organizations
to deliver humanitarian aid. Our six bridges on the
Tajik-Afghan border are available for that purpose. We
have successfully facilitated aid delivery through those
checkpoints in collaboration with the United Nations.
Moreover, we have been exporting a range of
essential commodities to Afghanistan, such as building
materials, agricultural products and food. We have
never stopped supplying electricity to the people
of Afghanistan. Our electricity goes to northern
provinces of Afghanistan and Kabul. The Panji
Poyon-Sherkhon Bandar crossing point continues to
facilitate the transportation of vital goods and supplies
into Afghanistan.

23-1794121/27

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

In conclusion, Tajikistan stands ready to support
any constructive efforts that contribute to lasting peace,
stability and prosperity in Afghanistan and the broader
Central Asian region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank the
United Arab Emirates for convening this meeting. I also
thank Ms. Otunbayeva, the Special Representative, for
her briefing.
We note the Secretary-General’s report on the
situation in Afghanistan. The report indicates that
de-facto authorities have maintained internal stability
and managed the Afghan economy. However, the
magnitude of humanitarian needs in Afghanistan
remains substantial and pervasive.
The seizure of Afghanistan’s foreign assets and
unilateral sanctions have significantly exacerbated the
current situation, posing substantial external obstacles
to effectively addressing the humanitarian situation in
the country.
Humanitarian aid must remain impartial and
unconditional, ensuring that it reaches those in need
without any interference from political or external
factors. It is crucial that the international community
fulfil its humanitarian commitments and pledges,
demonstrating solidarity and sympathy for the Afghan
people and offering them hope and a path to a more
stable and prosperous future. Similarly, releasing
frozen assets and lifting unilateral sanctions are vital
to support Afghanistan’s economy and help it recover.
As a neighbouring country with a long-shared
border and a host of millions of Afghans, we are
gravely concerned about the potential repercussions of
the current situation on the security and stability of the
entire region, especially for our neighbouring countries.
Despite some relative improvements in security, the
persistent presence of Da’esh and Al-Qaida affiliates
in Afghanistan, along with drug trafficking, continue
to pose a significant and immediate threat not only to
Afghanistan but also to neighbouring countries and the
entire region, as well as the international community
at large.
According to a United Nations report, the ban on
drug trafficking in Afghanistan has not been fully
implemented, allowing the illicit trade in opium to
continue across the country. Moreover, there is growing
22/27

21/06/2023

concern regarding the spread of covert laboratories and
locations involved in the production and trafficking
of industrial substances such as methamphetamine.
The fact that some of those illicit activities spill
across borders further exacerbates our concerns. We
support the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
in its ongoing efforts to monitor opium cultivation
in Afghanistan.
Despite repeated international calls for an
inclusive government, the de facto authorities have
made no progress towards genuine ethnic and political
inclusion. Instead, they have imposed ever more severe
restrictions and limitations on Afghan women and girls,
severely limiting their access to education. There are
also concerns that de facto authorities are deliberately
attempting to erode Afghans’ cultural, linguistic
and historical ties to the Farsi language, while also
attempting to exert Pashtun cultural dominance over
other ethnic groups and alter the demographic structure
of Hazara and Tajik provinces. Those measures have
negative consequences for Afghanistan’s stability and
security and should be reversed to protect the basic
human rights of all Afghan people.
We reaffirm our unwavering support for the
United Nations ongoing efforts, including the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
which are critical for ensuring peace and stability in
Afghanistan, especially given the current situation. In
that context, Iran commends the Secretary-General’s
initiative held in Doha on 1 and 2 of May, which brought
together Afghanistan’s special envoys from concerned
countries. We extend our support for the upcoming
second meeting on that initiative, and we remain
hopeful that, under the United Nations leadership,
the international community will continue to provide
crucial humanitarian and development assistance
to Afghanistan.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Feridun
Sinirlioğlu as the Special Coordinator entrusted
with the crucial task of conducting an independent
assessment on Afghanistan. We are ready to collaborate
closely with him in fulfilling his mandate.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
we need to cooperate collectively to aid Afghanistan
in rebuilding its economy and establishing favourable
conditions for its people, as well as for the safe return
of Afghan refugees.
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

While acknowledging the Taliban’s failure to
fully meet their commitments, we must maintain our
constructive engagement with the de facto authorities
through UNAMA to pursue the best possible outcomes
for the people of Afghanistan and the broader
international community. That approach benefits
everyone: the Afghan people, its neighbours, the entire
region and the international community. Considering
the lessons learned from past experiences of Taliban
isolation, it is vital that Afghanistan does not suffer a
similar fate.
Iran remains committed to close collaboration with
other neighbours, relevant partners and the United
Nations to help bring durable peace, security and
stability to Afghanistan.
Lastly, regarding the recent border incident that
happened between Iranian border forces and Taliban
security forces, which was referred to in the statements
of the Permanent Representatives of Mozambique
and Ecuador, I wish to say that, unfortunately, that
sad incident occurred as a result of the inadequate
capacity and training of the Taliban security forces.
We continue our constructive engagement with the
de facto authorities to manage and prevent repeating
such unnecessary incidents. We hope that the de
facto authorities fulfil their international obligations
especially in upholding Afghanistan’s obligations with
regard to the border activities with its neighbours.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mrs. Kasymalieva (Kyrgyzstan): We would
like to express our gratitude to the presidency of the
United Arab Emirates for organizing today’s debate
on Afghanistan. I welcome the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, and
thank her for the comprehensive briefing. I also thank
other speakers for their meaningful statements. We also
commend the efforts of the United Nations and other
international organizations, including humanitarian
organizations, in addressing the humanitarian needs of
the people of Afghan.
We thank Qatar, the United Nations and others
for hosting the high-level special envoys meeting
for Afghanistan in early May in Doha. We believe it
is important to hold constant consultations with the
countries of the region and broadly in order to maintain
the peace and security of Afghanistan.

S/PV.9354

Kurdistan expresses its solidarity with the
international community to overcome the humanitarian
crisis and stabilize the situation in Afghanistan by
exclusively peaceful means at the negotiating table.
For Kyrgyzstan, peace and stability in Afghanistan
is one of the priority areas in the system of regional
security. Therefore, my country is deeply interested
in a peaceful and stable Afghanistan and is ready to
develop good neighbourly relations with the country. At
the same time, noting its commitment to the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan,
Kyrgyzstan respects the right of the Afghan people to
determine the future of their country.
Since the Taliban came to the power in Afghanistan
in August 2021, our diplomatic mission continues its
work. Currently, with the support of international
donors, about 500 Afghan students are studying in
Kyrgyz universities.
I echo the comments of other speakers that
respecting human rights is fundamental and essential.
In that connection, it is vital to take steps to ensure
the real participation of women in all spheres,
including access to education. We share the concerns
of the international community with regard to the
infringement of women’s rights to education and work
in Afghanistan. Kyrgyzstan remains a friendly State
for Afghanistan because we are good neighbours and
we share a common religion and culture. Kyrgyzstan
considers it necessary to extend a helping hand to the
Afghan people in order to prevent the further escalation
of tensions in Afghanistan.
In that context, it is important that the Afghan
economy has been reintegrated into regional processes.
Kyrgyzstan, which has significant hydropower
resources, is interested in the successful implementation
of CASA-1000 energy project to export electricity
through Afghanistan to South Asia. We are ready to
actively interact and constructively cooperate with the
international community and the de facto Government
of Afghanistan in order to stabilize the situation as
soon as possible, establish peace in Afghanistan. We
express the hope that the wise people of Afghanistan
will be able to adequately overcome the consequences
of many years of war and build a prosperous State
that takes into account their rights and interests and
establish long-term peace and stability in Afghanistan
and in the region.

23-1794123/27

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

21/06/2023

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.

Mr. Prakash Gupta (India): I thank Special
Representative Roza Otunbayeva and Ms. Basij-Rasikh
for their briefings.

Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I apologize for the length
of my statement.

As a contiguous neighbour and long-standing
partner of Afghanistan and given our strong historical
and civilizational linkages to the Afghan people, India
has direct stakes in ensuring the return of peace and
stability to the country, and we continue to closely
monitor the developments in Afghanistan.
In view of the deteriorating humanitarian situation
and the urgent appeals by United Nations agencies,
India has delivered 40,000 metric tons of wheat and 150
tons of medical aid — consisting of medicines, vaccines
and other medical items. Recently, we also supplied
500 units of winter clothing and more than 5,000 units
of stationary items for the students of Habibia High
School, in Kabul. India has also partnered with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
in its humanitarian efforts and has supplied 1,100 units
of female hygiene kits and blankets for the UNODC
female rehabilitation centres across Afghanistan. I
am happy to announce that this month we started the
shipment of 20,000 metric tons of wheat assistance, in
partnership with the World Food Programme (WFP),
through the Chabahar port. As we speak, the first
tranche, consisting of 2,500 metric tons of wheat, has
already been handed over to the WFP warehouse at
Herat for further internal distribution, and the next
tranche of another 2,500 metric tons is en route via the
Chabahar port.
We believe that it is important to have international
consensus on issues related to Afghanistan. Our
collective approach is articulated in Security Council’s
resolution 2593 (2021). Broadly speaking, our
common and immediate priorities include providing
humanitarian assistance for the Afghan people, the
formation of inclusive and representative Government
structures, combating terrorism and drug trafficking
and preserving the rights of women, children and
minorities. India appreciates and supports the work
being done by the United Nations in Afghanistan. We
have already partnered with several United Nations
agencies on ground and continue to do so for the welfare
of the people of Afghanistan. We are ready to work with
the Secretary-General in his efforts to find progress in
that situation.
24/27

I would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
and the delegation of the United Arab Emirates on a
very successful presidency of the Council this month
and on convening this important debate on the situation
in Afghanistan. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Otunbayeva for her excellent briefing to
us this morning, and I also thank Ms. Basij-Rasikh for
her moving intervention.
While we await the independent assessment of the
situation in Afghanistan from Ambassador Feridun
Sinirlioğlu, we find that at present there are reasons for
both optimism and pessimism regarding Afghanistan.
On the positive side, we see security has vastly
improved in Afghanistan, allowing commerce and
trade, among other benefits. The interim Government
is stable and secure. There is no credible internal
threat, and no one should encourage anyone to pose
such a threat. The Afghan interim Government has
managed the Afghan economy, especially trade,
commerce and revenue collection, reasonably well.
The opium economy has been reduced, and the Afghan
interim Government is engaged with all immediate
neighbours — that is, China, Iran, Pakistan, Uzbekistan,
Tajikistan and Turkmenistan — and with the countries
of the region and is open to engaging with the rest of the
international community.
On the negative side, the humanitarian situation
remains dire, compounded by the impacts of climate
change and sanctions. The unacceptable restrictions
relating to women and girls have been broadened
instead of reversed. Pakistan will continue to make
every effort to find a durable and mutually agreed
solution on this important issue. There has been limited
progress towards enhancing political inclusion, and
the threat from terrorist organizations within and from
Afghanistan persists. While Al-Qaida is a shadow of its
early self, Da’esh has yet to be contained, and the threat
from the Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan (TTP) is real and
sizable — not only because of the external support it
has received, but also because of other regional factors.
Continued engagement with the Afghan interim
Government is the best approach to reinforce the
positive trends and address the continuing challenges
in Afghanistan.
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

At our invitation, the acting Foreign Minister
of Afghanistan, Mr. Muttaqi, visited Islamabad on
5 May for bilateral and trilateral discussions with our
Foreign Minister and the Foreign Minister of China. As
Afghanistan’s closest neighbour and friend, Pakistan
is committed to doing everything possible to promote
peace, harmony and socioeconomic development
in Afghanistan. In turn, we have been reassured by
the Afghan interim Government of its goodwill and
support, including in addressing the threat posed by the
TTP and other terrorist groups.
The fifth Pakistan, Afghanistan and China Foreign
Ministers dialogue was held in Islamabad on 6 May and
addressed the critical issues relating to Afghanistan
and the region. The meeting underlined the importance
of cooperation across the spectrum of issues. The
three Foreign Ministers called on the international
community to engage constructively with the Afghan
interim Government.
Afghanistan’s immediate neighbours are playing
a major role in promoting peace and stability in
Afghanistan. The continuation of the deliberations
of the region’s Foreign Ministers in Samarkand was
an important event. Pakistan also believes that other
countries of the region, in particular the members of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, can and
must play a larger role in promoting economic and
political stability and development in Afghanistan.
Pakistan welcomed and participated in the Doha
Meeting of special envoys on Afghanistan. It was
a useful and constructive exchange of assessments
and recommendations to address the situation in
Afghanistan. We hope the United Nations and the
Secretary-General will continue his endeavour for
normalization in Afghanistan. We believe that, to make
this effort more effective, we should identify clear
objectives to be promoted, promote direct engagement
with the Afghan interim Government by having its
representatives at the table and move away from
utilizing only sticks and instead trying some carrots to
advance the international community’s objectives.
As we develop mutual trust and confidence with
the Afghan interim Government to address the issues
related to Afghanistan, we hope that the international
community will, first, continue humanitarian assistance
to the 28 million Afghans who need such assistance,
which, in accordance with humanitarian norms, must
remain unconditional. The Secretary-General’s appeal
for $4.2 billion in humanitarian help, which has so far

S/PV.9354

received less than 10 per cent, should be fully funded.
Secondly, we should take concrete steps to revive the
Afghan economy, including releasing externally held
Afghan reserve assets, reviving the Afghan banking
system, including through technical assistance to
the Central Bank, reviving international support for
reconstruction and infrastructure projects and for
the implementation of regional connectivity projects.
Thirdly, we should open and sustain a process of
engagement with the Afghan interim Government
through various available platforms — bilateral,
regional and international.
Pakistan believes that engagement and cooperation
can lead to a peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan,
where the humanitarian crisis will be over, where
the rights of women and girls will be respected in
accordance with sharia, where the economy is thriving,
where Afghan refugees have returned home, where
terrorism has been effectively addressed and where
Afghanistan provides the trade and transit link between
Central, West and South Asia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I commend
the United Arab Emirates presidency of the Security
Council for convening today’s meeting and focusing
on the activities and the very important mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).
I thank Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and Head of UNAMA for her continued efforts aimed
at strengthening the role of the Mission and its place
within the United Nations and international processes.
On the issue of international recognition of the
Taliban, we are strictly guided by the Security Council’s
position. Meanwhile, the new leadership of Afghanistan
continues to work on building Statehood, carrying out
work to normalize the activities of State administrative
institutions, collecting taxes, strengthening defence
capabilities, and so on. Under these conditions, one
should not overlook the fact that the new Government
working in Afghanistan is in its second year now. The
country needs to survive and build normal relations
with its neighbours and other partners, including
international organizations.

23-1794125/27

S/PV.9354

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan’s integration into the regional economic
system meets the interests of both the country itself
and its neighbours. Diversification of trade relations
is important for our landlocked region. For example,
last year the trade turnover between Kazakhstan and
Afghanistan amounted to almost $1 billion, and this is
not the limit. Afghanistan could play a central role in
connecting Central and South Asia. In turn, regional
economic cooperation could accelerate the achievement
of stability and development in Afghanistan.
In order to establish constructive business
contacts, Kazakhstan accredited representatives of
the new Afghan Administration, without giving them
diplomatic status. The May Doha meeting between
Secretary-General António Guterres and the special
representatives for Afghanistan of a number of countries
confirmed the importance of further cooperation
between the international community and the Taliban,
primarily in the humanitarian assistance, trade and
economic spheres.
We consider it important to maintain close
interaction with the de facto authorities of Afghanistan
so as to seek, in the interests of the Afghan people,
remedies to the current crises, key among which are the
acute humanitarian crisis and the remaining instability,
terrorism and extremism. In addition, the security risks
posed by the illegal circulation of weapons and drugs,
and the steep escalation of illegal migration and the
influx of refugees, need critical attention.
We hope that the de facto authorities of Afghanistan
will take appropriate steps to establish an inclusive
and representative Government, uphold human rights,
including the rights of women, children and persons
belonging to minorities, and promote the full, equal,
meaningful and safe participation of women in all
aspects of Afghan society.
We are researching opportunities to strengthen
the activities of the Kazakhstan Agency for
International Development (KazAID) in providing
official development assistance in Afghanistan. We
are interested in establishing cooperation between
KazAID, other development agencies and United
Nations agencies in the implementation of relevant
projects for the economic stabilization of Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uzbekistan.
26/27

21/06/2023

Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, let me
commend the Permanent Mission of the United Arab
Emirates for convening today’s open briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Her Excellency Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, and Ms. BasijRasikh, for their informative briefings.
The unfolding situation in Afghanistan is a cause
for serious concern for both countries of the region and
the international community as a whole. The current
state of destruction of the economy, widespread chaos
and poverty are becoming the defining factors for the
overall internal political situation in the country.
As Afghanistan’s immediate neighbour, Uzbekistan
has always advocated not just bringing humanitarian
assistance to the country, but also working out concrete
steps conducive to the recovery of the national
economy. From our perspective, at the current stage, it
is important not to let Afghanistan be internationally
isolated, as that would exacerbate the humanitarian
situation. We are talking about the fates of millions of
people. The Afghan problem should therefore not be
neglected, as it was in the past.
We are convinced that the quick repeal of the ban
on girls’ education and women’s employment should
become a key factor in achieving national consensus,
sustainable development and the integration of
Afghanistan into the international community as a
responsible member. Accordingly, the fundamental
conditions for establishing long-term peace in
Afghanistan remain linked to the formation of an
inclusive Government and ensuring basic rights and
freedoms for the people, especially women and national
minorities. Uzbekistan strictly adheres to this position
in its contacts with the Taliban.
We believe that the time has come to take concrete
steps to enhance the roles of the United Nations, leading
countries of the world and the States neighbouring
Afghanistan in resolving the situation in the country.
The initiative of the President of Uzbekistan, His
Excellency Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev, on the formation
of a high-level international negotiating group under
the auspices and with the support of the United
Nations, to prepare and come to agreement with the
Afghan authorities on the phased implementation of
the obligations of the parties, serves this purpose. This
initiative would not only allow a rapprochement of the
positions of various States towards the new Afghan
23-17941

21/06/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

authorities, but it would also facilitate the country’s
recovery from its current dire socioeconomic situation.
The composition of the proposed negotiating
group could be discussed with Member States and the
Security Council. Having broad powers, this group
would conduct direct negotiations with the Afghan
authorities to develop a detailed road map that the de
facto authorities in Kabul would follow to implement
international requirements and obligations. In other
words, the implementation of each specific step outlined
in this road map could lead to the gradual improvement
of the Taliban’s relations with international community,
for example, removing the Taliban from the United
Nations sanctions list, resuming financial assistance
from donor countries and stepping up international
efforts aimed at providing humanitarian and other
types of aid to the Afghan people.
Additionally, preventing Afghanistan’s territory
from becoming a springboard for international terrorism
and severing all ties with various terrorist groups,
primarily Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations,
should also be among the key objectives of this
negotiating group. Those aspects were specifically
highlighted by the delegation of Uzbekistan during the
recent meeting with the Secretary-General that took
place in Qatar last month.

S/PV.9354

We believe that our efforts should be based primarily
on the interests of the ordinary Afghan people. It is
necessary to move away from patterns and stereotypes
in considering the entire population of Afghanistan
in the light of the current attitude of the international
community towards the Taliban. It is important to
shift the conceptual approach away from the tactics of
pressure and threats in favour of a pragmatic dialogue
with the new authorities in Kabul.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that today
the international community should not abandon the
Afghan people with their most challenging problems.
We believe that the United Nations should continue
to play a leading role in mobilizing and coordinating
international efforts to render assistance to Afghanistan.
In that regard, we appeal to the Security Council
to seriously consider the initiative of the President
of Uzbekistan to establish the above-mentioned
negotiating group as an effective mechanism to address
the concerns of the international community with the
de facto authorities of Afghanistan.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

23-1794127/27
