A /69/PV.72

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

72nd plenary meeting

Monday, 15 December 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/69/617)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Credentials
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. The draft
resolution reads as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Having considered the report of the
Credentials Committee and the recommendation
contained therein,
“Approves the report of the Credentials
Committee.”
I now give the floor to the Chair of the Credentials
Committee to introduce the report of the Committee
and the draft resolution contained therein.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh), Chair of the Credentials
Committee: I have the honour to introduce the report of
the Credentials Committee concerning the credentials
of the representatives of Member States to the sixtyninth session of the General Assembly, contained in
document A/69/617.

Having considered the credentials of the
representatives at its meeting of 25 November 2014, the
Committee was pleased to adopt without a vote a draft
resolution accepting their credentials. I would like to
note that since the meeting of the Credentials Committee,
the following Member States have submitted formal
credentials in the form required by rule 27 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly: Algeria, India,
Nigeria, Tunisia and Turkey.
I am now pleased to commend for the Assembly’s
consideration the Committee’s recommendation,
contained in paragraph 11 of its report, that the General
Assembly adopt the draft resolution approving the
report of the Credentials Committee. Finally, I wish to
record my sincere appreciation to the members of the
Committee and to the Secretariat for greatly facilitating
our work.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“Credentials of representatives to the sixty-ninth
session of the General Assembly”, recommended by the
Credentials Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/138).
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-69515 (E)

*1469515*

A/69/PV.72

Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation joined the consensus adoption of resolution
69/138. However, I would like to express my delegation’s
reservation on the parts of the report contained in
A/69/617 that may be construed as recognition of the
Israeli regime.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 3?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14
Culture of peace
(a) Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/413)
(b) Draft resolutions (A/69/L.34 and A/69/L.41)
The Acting President: I would like to draw the
attention of members to a letter dated 12 September
2014 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the General Assembly, transmitting the
seventh annual report of the High Representative for
the Alliance of Civilizations, circulated in document
A/69/382.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Bangladesh to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.34.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the sponsors, a draft resolution
entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace” (A/69/L.34). Bangladesh
takes pride in having introduced the draft resolution on
this item to the Assembly since 2001. We are pleased
that the text has been receiving the overwhelming
support of Member States and that it has been adopted
every year by consensus.
The culture of peace is very close to all of our
hearts. The culture of peace is an aspiration of all
humankind, and it is also the essence of the Charter
of the United Nations. Promoting and inculcating a
mindset of a culture of peace is at the core of the creative
management of differences and divisions. The world
today faces too many problems of divisiveness and
narrow-mindedness that disrupt and derail our shared
objective of sustainable peace, stability and progress.
Inequalities,
discrimination,
misunderstanding,
intolerance and hatred around the globe are generating
new dimensions of conflict. There is undoubtedly an
urgent need to build and promote a culture of peace

2/23

15/12/2014

across the world and to create a mindset of tolerance,
respect and love for others and of respect for diversity,
irrespective of caste, creed, colour, race, ethnicity or
and religion.
If the world order is to move away from its present
pockets of chaotic, uncertain and violent condition,
building a culture of peace is the answer. Although we
witnessed the completion of the International Decade
for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children
of the World, we need to maintain and strengthen our
resolve now even more than we did in years gone
by. We have impressive frameworks on paper, but
translating them into action is still a challenging task.
Therefore, we still need everyone’s strong support and
commitment.
Against that backdrop, my delegation has submitted
this annual draft resolution. We thank Member States
and their delegations for their active participation
in the negotiation process. We thank them for their
valuable inputs and cooperation, which have enriched
the draft resolution. This year, the draft resolution has
been strengthened by incorporating some important
references and elements in promoting a culture of peace.
First, for example, it welcomes the successful
holding of the High-level Forum on the Culture of
Peace, convened by the President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session on 9 September, as
envisaged in resolution 68/125. It refers particularly to
high-level and wide-ranging partnership and inclusive
collaboration among Member States, international
organizations and civil societies. The draft resolution
also welcomes with appreciation the observance of the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace by the
Forum.
Secondly, the draft resolution recognizes the role
of women and young people in advancing the culture
of peace and, in particular, the importance of greater
involvement of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in activities promoting a culture of
peace, including in post-conflict situations.
Thirdly, the draft resolution also notes the initiatives
of civil society, in collaboration with Governments, to
strengthen civilian capacities to enhance the physical
safety of vulnerable populations under threat of violence
and to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes.

14-69515

15/12/2014

Fourthly, the draft resolution notes the importance
of due consideration to a culture of peace in the context
of the post-2015 development agenda.
Fifthly, the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventieth session a report, within existing resources,
on actions taken by Member States and by all
concerned entities of the United Nations to implement
the Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace.
The High-level Forum on a Culture of Peace,
organized by the President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-eighth session on 9 September, provided us
with a unique opportunity to bring together Member
States and stakeholders, and to reinvigorate our
common endeavour to promote a culture of peace. The
Forum was particularly important as it observed the
fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace, and
for its special focus on the role of women and young
people, as well as the relevance of global citizenship in
advancing the culture of peace.
The enthusiasm exhibited during the highlevel event has inspired Member States to continue
convening the forum. Holding such events every year
will not necessarily incur additional costs to the United
Nations budget, but it will convey a powerful message
to the world, especially to young people, that the United
Nations is truly committed to nurturing a culture of peace
in order to help inculcate a mindset of respect and love
for fellow human beings, free from a mindset of hatred,
intolerance, misunderstanding, war and violence. We
look forward to the convening of the High-level Forum
on the Culture of Peace by the President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session, and hope that it
will make a meaningful contribution to furthering a
culture of peace for a pro-people, pro-planet, inclusive,
peaceful and sustainable world for all.
Each year, the draft resolution receives the support
of a large number of Member States. I am pleased
to mention that this year about 100 countries are
sponsoring this important draft resolution. A significant
development this year is the fact that the draft has
received wide-ranging and cross-regional sponsorship.
We express our sincere thanks and commendations
to all the sponsors for their support and commitment,
particularly those countries that are sponsoring the
draft text for the first time.

A/69/PV.72

It is my belief and hope that one day, not only
every delegation will come forward to sponsor the draft
resolution, but, more importantly, that every nation,
every society, every family and every household will
practice the spirit and the mindset of a culture of peace
for our cherished goal of sustainable peace, stability
and prosperity across nations. With that aspiration, I
hope that, as in past years, we will be able to adopt the
draft resolution by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.41.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): It is my great honour
to join the Permanent Representative of the Philippines,
Mr. Libran Cabactulan, in introducing the draft
resolution entitled “Promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace” (A/69/L.41).
Following last-minute consultations with the
negotiating Member States, the facilitators have agreed
to introduce the following revisions to the text of the
draft resolution.
A new preambular paragraph will be inserted
after the fifth preambular paragraph, which shall read
“Recalling also its resolution 68/127 on a world against
violence and violent extremism”.
In the first line of the current sixteenth preambular
paragraph, the words “taking note of” are to be deleted
and replaced with the word “welcoming”.
In the last line of paragraph 11, the words “calls
upon Member States to create conditions for voices of
moderation to be heard” are to be deleted and replaced
with the words “encourages efforts, as appropriate, to
enable voices of moderation to be heard”.
I thank all Member States that took active part
in the negotiations on the draft resolution this year
and enriched its content with their constructive
suggestions. I also thank the Secretary-General for
submitting his comprehensive report on the agenda
item (A/69/413), which outlines the progress achieved
in the implementation of resolution 68/126, adopted by
consensus last year.
We appreciate the leading role of UNESCO and the
valuable contribution of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations to the promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue at the national, regional
and international levels. We particularly welcome

14-695153/23

A/69/PV.72

the adoption by the Executive Board of UNESCO of
the Action Plan for the International Decade for the
Rapprochement of Cultures. The Plan offers a strong
opportunity to take practical steps for the promotion
of interreligious and intercultural dialogue through
education, culture and the media, with an emphasis
on the involvement of young men and women in the
dialogue process. We hope that Member States and
the relevant United Nations agencies will undertake
appropriate programmes and activities in support of
the Action Plan.
The world today is afflicted with destructive
conflicts, old and new, which are fuelled by lingering
suspicions and mistrust across religious and
civilizational fault-lines. Those conflicts not only cause
immense human suffering and economic losses, but
also obstruct friendly interaction and socioeconomic
cooperation among the various regions and nations
of the world. We are also witnessing a growing trend
towards xenophobia and religious intolerance and the
emergence of new extremist ideologies in different
parts of the world.
The impending clash of civilizations in a globalized
world is both avoidable and reversible. Much of it can be
traced to the growing gap in understanding, trust and
tolerance among the various religions and civilizations
of the world. Extremist and terrorist groups exploit
the gap to propagate their own toxic agenda. It is
therefore imperative for all of us to strengthen the
mechanisms and actions for the promotion of dialogue
and understanding among all religions and civilizations
with a view to restoring harmony and strengthening
cooperation for peace and development.
Despite their differences, religions and cultures
have a lot in common that can actually unite us.
We need to build on those shared values. Cultural
diversity can be converted into a positive force for
promoting cooperation, socioeconomic development
and international harmony. If that is to happen, we
will have to join hands to eliminate prejudices, biases
and stereotypes and to engage in a genuine and
constructive dialogue at all levels across cultural and
religious divides. The dialogue should be pursued in
a structured, multilayered and all-inclusive format. It
should include religious and community leaders, civil
society and academic institutions.
The ultimate objective of dialogue should be to
prevent conflict and promote peace and harmony
through better understanding, moderation and a global
4/23

15/12/2014

culture of peace. It is our belief that, with enhanced
dialogue and better understanding, it is possible to
achieve the objective of a diverse, yet harmonious
and peaceful world, standing firmly on the pillars of
peaceful coexistence and unity in diversity. We hope
that the Assembly will, once again, lend its unanimous
support to the draft resolution.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): The Philippines
joins our co-facilitator, Pakistan, in introducing the
draft resolution on the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace, contained in document A/69/L.41, under
agenda item 14, “Culture of peace”, with revisions,
including a new fifth preambular paragraph and
some changes in paragraph 11, as orally presented by
the Ambassador of Pakistan, following last-minute
consultations with the negotiating Member States.
This year, we are celebrating the tenth anniversary
of the resolution. It is fitting that we do so with the
adoption by UNESCO in March of the Action Plan
for the International Decade for the Rapprochement
of Cultures. Hence, the draft resolution encourages
Member States and the relevant intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to carry out activities
in support of the Action Plan.
Aside from continuing its recognition of the
valuable role of the Office for Economic and Social
Council Support and Coordination in the Department
of Economic and Social Affairs as the focal point
within the Secretariat on the issue, the draft resolution
strengthens its support for the work and activities of
UNESCO, the lead agency for the implementation of
the draft resolution and of the Action Plan. It especially
welcomes the UNESCO Peace and Dialogue e-Portal as
a means of promoting interreligious and intercultural
dialogue through information technology, a tool that is
particularly relevant in reaching out to young people.
The draft resolution also continues to welcome the
deepening engagement of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations and welcomes the Bali Declaration
adopted at the Sixth Global Forum of the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations, with the theme
“Unity in Diversity: Celebrating Diversity for Common
and Shared Values”, which was held in Bali, Indonesia,
from 28 to 30 August.
I cannot overemphasize the value of our ongoing
efforts in promoting interreligious and intercultural
dialogue and of such dialogue as the foundation for a

14-69515

15/12/2014

A/69/PV.72

just and lasting peace. As we approach the banner year
of 2015, the draft resolution recognizes the importance
of giving due consideration to culture in the ongoing
discussions on the post-2015 development agenda.
Without peace, there can be no sustainable development.

prepared and submitted to guide our consideration
of the agenda item. CARICOM also wishes to thank
UNESCO and the various United Nations entities that
are committed to promoting the values of the culture
of peace.

We have seen this in the Philippines, on the
island of Mindanao, where peace negotiations to
settle years of conflict succeeded only when all of the
stakeholders realized that peace must go hand in hand
with development and that peace would come only
when we had interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
That is at the heart of the successful conclusion of the
Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro that the
Government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
signed in March. It was pushed forward by, among
others, a series of Bishops-Ulama conferences, some of
which were held in Pakistan and which we hope can be
used by other States as a model for interfaith dialogue.

We live in an era of increasing globalization and
deepening interdependence. As CARICOM itself
is the essence of cultural diversity, we recognize
the importance of promoting interreligious and
intercultural dialogue. CARICOM believes that the
peaceful resolution of conflicts and differences is
crucial to social and economic development.

The pursuit of universal peace is not easy given the
challenges and complexities of the modern world and,
in fact recent complications. It is also not a short-term
issue or goal. We therefore believe that the affirmation
of the need for mutual understanding of our diversity
in religions as well as cultures and the dialogue of
civilizations on an annual basis is essential to the
culture of peace.
We also believe that interreligious and intercultural
dialogue is an issue that cannot be addressed in isolation
or stand by itself. The initiatives and other resolutions
under the agenda item — including the draft resolution
on the culture of peace — complement and build on
each other, as they address different dimensions of
the issue. Allow us at this point to thank the Member
States that have traditionally sponsored and supported
the draft resolution and to welcome and thank those
Member States that are sponsoring it for the first time.
Finally, we wish to thank all delegations that
actively contributed to the discussions and exercised
honesty, flexibility, constructiveness and cooperation.
Together with Pakistan, the Philippine delegation and
the other sponsors commend the draft resolution for
consensus adoption by the Assembly.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
On behalf of the 14 States members of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), it is an honour for me to
address the General Assembly on agenda item 14,
“Culture of peace”. CARICOM takes this opportunity
to thank the Secretary-General for the report (A/69/413)

Disparities among and within countries remain
a global concern. Poverty and social and income
inequality have persisted, causing growing resentment
and intolerance. CARICOM believes that the post2015 development agenda will need to address the
increasing inequalities among countries and ensure
that globalization benefits all countries and not just a
selected few. Consistent with its obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations, the United Nations must
be a force for equality and fairness in the context of an
inequitable system of globalization. The United Nations
must work to ensure that rules apply evenly, effectively
and consistently among all actors in our global family.
The report of the Secretary-General notes that
in increasingly diverse and interconnected societies,
cultural and religious differences are at the forefront.
People need to be equipped with the capacities
necessary to thwart hate speech, challenge stereotypes
and promote peaceful coexistence in diversity. People
need to be educated on the basic principles of peace,
tolerance, cooperation, peaceful dialogue and mutual
respect for all. CARICOM believes that nowhere is it
more important to promote these values than among
our young people. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has
declared that through education, we teach children not
to hate. Through education, we raise leaders who act
with wisdom and compassion. Through education, we
establish a true, lasting culture of peace.
CARICOM strongly believes that education, which
causes a fundamental shift in how we view reality,
is a powerful weapon against oppression. Education
empowers. Malala Yousafzai, the 17-year-old education
activist from Pakistan, who was recently awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize, is a shining example of that. In her
Nobel Peace Prize lecture, Malala said:

14-695155/23

A/69/PV.72

“Why is it that countries which we call strong
are so powerful in creating wars but are so weak
in bringing peace? Why is it that giving guns is so
easy but giving books is so hard? Why is it, why is
it that making tanks is so easy, but building schools
is so hard?
“We are living in the modern age and we
believe that nothing is impossible. We have reached
the moon 45 years ago and maybe will soon land on
Mars. Then, in this twenty-first century, we must
be able to give every child quality education.
“We must work, not wait. Not just the politicians
and the world leaders, we all need to contribute.
Me. You. We. It is our duty.”
It is CARICOM’s hope that through peace
education, we can create a mindset of tolerance and
cooperation and create an enduring culture of peace.
Mr. Ismail (Brunei Darussalam): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the 10 States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand and Viet Nam.
At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report and commend the
Philippines, Pakistan and Bangladesh for their efforts
in facilitating resolutions A/69/L.41 on interreligious
and interfaith dialogue and A/69/L.34 on a culture of
peace.
We would like to take the opportunity to extend
our support to the Government and people of Australia
on the hostage situation in Sydney that took place
yesterday. We reject extremism and radicalism, stand
ready and united with the international community, and
strongly condemn violent terrorist acts. At the same
time, our heartfelt sympathy and deepest condolences
also go to our fellow ASEAN colleague Indonesia,
which has been affected by a landslide in Central Java
on Friday, 12 December, which resulted in the deaths of
a number of people.
ASEAN strongly upholds the culture of peace
that has been instilled in its States members since
the establishment of our Association. As stated in
paragraph 2 of the Bangkok Declaration of 1967, among
the aims and objectives of the formation of ASEAN is

6/23

15/12/2014

“To promote regional peace and stability
through abiding respect for justice and the rule
of law in the relationship among countries of the
region and adherence to the principles of the United
Nations Charter”.
ASEAN believes that a culture of peace must be
inculcated starting from a young age. In that regard, we
have put in place a regional programme called ASEAN
Young Professionals Volunteer Corps, which provides
assistance to projects ranging from rural development,
poverty eradication, education, agriculture and health
to environmental matters. The programme aims to
promote the values of equality and mutual respect and
strengthen mutual understanding through promoting
dialogue and interaction among young people.
ASEAN is in the midst of working towards
building an ASEAN Community by 2015 that is
characterized by people of varied background,
ethnicity, language, religion and culture living together
in harmony and building towards a common future of
peace and prosperity. As paragraph 6 of the ASEAN
Socio-Cultural Community Blueprint states, the
ASEAN Community will be characterized by
“a culture of regional resilience, adherence to
agreed principles, spirit of cooperation, collective
responsibility, to promote human and social
development, respect for fundamental freedoms,
gender equality, the promotion and protection of
human rights and the promotion of social justice”.
That is affirmed in the ASEAN Vision 2020, which
sees ASEAN as
“a concert of Southeast Asian nations, outward
looking, living in peace, stability and prosperity,
bonded together in partnership in dynamic
development and in a community of caring
societies”.
We see that the real divide in the world today is
no longer between East and West, or between the
developed and developing economies, or between the
rich and poor, and certainly not between different faiths.
Instead, it is the disparity between the moderates and
extremists that has caused the various problems and
challenges affecting us today.
We understand that peace cannot be attained
through ASEAN’s efforts alone and that cooperation
among everyone is very necessary. ASEAN, therefore,

14-69515

15/12/2014

will continue to engage in dialogue with our external
partners through ASEAN-led mechanisms, including
through preventive diplomacy and confidence-building
measures under the ASEAN Regional Forum; the
peaceful settlement of disputes through initiatives such
as the Global Movement of Moderates, which upholds
the value of moderation; and other activities under the
non-traditional areas of security, defence and disaster
management.
ASEAN States members at various national levels
have also been contributing to the work of other
regional and international organizations. We welcome
and support, inter alia, the interfaith dialogue initiative
under the Asia-Europe Meeting, and the Declaration
of the Asia-Europe Meeting High-level Conference on
Intercultural and Interreligious Dialogue, under the
theme “Harmony of Civilizations: necessary condition
of sustainable development”, held in St. Petersburg,
Russian Federation, in July. We also continue to
support the Interfaith Dialogue e-Portal established
by the Special Non-Aligned Movement Ministerial
Meeting on Interfaith Dialogue and Cooperation for
Peace and Development, held in Manila in 2010. In
particular, we also welcome the practical initiatives to
employ information and communications technology to
reach out to the young people and to all members of
civil society.
ASEAN further underscores the importance of
giving due consideration to a culture of peace to the
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals and
the post-2015 development agenda, since when there is
no peace, there will be no development. Moreover, last
month in Myanmar our leaders signed the Nay Pyi Taw
Declaration on the ASEAN Community’s Post-2015
Vision, which serves as the basis for a comprehensive
road map for ASEAN, beyond 2015.
We therefore fully support the efforts of the United
Nations in promoting a culture of peace, particularly
through the Action Plan for the International Decade for
the Rapprochement of Cultures 2013-2022, formulated
by UNESCO in consultation with Member States and
the relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, and which emphasizes the involvement of
youth and women in cultivating mutual understanding
and tolerance; the UNESCO Peace and Dialogue
e-Portal in its outreach; and the work of the United
Nations Alliance of Civilization in promoting mutual
understanding among different civilizations, cultures,
religions and beliefs.

A/69/PV.72

ASEAN Member States are also committed to the
promotion of a culture of peace and have been actively
participating in such forums as the annual meeting of
the Global Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations, which
held its sixth Forum in Bali, Indonesia, in August.
To conclude, ASEAN takes this opportunity to
reiterate our commitment to upholding a culture of
peace, as enshrined in our founding principles and
Charter, and will continue to play an active role in
pursuing that course. We also stand ready to work
alongside all regional and international partners and
complement the work of the United Nations towards
this end.
Ms. Lusananon (Thailand): Thailand aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the permanent
representative of Brunei Darussalam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Thailand wishes to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on the promotion of a culture
of peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace (A/69/413).
We commend the commitment and active role of United
Nations entities, in particular UNESCO, in promoting
a culture of peace and for their valuable contributions.
We are living in the world of great diversity and
increasingly interconnected societies. It is therefore
highly essential for all of us to appreciate and cherish
this beauty of diversity in order to live in peace and
harmony. However, the world we are living in is crying
for peace. Intolerance, discrimination, exclusion,
inequality and hatred, to name just a few problems,
are significant threats to peace and harmony. No
single country can overcome such threats alone. The
international community must work together to promote
a sustainable culture of peace at the national, regional
and global levels.
Thailand’s domestic and foreign policy prioritizes
the strengthening of the value of moderation in order
to promote better understanding and mutual respect
among different cultures, religions, faiths and beliefs.
Everyone in the society must be equipped with the skills
to recognize and stop hate speech, stereotypes and
discrimination. We strongly believe that the freedom of
expression, human rights and the rule of law are fertile
ground in which to cultivate peace and harmony in
multicultural societies.
Thailand honours our international commitments
with regard to dialogue for preventive diplomacy

14-695157/23

A/69/PV.72

within various frameworks, including ASEAN, the
Asia-Europe Meeting, the Asia-Middle East Dialogue
and the Asia Pacific Regional Interfaith Dialogue. The
fifth ASEAN “Bridges — Dialogues Towards a Culture
of Peace” event was held in Thailand in September
2014. That event was part of the Bridges series, hosted
by the International Peace Foundation, involving
several major public events that will run continuously
in Thailand until March 2015. The event covers a wide
range of issues in politics, economics, science, culture
and media, with the goal of bridging differences and
building a culture of peace and development in a
globalized world.
We participate actively in various international
dialogue and cooperation frameworks as well as
provide full cooperation and support, whenever and
wherever needed, to promote global harmony to the
best of our ability. In this regard, Thailand commends
the Government of Indonesia for hosting the sixth
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations Global Forum
under the theme “unity in diversity”. Thailand, as an
original member of the Group of Friends of the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations, has been proactively
supportive of promoting the culture of peace and
interreligious, interfaith and intercultural dialogue.
Promoting a sustainable culture of peace requires
a holistic approach. Let me share with the Assembly
some of our views in this regard. First, it is imperative
to engage Member States, the relevant United Nations
agencies and all relevant stakeholders. Thailand
supports the constructive roles of various actors, be
they public or private sector, civil society, media,
academia, local leaders, religious figures, women and
youth. We underscore in particular the role of women
as agents for peace and conflict resolution. The role of
media as a carrier of peace in advocating the culture of
peace is also indispensable.
Secondly, Thailand recognizes the need to spread
the message of peace, tolerance and promoting mutual
respect of differences. We are appalled by the fact that
religions that carry the message of peace-making and
peacekeeping have been misinterpreted and distorted
and become the main driving force for violence and
terrorism. We therefore urgently need to promote a
true understanding of the essence of religions, faiths
and beliefs and to counter ideologies that underpin
violence. The constructive roles of religious leaders,
academia and media can greatly contribute to better
understanding and bridging differences.

8/23

15/12/2014

Thirdly, the promotion of a culture of peace can
be carried out through capacity-building and education.
Expert historians met in Bangkok in September 2014
to discuss ways to raise awareness about the shared
histories of South-East Asia, to improve the quality
of history curricula in order to encourage mutual
understanding and respect among people in the region
and strengthen relations among neighbours. In addition,
the first UNESCO Forum on Global Citizenship
Education was also held in Bangkok in December 2013.
Fourthly, we need to place an increased emphasis on
Youth. Promoting the notion of peace as part of the youth
culture will undoubtedly contribute to the realization of
our goals. To this end, Thailand has been very active in
promoting the culture of peace among young people not
only through the early stages of the education but also
through various activities organized by governmental
agencies, academics, non-governmental organizations
as well as local communities. We place high hopes in
harnessing a vibrant, forward-thinking new generation
of minds, for whom prejudice and the incitement of
hatred has no place within their culture.
Last but not least, we are witnessing the rapid spread
of hate speech and incitement across the globe through
the Internet. We need to formulate more effective
policies and to explore new tools and mechanisms to
prevent and combat such malicious acts.
In conclusion, Thailand supports and co-sponsors
all resolutions under this agenda item to demonstrate
our resolve in this respect. In conclusion, let me reiterate
Thailand’s commitment to working closely with the
international community in fostering culture of peace
and intercultural understanding. Let us counter violence
with non-violence. Let us build peace with peace.
Mr. Alali (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It a pleasure
for me to address the General Assembly on this very
important item. I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/69/413). I would also like
to thank Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al Nasser, High
Representative for the Alliance of Civilizations, for
his report and for his efforts and contributions to
strengthening the culture peace.
We read with great interest the report of the DirectorGeneral of UNESCO concerning the follow-up to and
implementation of the resolution and programme of
action on the culture of peace. We welcome UNESCO’s
activities promoting a culture of peace and non-violence
in all areas of its work.

14-69515

15/12/2014

It goes without saying that peace is not come by
easily. It cannot be strengthened without the proper
climate and conditions to protect it. The culture of
peace is funded on a great number of principles, values
and human behaviours, based on the rejection of the use
of force and closely linked to development and human
rights. The State of Qatar is aware that to establish and
strengthen peace, a great number of practical factors
are necessary in several areas. Our commitment in
these factors is based on several pillars, which are
the basis of our foreign policy. We therefore devote
significant effort towards settling conflicts peacefully
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
through mediation aimed at resolving tensions that
threaten international peace and security.
The United Nations also influences governmental
policy to strengthen socioeconomic and human
development on the basis of human rights for all. We
have sought to strengthen democracy, the rule of law
and good governance, as well as to promote gender
equality and combat terrorism, crime and corruption.
We have given particular importance to strengthening
the participations of all segments of society in national
processes, in particular to the empowerment of youth
because young people represent the generation that bears
greatest responsibility for building a future of peace and
prosperity. On 25 and 26 March, we held a conference
on young people and their role in strengthening the
values of dialogue, with more than 350 participants
representing many cultural and religious affiliations.
We held the Tenth Doha Conference on Interfaith
Dialogue from 23 to 25 April 2013, on the theme of best
practices in interfaith dialogue, and launched an annual
global award for interfaith dialogue.
The State of Qatar was one of the first countries
to contribute to the support and development of the
Alliance of Civilizations. We have played a major
role in fighting polarization and extremism, while
strengthening tolerance and cultural diversity. From
11 to 13 December 2011 we also hosted the Alliance’s
Fourth Global Forum.
Education is one of the principal ways to reach
a generation that understands the values of peace
and benefits from them. We have sought to promote
education as a national priority by including the culture
of peace in our school curriculums, and we have positive
signs of progress in that educational area. At the
international level, we have worked to adopt a number
of initiatives aimed at helping children to grapple with

A/69/PV.72

the negative effects of conflict, such as our Education
Above All and Educate a Child initiatives, launched
by Her Highness Sheikha Moza bint Nasser, designed
to enable millions of children in countries racked by
war and conflict to have access to high-quality primary
education.
Finally, we would like to say that we agree with
the Secretary-General that peace is one of the strategic
dimensions of the post-2015 development agenda, and
with the recommendation of the Director-General
of UNESCO to the effect that peace should not be
defined merely as the absence of conflict, but that it
implies respect for and a guarantee of three of people’s
legitimate rights — dignity, diversity and dialogue
between cultures.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
promotion of a culture of peace and interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace, as contained in document A/69/413.
Malaysia would like to associate itself with
the statement made by the representative of Brunei
Darussalam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN).
My delegation would like to reiterate the importance
of complying with the basic principles of the United
Nations Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace, adopted by the General Assembly in
1999 (resolution 53/243). In that regard, the international
community should strengthen its ongoing efforts to
promote a culture of peace and effectively implement
the Programme of Action.
We would like to join other Member States in
commending the work and initiatives of UNESCO,
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and other
United Nations entities, including regional initiatives
such as the Asia-Pacific Interfaith Dialogue and the
ASEAN Interfaith Dialogue. I would like to express
our appreciation to the Director-General of UNESCO
on its successful launch of the International Decade for
the Rapprochement of Cultures (2013-2022). We are
encouraged by the new Action Plan and believe that it
provides various opportunities for ensuring a renewed
focus on intercultural dialogue and a culture of peace.
We take note of the outcome of the High-level Forum
on the Culture of Peace held at the United Nations on
9 September. We would also like to acknowledge the
roles and contributions of women and young people, as

14-695159/23

A/69/PV.72

well as non-governmental organizations, to a culture
of peace, and of global citizenship as a pathway to
that culture of peace. Malaysia will continue its active
participation and support in promoting a culture of
peace, interreligious and intercultural dialogue and
understanding and cooperation for peace.
I would like to recall the Prime Minister of
Malaysia’s proposal to the General Assembly at
its sixty-fifth session on the establishment of the
Global Movement of Moderates, calling on people
of every religious belief and faith, including all their
interreligious and intercultural aspects, to work together
to tackle extremism (see A/65/PV.19, p. 20). Malaysia
strongly believes that aspects related to moderation,
and the promotion of a culture of peace, will eventually
curb extremism and radicalism. We are hopeful that our
noble efforts will eventually counter and drown out the
voices of extremists and radicals. For that to happen,
we encourage all Member States to work together to
institute a culture of peace and moderation among
peoples domestically as well as internationally.
My delegation acknowledges the importance of
maintaining peace and harmony in order to avoid
instability and mistrust, which hamper countries’
development efforts. I would like to share briefly some
of Malaysia’s experiences in promoting a culture of
peace. Malaysia is a multi-ethnic, multicultural and
multi-religious country. In order to preserve peace and
harmony among its various racial and ethnic groups,
it has introduced the concept of One Malaysia, which
puts the emphasis on balance and comprehensive
development and the promotion of culture and morality,
based on positive aspirational values.
We believe that our ongoing efforts to promote
a culture of peace, dialogue and exchanges of ideas
are some of the best ways to instil understanding
and acceptance between different groups, faiths and
religions. We should also share ideas and knowledge
and discover common ground that may be able to bring
disparate groups closer together. It is our strong belief
that promoting a culture of peace should be an inclusive
process. Positive interaction among peoples of diverse
cultures and values will therefore help to achieve the
aim of preserving and promoting global peace and
stability, which are essential prerequisites for promoting
sustainable economic and social development.
In conclusion, Malaysia is pleased to be a sponsor
of draft resolutions A/69/L.34, on the follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
10/23

15/12/2014

Peace, and A/69/L.41, on the promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and
cooperation for peace. We all want a world free from
violence and war, and to live in peace and harmony. In
order to achieve that, we must work tirelessly to build
a more secure and peaceful world for our children and
future generations.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): My delegation
supports both of today’s draft resolutions under
the agenda item “Culture of peace” (A/69/L.34 and
A/69/L.41), since they give an impetus to many actions
already undertaken to advance understanding, tolerance
and solidarity within and among nations, so acutely
needed in today’s world, torn as it is by strife, conflicts,
terrorism and religious intolerance. In order to be
effective, the draft resolutions must be reinforced by
the Declaration of Principles on Tolerance, the Alliance
of Civilizations — under the broad United Nations
platform for dialogue among civilizations — and all
other legal instruments and frameworks related to
culture and peace.
The implementation of the draft resolutions calls
for well-coordinated action on the part of the United
Nations system, led by UNESCO, its Member States,
regional organizations and all other stakeholders, in
order to reduce poverty — which breeds conflict — and
foster social cohesion and inclusion, pluralistic and
democratic participation, and sustainable development
for all segments of society, including women, young
people and children. Focus must also be on indigenous
peoples, refugees, displaced persons and migrants.
Today we have the opportunity to minimize
extremism, bias and prejudice through education and
the promotion of values, the appropriate use of new
technologies and the dissemination and free flow of
information. We must reach out to establish durable
international peace and security through general and
complete disarmament and effective arms control of
all weapons of mass destruction, including small arms.
Confidence-building measures and efforts on conflict
prevention and negotiating peaceful settlements are also
crucial. Problems arising from post-conflict situations
must be addressed through measures such as the
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
into society, weapons-collection programmes, the
exchange of information and truth and reconciliation
commissions.
Progress at the global level can be achieved
through the individual efforts of Member States, and
14-69515

15/12/2014

Kazakhstan’s efforts have been noteworthy in many
dimensions. As a nation with about 130 ethnic groups
and almost 20 different religious denominations,
Kazakhstan has established a unique mechanism of
inter-ethnic and interfaith dialogue — the Assembly of
the People of Kazakhstan, a body that plays an important
role in statehood development and decision-making,
including through direct participation in the legislative
processes of my country’s Parliament.
To foster peace and stability through such a
dialogue between diverse faiths and cultures, in 2003
the President of Kazakhstan launched the Congress
of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, which
is held triennially. As the outcome of the fourth
Congress, in May 2012, a council of religious leaders
was created to focus on cooperation with other forums
and international organizations, such as the United
Nations. In 2015, the fifth meeting of the Congress will
focus on closer dialogue among religious and political
leaders. We look forward to enhanced cooperation
between the Congress and the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations to promote further peace and stability
through intercultural and interfaith dialogue.
Kazakhstan, as the first Eurasian Chair of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
in 2010 and the Chair of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation in 2011-2012, continued to promote
interfaith dialogue on the regional and global stages.
My country has also enacted new legislation and
instituted new governmental agencies and mechanisms.
Kazakhstan is highly committed to providing moral
and spiritual education to children and young people
to overcome the spiritual vacuum of human values and
to strengthen the moral fabric of its society. That has
protected people from the dangers of their moral selfdestruction and degradation.
Kazakhstan also initiated the International Year for
the Rapprochement of Cultures and, subsequently, the
International Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures
2013-2022, adopted during the thirty-sixth session of
the UNESCO General Conference in November 2011.
That has provided the space for a decade of events and
activities to promote progress on issues from tolerance
to an actual culture of peace.
Kazakhstan pledges to join the multilateral
effort to foster global harmony and cooperation and
strengthen everyday peace through focusing on human
capacities and empowerment of peoples in the post2015 development phase.

A/69/PV.72

Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is honoured to participate in today’s debate
on the culture of peace. We take this opportunity to
thank Ms. Irina Bokova, Director General of UNESCO;
Mr. Jorge Sampaio, former High Representative of
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations; and
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser, United Nations High
Representative of the Alliance of Civilizations, for
their efforts to disseminate a culture of peace, dialogue
and respect for differences. We welcome all efforts
to integrate those values, with a particular focus on
education and youth participation. We have also taken
note of the report of the Secretary-General (A/69/413)
on the main activities of United Nations organizations
over the past year to promote the dialogue among
cultures, civilizations and religions.
The world today is facing major problems due to
divisions distracting us from our common goals of
global peace and security. Despite the many efforts
to strengthen these shared objectives, it is regrettable
to note the increasing power of ongoing intolerance,
discrimination,
xenophobia,
Islamophobia
and
inter-State, ethnic and religious tensions, while peace
remains elusive. The world still has a way to go in
ensuring that States and their people can learn to
coexist in diversity and to make it a source of spiritual,
cultural and civilizational wealth. It is also essential
that the United Nations become the catalyst in creating
new forms of cooperation, solidarity and involvement
to achieve the well-being and progress of humankind
and peace and dignity for all people, wherever they may
be.
We are all facing a historic turning point globally,
politically and economically. It is essential to preserve
spaces for dialogue — such as the Alliance of
Civilizations — to counteract the pull of radicalism,
terrorism, dissent, separatism and obscurantist
doctrines. By remaining within the Alliance and
focused on our basic objectives of rapprochement among
cultures, strengthening mutual understanding and
combating the hostage-taking of peoples and religious
beliefs by minorities with extremist ideologies, we can
achieve our universal targets.
In these troubled times, when some are determined
to pit ideologies and groups against one another, it
is the responsibility of the Friends of the Alliance of
Civilizations to continue to work with lucidity, wisdom
and determination and, more than ever, functionally.
Morocco understood early on the need for enhanced

14-6951511/23

A/69/PV.72

efforts to prevent terrorism and religious extremism
by adopting a unique preventive strategy. That
de-radicalization strategy is based on the triptych
of religious security, preventive security and human
development.
In that framework, Morocco offers technical
training in the fight against terrorism. The programme
was inaugurated with Mali through the training, in
Morocco, of 500 Malian imams. Other countries, such
as Côte d’Ivoire, the Niger, Tunisia and Guinea, have
requested the assistance of the Kingdom of Morocco
to allow their imams to benefit from the training.
The Ministry of Endowments, which oversees the
programme, is planning to build a training institute in
Fez, in response to the growing demand in that domain.
Moreover, based on its experience, traditional values
and political resolve, Morocco has always striven
to maintain a space for peace and prosperity in the
Maghreb, Africa, the Euro-Mediterranean region and
the Middle East.
Morocco continues to work constructively in
establishing good-neighbourly and trusting relations
within all cultural spaces. In collaboration with the
UNESCO Office in Rabat, Morocco will undertake
several actions aimed at strengthening the protection
of cultural diversity and promoting pluralism and
dialogue among cultures and religions. Likewise,
Morocco has often called for the promotion of culture
through dialogue, as it has always been a welcoming
land of tolerance and conviviality that is open to other
civilizations, cultures and religions. As His Majesty
King Mohammed VI said, in a speech at the 2001
conference of the Islamic Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization,
“From time immemorial, Morocco has been and
remains a crossroads of tolerance and cohabitation,
a haven for understanding and coexistence, and a
point of departure in establishing communication
bridges between civilizations and cultures and
among various societies, regardless of their diverse
religions, beliefs and ethnic origins.”
In that spirit we hope that the rapprochement of
cultures will contribute substantially to the emergence of
a true culture of tolerance, dialogue and understanding
among all Member States and create fertile ground
for an opening towards others and acceptance of their
specific characteristics.

12/23

15/12/2014

Finally, the Kingdom of Morocco is pleased to
sponsor draft resolutions A/69/L.34 and A/69/L.41,
entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace” and “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”, respectively. We urge their
adoption by consensus.
Mr. Sumi (Japan): Japan would like to express
its sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
report on the promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace (A/69/413). We also wish to
express our thanks to the representative of Bangladesh
for introducing the draft resolution on the follow-up to
the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace (A/69/L.34), and to the representatives of
Pakistan and the Philippines for introducing the draft
resolution on the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace (A/69/L.41). Japan would further like to
thank the delegations that joined in the negotiations on
these draft resolutions for their flexibility and valuable
contributions to the texts.
Japan believes that women are agents of peace and
can significantly contribute to conflict prevention and
resolution. In line with Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, Japan
has been actively promoting the role of women in these
domains. Furthermore, we share the view of many
other delegations that peace lies in the hands of future
generations. Therefore, we attach great importance
to cultivating a culture of peace among young people
through education on relevant topics. As Japanese
Prime Minister Mr. Shinzo Abe stated before the
General Assembly in September,
“Japan is a nation that has worked to eliminate the
war culture from people’s hearts, and it will spare
no effort in continuing to do so” (A/69/PV.9, p. 30).
In the same vein, Japan embraced the High-level
Forum on the Culture of Peace, held in September, and
its focus on the role of women and young people in
advancing the culture of peace. In that regard, and with
reference to the draft resolution on the follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace, Japan would like to direct particular attention
to the seventeenth preambular paragraph, which reads:

14-69515

15/12/2014

“Recognizing the role of women and young
people in advancing the culture of peace and, in
particular, the importance of greater involvement
of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in activities promoting a culture of
peace, including post-conflict situations.”
Japan firmly believes that the role and contributions
of women and young people to the culture of peace are
important not only because women and young people
represent a significant part of the global population,
but also because they are the key drivers of the sort
of change of mindset, institutions and cultures that we
seek.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report entitled “Promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace” (A/69/413). For the first
time here, we have seen UNESCO, the Alliance of
Civilizations and all United Nations entities, through
their activities, strive to strengthen the culture of peace
and implement the plans and resolutions adopted. I
would also like to acknowledge Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz
Al-Nasser for his implementation of the strategic plan
for the period 2013-2018.
The Preamble of the Charter of the United Nations
stipulates that, in order to fulfil the noble objectives of
the Organization:
“We the peoples of the United Nations [are]
determined ... to practice tolerance and live together
in peace with one another as good neighbours, and
to unite our strength to maintain international
peace and security.”
Similarly, the Preamble of the UNESCO Constitution
declares, “That since wars begin in the minds of men, it
is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must
be constructed”.
In this regard, I would like to express our full
support for of all these initiatives. Tunisia has been
home to numerous successive cultures and religions
throughout its 3,000-year history. Today it stands as
a bridge for mutual understanding, rapprochement
and coexistence among nations, owing to its strategic
position in relation to Africa, Europe and the Arab
world. Tunisia’s position is also based on its conviction
of the need to enlarge on these concepts in order to
foster peace, tolerance and dialogue and to emphasize

A/69/PV.72

the human aspects of strengthening social stability an
economic development.
Based on these values, we invite all international
entities and civil society organizations and the private
sector to spread this culture of rapprochement, dialogue
and cooperation among peoples, nations, cultures
and religions in order to benefit from the available
frameworks and mechanisms, especially those offered
by the United Nations. Given the threats posed today
by extremism, exclusionism, radicalization and
terrorism to peace and security, this has never been
more important for a world ripe with potential. We
have always supported the essential role of UNESCO
in spreading the culture of peace and rapprochement
through its various programmes, and especially in the
context of its programme on the culture of peace and
non-violence, as well as the International Decade for
the Rapprochement of Cultures (2013-2022). These
represent two important frameworks in which UNESCO
is able to promote peace and dialogue.
Tunisia would also like to acknowledge the
inclusion of culture in the post-2015 development
agenda. Along these same lines, we support the new
strategic plan for the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations for the period 2013-2018, which reflects a
new concept of expanding the activities of the Alliance
to develop resources and implement its programmes.
We also appreciate the fact that the Alliance is working
to implement concrete projects in order to realize its
objectives, based on regional and national strategies.
We would also like to commend the cooperation
partnership with the United Nations Development
Programme in all of our country’s sectors, including
youth programmes. In the same vein, I would like to
commend the efforts of other United Nations entities
and programmes to strengthen the culture of peace,
particularly the Peacebuilding Commission, which
plays a very important role in post-conflict situations.
In conclusion, I commend all efforts to spread the
message of tolerance and dialogue in our world today,
and to reiterate Tunisia’s determination to participate in
them, in view of its historical role in promoting peace
and security.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): Peace is like the oxygen we breathe. Most
of the time, when it is there, we do not realize how
important it is. Sometimes we neglect it and do not tend
it. When we do not have it, we realize how vital it is as

14-6951513/23

A/69/PV.72

a catalyst in every area of human activity and all of our
ventures, individual or collective, for economic, social
and cultural progress.
Need we stress yet again, to give it its full importance,
that our country’s motto begins with the word “peace”,
followed by “work” and “fatherland” — constituting
an entire vision and programme? Need we recall yet
again that for many years our country has taken part in
United Nations operations in several parts of the world
in order to defend peace?
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the issue, contained in document A/69/413.
Four years after the end of the International Decade for
a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of
the World, 2001-2010, I welcome the fact that a culture
of peace is still one of our community’s concerns.
Cameroon shares the position of the SecretaryGeneral that peace must be taken into due account in
formulating the post-2015 development agenda. My
country is aware of the importance of the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace for the
good of all humankind, particularly future generations.
Like UNESCO, we believe firmly that we must
cultivate the defence of peace in people’s minds. We
are an active participant in the Programme of Action.
That is why we subscribe to the Education Above All
global initiative. In that connection, we have included
civic education in the official school curriculum,
starting with the early language section of primary
education — which is, by the way, compulsory and free
to all — through the final year of secondary school. The
programme transmits values such as understanding of
others, tolerance, knowledge of and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and acceptance
of differences as sources of enrichment. This helps
to strengthen peace, social stability, respect for
diversity and mutual respect, promoting an atmosphere
conducive to peace and understanding. I should not
omit to emphasize the importance of UNESCO Clubs,
which are formed by students in secondary schools
with the aim of further advocating the values promoted
by the agency.
I would like to emphasize Cameroon’s celebration
every 21 September, along with the rest of the
international community, of the International Day of
Peace, and of the International Day of Non-Violence on
2 October. The two days are an opportunity for recalling
the values dear to our Organization and without which
humankind would be in peril. I am talking about our
14/23

15/12/2014

shared fight for the common values of maintaining
and building peace, preventing conflict, disarmament,
sustainable economic and social development,
promoting human dignity and rights, democracy,
the rule of law, good governance, tolerance, gender
equality, non-violence and the peaceful settlement of
differences.
If peace is to be lasting, it must be inclusive. That
is why it is important to promote peaceful coexistence
among different cultures and religions. Ecumenical,
interfaith and intercultural dialogue has made a
valuable contribution to social cohesion, harmony and
active dialogue in Cameroon, an Africa in miniature. It
enables us to question prejudices and improve mutual
understanding. In that regard, we should emphasize
the important role of education and awareness-raising
through the media and information and communication
technologies.
In conclusion, peace is cultivated in people’s minds
as they go about their daily life. In order to achieve
it, we need to increase our activities at every level, in
order to make progress every day in promoting and
enjoying peace. I call on everyone here to continue to
work together to attain that goal. Our shared future
depends on it. In the light of all of these considerations,
Cameroon, as in previous years, has become a sponsor
of today’s draft resolutions (A/69/L.34 and A/69/L.41),
which we would request the Assembly to support
unanimously.
Mr. Agbangla (Benin) (spoke in French): I commend
the holding of today’s meeting, which gives us a happy
opportunity to tackle a subject of great concern for
which our shared Organization, whose mandate is to
contribute to international peace and security, is the
best possible venue and framework. The subject is
also a major issue for our peoples’ present and future
and one that is always worth revisiting, emphasizing,
deepening our consideration of and, above all, working
on together.
My delegation welcomes the multifaceted efforts
by the United Nations to define and adopt, on behalf
of the international community, the principles and
values on which peoples’ coexistence for peace should
be based. Many resolutions have been adopted by the
General Assembly in this regard, and my country has
always supported such resolutions by sponsoring them.
I am pleased to note in particular resolutions 53/243 A,
53/243 B and, above all, 67/104, on the promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
14-69515

15/12/2014

A/69/PV.72

and cooperation for peace, adopted by the Assembly in
December 2012, and the adoption of the International
Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures 2013-2022,
which gives us the framework and the opportunity to
work together to build a true culture of peace in the
spirit of the Yamoussoukro declaration of 1989.

only by educating young people on tolerance, openness
and interculturalism and by teaching religious history
in schools. The media, especially social networks, also
have a role to play as a potential vector for intolerance
and hatred or, conversely, a promoter of cultural
rapprochement for peace.

My delegation would like to commend the
remarkable work done in the field by the major United
Nations agencies and entities, despite the difficulties
they encounter, aimed at operationalizing the ideals and
standards conveyed by the aforementioned resolutions.
I am thinking in particular of the vital role that
UNESCO plays in this matter and that of the Alliance
of Civilizations, which, since its establishment, has
demonstrated its relevance and usefulness in the United
Nations system.

My delegation believes that if we want to build a
culture of peace, especially in Africa, we must come
together to reflect and act methodically, through
initiatives that are new and of an entirely different
nature. Such initiatives must go beyond the legitimate
security response that is required for the fight against
all types of violent extremism, particularly those with
religious connotations. Only systematic and sincere
interreligious and intercultural dialogue will help us to
overcome disaster in this area.

We also support all the initiatives taken by the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation to promote
interreligious dialogue and the culture of peace. Benin
further duly appreciates the specific contribution
of certain civil society structures, particularly the
Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue,
established by His Majesty King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz Al-Saud and based in Vienna, and the Félix
Houphouët-Boigny Foundation for Peace Research,
headquartered in Yamoussoukro.

That is the objective and scope of the African
initiative for peace education and development through
interfaith and intercultural dialogue undertaken by
the Government of the Republic of Benin. It will be
officially launched in Cotonou from 26 to 29 May 2015,
at an international symposium that we will facilitate.
That initiative already has the support of many
partners, among which I would like to acknowledge
and thank the Alliance of Civilizations, UNESCO,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Economic Community of West African States. It is a
key concern in Africa today and will be the subject
of the decisions taken at the next summit of Heads of
State and Government of the African Union in January
2015. It aims at countering the resurgence of religious
extremism in Africa by addressing its roots.

Allow me to place a particular emphasis on
dialogue, including interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, to which my country, Benin, has always
attached particular importance, as we have ample
experience in the matter. We humbly believe that that
fact has enabled us to today send a message to other
countries, especially in Africa. As the Assembly
knows, religions’ place and role in the public space,
whether in Africa or anywhere around the world, are
not simple. Our modern societies’ relationship on the
one hand with religions, whether they are indigenous
or of the book, and on the other between such religion’s
adherents, is very often complex. Prejudice, resentment
and misunderstandings constantly arise.
However, when we look closely, bridges and points
of convergence do exist between religions and can be
cultivated. We discover that fact by opening spaces
for dialogue, allowing the various religious authorities
and followers to talk in order to get to know each other
better, with respect for their own identities, to discuss
their views, to clear up misunderstandings, to facilitate
mutual understanding and to recognize the need to live
together in community. We can strengthen dialogue

That initiative is being undertaken in parallel with
two others, namely the international symposium on
dialogue between indigenous religions, Christianity
and Islam in service of peace, held in Cotonou on
20 and 21 August 2007 under the auspices of UNESCO
and, more recently, the international symposium on
interreligious dialogue, also held in Cotonou, from 3 to
5 March 2014, under the presidency of Cardinal JeanLouis Tauran, President of the Pontifical Council for
Interreligious Dialogue.
As a foretaste of the Cotonou symposium, I would
like to inform the Assembly that the delegation of
Benin will shortly hold a side event on that initiative
in the Trusteeeship Council Chamber from 1.15 p.m. to
2.15 p.m. At the event, the ins and outs of the initiative
will be presented to members in detail. We cordially
invite all members who understand the enormous

14-6951515/23

A/69/PV.72

promise that that noble initiative holds. We need
their support and contributions for the success of the
initiative.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba attaches great importance to this debate.
Promoting a culture of peace is the essence of the
United Nations. The Organization’s founders expressed
in the Charter the aspirations of their peoples to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, their
faith in the dignity and worth of the human person
and the need to promote social progress and better
standards of life in a larger understanding of freedom.
In the second decade of the twenty-first century, those
founding objectives remain the driving force behind the
work of the United Nations.
Cuba reiterates its full commitment to the fulfilment
of the Charter of the United Nations, including the
purposes and principles set forth therein, and stresses
that its work in terms of international relations is
inspired by the need to promote a culture of peace in
all areas.
The aim of further strengthening the global
movement for a culture of peace, noted in both
documents, is very relevant, as emphasized by the
General Assembly in resolution 68/125 and reiterated
in draft resolution A/69/L.34, which is proposed for
adoption today. Progress towards the full development
of a culture of peace is achieved through a set
Organizationf values, attitudes, traditions, behaviours
and lifestyles that the States Members of the United
Nations have defined as part of the concept of culture
of peace, whose essential elements, among others, are
respect for life; the end of violence and the promotion
and practice of non-violence through education,
dialogue and cooperation; full respect for the principles
of sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States; non-interference in matters
that are basically under the domestic jurisdiction of
States, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law; commitment to the
peaceful settlement of conflicts; efforts to meet the
needs of present and future generations with regard to
development and the protection of the environment;
and respect for and the promotion of the right to
development.
The promotion of a culture of peace requires the
education of individuals from a very early age. At the
national level, school, family and society as a whole
are responsible for instilling the values, attitudes
16/23

15/12/2014

and behaviours that are needed to develop a culture
of peace. They must be accompanied by similar and
complementary actions at the regional and international
levels. Member States have the responsibility of
complying with the Charter of the United Nations and
other international treaties to which they are party and
that are part of international law.
A culture of peace cannot be achieved through
the threat or use of force in international relations. A
culture of peace cannot be achieved through actions
aimed at overthrowing Governments that have been
legitimately constituted through the application of
domestic law established by the sovereign decision
of its people. A culture of peace cannot be achieved
through the existence of nuclear weapons that, almost
70 years after the bombings of the cities of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki, threaten to exterminate humankind and
the environment with even greater power. No weapon
of mass destruction is compatible with the culture of
peace.
Imposing national agendas on other peoples through
economic, commercial, financial or military blockades
is a criminal and immoral way to obstruct progress
towards a culture of peace. Developing a culture of
peace also requires unequivocally condemning all
acts, methods and practices of terrorism and taking
concrete actions to counter them, regardless of their
forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomever
they are committed, including State terrorism. It would
be inconceivable to achieve a genuine culture of peace
for peoples oppressed by colonialism and deprived
of the exercise of the right to self-determination and
independence.
The region of Latin America and the Caribbean is
in the vanguard of applying measures that contribute
to strengthening a culture of peace. As is well known,
for example, the region established the first densely
populated zone free of nuclear weapons through the
Treaty of Tlatelolco, and all Member States of the
region are also States parties to the Biological Weapons
Convention. The Latin American and Caribbean peoples
have shown their commitment to the reaffirmation of
peace and negotiated solutions to conflicts by declaring
the region to be a zone of peace as one outcome of the
second Summit of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States (CELAC), held in January in
Havana. CELAC and the declaration of Latin America
and the Caribbean as a zone of peace are genuine
contributions to the culture of peace and tangible

14-69515

15/12/2014

examples of how, with political will, the obstacles to
peaceful coexistence and solidarity among our peoples
can be overcome.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): First of all, I wish to associate
myself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Brunei Darussalam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Nations (ASEAN). I would
also to highlight certain points in my own national
capacity.
Cambodia underlines the importance of the culture
of peace and believes that it must be cherished in the
hearts of the peoples of the world, since we recognize
that conflicts and war can erupt in a matter of days,
while peace takes years to achieve. Unfortunately, we
have seen armed conflicts continue to rage and to claim
the lives of combatants and civilians alike, including
children, in some parts of the world. Violent extremism
is still a threat to peace and development.
The United Nations has been playing an important
role in containing conflicts through various activities
and interventions in conflict areas, and promoting its
development agenda, which our leaders have agreed
to. My country believes that peace and development
are interlinked. We have all agreed to adopt the post2015 development agenda as our theme for the coming
years, in particular to commemorate the seventieth
anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations.
As a post-conflict country ravaged by the
scourge of war in recent decades, and while working
to rehabilitate itself, Cambodia views the culture of
peace as its core value and adheres to the principles of
the Charter of ASEAN and the Charter of the United
Nations. Peace and stability are the long-term goal of
ASEAN. Cambodia also attaches great importance to
the adoption of regional confidence-building measures
and preventive diplomacy through various annual
meetings in the framework of ASEAN with all our
dialogue partners, the ASEAN Regional Forum, and
regional seminars and workshops. The Treaty of Amity
and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, which is a legal tool
aimed at promoting peace, amity and cooperation, has
become more popular, with 32 countries joining as high
contracting parties, while other countries are eager to
join.
Cambodia welcomed General Assembly resolution
55/282, which was adopted at its fifty-fifth session
to proclaim the International Day of Peace. On
21 September this year, in joining the international

A/69/PV.72

community to mark the occasion, the Prime Minister
of Cambodia addressed the nation on the importance
of the Day and outlined Cambodia’s achievements and
commitments aimed at curbing, reducing and ending
armed conflicts and wars around the world. More
importantly, Cambodia also welcomed resolution
61/271, which proclaimed 2 October — the birthday of
Mahatma Gandhi, the father of non-violence campaigns,
who struggled to bring national independence to India
in 1947 — the International Day of Non-Violence.
While war makes for fragility and cannot
be an option, peace must be maintained through
confidence-building measures and respect for
international norms and the rule of law. My delegation
therefore noted with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General (A/69/413), which highlights
the work being done by United Nations agencies,
particularly UNESCO, to promote education, dialogue,
reconciliation, interreligious dialogue and a rightsbased approach. The report concludes by calling for
an increasingly integrated approach by United Nations
entities.
While acknowledging the importance of all
religions in contributing to a culture of peace, my
delegation believes it is vital to instil in younger
generations the drive to embrace peace and live in
harmony. To that end, Cambodia has sponsored the
draft resolution on the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace (A/69/L.41), to be adopted by consensus in
the Assembly today.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank India for initiating a resolution establishing an
International Day of Yoga (resolution 69/131), dedicated
to enhancing the health of people around the world,
which was sponsored by a large number of countries,
including my country, and adopted by the Assembly
last week without a vote.
Mr. Dehgani (Islamic Republic of Iran): The agenda
item we are discussing today, and the draft resolutions
we will shortly be taking action on (A/69/L.34 and
A/69/L.41), have acquired increasing importance in
the past few months and years. They were important to
begin with because of their focus on peace, the single
most important pillar on which our Organization was
founded, and because of their emphasis on the need
to develop an appropriate culture of peacebuilding,
the primary foundation on which just and long-lasting
peace should be built. The reason they have acquired

14-6951517/23

A/69/PV.72

further importance is owing to the increasing activity,
especially in our region, of wicked elements that are
inherently opposed to peace and are anathema to a
culture of peace. In that context, we are all aware of the
plight of the peoples of Iraq and Syria as a result of the
actions of forces of blind and dark violence.
As a culture of peace, as developed in General
Assembly resolutions, has an impact mainly on
individuals and communities, the expectation is that the
lofty and noble ideals incorporated into today’s draft
resolutions will help decrease and eventually eliminate
the support that the terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq
receive from various parts of the region and beyond,
including from certain individuals and communities.
Similarly, we should redouble our efforts to implement
the draft resolutions, thus fighting the counter-culture
of violence and extremism that is corrupting the minds
of some young people.
The Islamic Republic of Iran attaches great
importance to efforts to promote peace, moderation,
dialogue and understanding among cultures, religions
and civilizations. Last year my Government took the
initiative of proposing a resolution on a world against
violence and violent extremism (68/127) that the
Assembly adopted by consensus. The initiative came
from His Excellency Mr. Hassan Rouhani, President
of the Islamic Republic of Iran, in his speech in the
general debate of the Assembly at its sixty-eighth
session (see A/68/PV.6, p. 16). The widespread support
it has enjoyed shows the importance of the matter in the
eyes of the world, as well as the urgent need for resolute
coordinated action by the international community
designed to address the rising phenomenon of violent
extremism.
Developments since the resolution’s adoption bear
witness to the relevance of its call and to how essential
it is that all nations work to curb violent extremism. We
are pleased to see growing awareness in every region
and international forum, as well as in academia, the
media and civil society, of the need to adopt policies
and take action to counter violent extremism. Last
week, the first international World against Violence and
Violent Extremism Conference was held in Tehran, in
the Islamic Republic of Iran, in which representatives
of Governments, academia and civil society from
more than 50 countries participated. The Conference
culminated with the adoption of a declaration and plan
of action that is being circulated to the Assembly as a
document under today’s agenda item. The Declaration

18/23

15/12/2014

and Plan of Action emphasizes norms and principles
promoting peace and tolerance within societies and
among peoples and communities, and enumerates
concrete actions that should be taken to implement
those norms and principles.
In our globalized world, no evil can be contained
in one region. Violence and violent extremism, and
the cultures that feed them, are as contagious as Ebola
and H1N1 flu, and affect the entire world in the same
way that carbon dioxide does, regardless of where
they originate. The culture that feeds this new type
of violence is already on the move, plaguing near and
distant societies alike. Today violent extremists and other
enemies of peace are from many different countries,
ethnicities and nationalities. As the challenges to peace
have become global, so should any action being taken
against them. Mobilizing the global population against
the enemies of peace is therefore now a necessity, and
a global dialogue is the starting point from which to
address that necessity.
The preamble to the UNESCO Constitution declares
that “since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in
the minds of men that the defences of peace must
be constructed”. If we are to win the battle between
extremism and moderation, between tolerance and
bigotry, we should start by changing minds. The violent
extremists who assume that they are the only ones who
deserve to live are mentally poised to oppose peace.
No religion teaches its followers that they are the only
ones who deserve to live. Killing innocent people in the
name of religion is an absolute distortion of religion.
The voices of wisdom of all religions should now close
ranks and reiterate their absolute loyalty to peace and
tolerance.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 49/2, of 19 October 1994, I now
give the floor to the observer of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Lobry-Boulanger (International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies): The
International Federation of Red Cross and and Red
Crescent Societies (IFRC) welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the promotion of a culture of
peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace (A/69/413) and
the progress described in the report led by UNESCO,
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, the
Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations Volunteers,
UN-Women and many other United Nations entities.
14-69515

15/12/2014

More specifically, the IFRC agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s emphasis on the interconnectedness between
the culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, and his call for
“an increasingly integrated approach on the part of
the entities of the United Nations system to these
problems, particularly in their activities at the field
level” (A/69/413, para. 95),
as exemplified by the single report presented this year.
The IFRC is strongly committed to fostering a
global culture of respect for peace and non-violence,
intercultural dialogue and social inclusion in which
human values and dignity are truly celebrated. Indeed,
promoting social inclusion and a culture of non-violence
and peace is one of our three strategic aims for the
present decade. The report states that turning a culture
of violence into one of peace requires a global mind and
behaviour shift from the way we currently think and
interact — from being locked into differences to valuing
diversity and pluralism; from adverse reaction to joint
response and proactive prevention; from exclusion based
on fear to connection based on a common humanity;
and from resort to verbal and physical violence when
feeling threatened to constructive dialogue and trust.
In this framework, we believe that women, young
people and children are powerful sources of change,
whose energy and skills need to be harnessed when
pursuing societal transformation leading to a culture of
non-violence and peace. Furthermore, we believe that
education and volunteerism are crucial pillars when
pursuing societal transformation leading to a culture of
non-violence and peace.
Women continue to suffer from the impact
of economic and financial crisis. They are
disproportionately vulnerable and affected by other
humanitarian challenges as well, such as poverty,
climate change, food insecurity, migration, internal
displacement and conflict, which result in additional
vulnerabilities. Yet, women are also disproportionately
affected by the impact of natural disasters, the scarcity
of resources and the lack of or inequitable access to
adequate health and education services and facilities.
We also know that, unfortunately, women continue to
be subjected to unacceptable levels of violence.
Accordingly, the IFRC ensures that in responding
to emergencies, appropriate violence prevention,
mitigation and response strategies, including
counseling for survivors of violence, are incorporated

A/69/PV.72

into our programming. The IFRC additionally ensures
that gender considerations are built into all areas of our
work, including water and sanitation, health care and
shelter. All of this is in line with our strategic framework
on gender diversity issues. In other words, we identify
and address the distinct needs and capacities of women,
girls, boys and men of all ages and abilities.
In order to confront the underlying causes of
vulnerability and foster safe and resilient communities,
we also encourage an increase in and a strengthening of
volunteer programmes. By enhancing volunteerism, we
are able to put forward a two-fold approach to supporting
women. First, women volunteers, both young and old,
are best suited to providing humanitarian assistance to
their communities, and in particular to other women.
Secondly, experience has shown that, when engaged,
women more easily find support systems that help them
build the confidence necessary to face their day-to-day
problems.
As stressed in the Secretary-General’s Global
Education First initiative, the importance of ensuring
access to quality education for all is widely agreed
upon. The essential questions remaining are: what kind
of education do we want to provide? What should be its
purpose and, hence, content in terms of the overarching
human values that we want education to instil? The IFRC
strongly believes that education in school or non-formal
settings is not only about developing cognition or
knowledge, but also about instilling and nurturing
human values, as well as the social and life skills that
enable individuals to act and interact harmoniously and
constructively. The IFRC believes that if we wish to
work towards a world free of discrimination, exclusion
and violence, education must instil such skills empathy,
non-judgmental thinking, active listening, critical
thinking, non-violent communication, collaborative
negotiation and mediation.
When touching the heart, education fosters a
genuine appreciation of and respect for diversity.
Education is therefore essentially very much about
learning to be and learning to live together. Yet, how
is it possible to be non-violent in violent situations, or
not to resort to violence in fragile environments? We
believe that the answers start with acquiring the ability
to “feel ourselves” — that is to say, analysing situations
from the humanitarian perspective and then engaging
in constructive actions. It is well documented that the
application of such skills in fact reduces the likelihood

14-6951519/23

A/69/PV.72

of resort to violence in response to others’ violent
behaviour.
Requiring an ability to engage in constructive
dialogue and to respect diversity lessens the chance
that children and young people will engage in
discriminatory behaviours. It also reduces the
likelihood of their resorting to violence to deal with
differences or reduce tensions. This snowball effect
of education positively impacts society as a whole by
reducing the well-documented social and economic
costs that result from violence and by creating safer
and more inclusive communities. Family life, school,
media and community interactions all constitute
potential educational platforms to promote a culture of
non-violence and peace.
Lastly, in addition to values and skills-based
education to address the underlying cause of violence,
we strongly encourage an increase in and strengthening
of volunteering opportunities. Volunteering, which we
consider to be a non-formal education, is at the heart of
community-building and a catalyst for social cohesion.
Beyond the benefits that I outlined earlier for women and
girls, it is an excellent way for individuals to contribute
to their communities by working together with people
from diverse backgrounds, cultures and religions. It
strengthens community support systems, and thereby
increases resilience and reduces vulnerability to violent
actions.
In conclusion, we believe that the cumulative
effect of non-cognitive approaches within a skills- and
values-based education, combined with volunteering,
positively impacts society as a whole by reducing the
well-proven social and economic impact of violence
and by creating safer and more inclusive communities.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 14.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/69/L.34 and A/69/L.41, as orally revised. In
connection with draft resolution A/69/L.34, entitled
“Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace”, I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Elliot (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
A/69/L.34: Benin, Bulgaria, Burkino Faso, Cameroon,
20/23

15/12/2014

Chile, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominica,
the Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Georgia, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Italy, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Mali, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Mozambique, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Palau, the
Republic of Korea, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Somalia, Suriname, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Viet
Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.34?
Draft resolution A/69/L.34 was adopted (resolution
69/139).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.41, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”, as orally
revised.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Ms. Elliot (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/69/L.41: Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei
Darussalam, Chile, China, Hungary, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Luxembourg, Morocco, Poland, the
Russian Federation, Slovenia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey
and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.41, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/69/L.41, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 69/140).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote or position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia): Armenia recognizes
and fully shares the importance of resolution 69/140,
entitled “Promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace”,
and commends the efforts of its main sponsors on

14-69515

15/12/2014

the basis of its strong belief that such dialogues can
enhance peace and social stability, respect for diversity
at the global, regional, national and local levels,
and an environment conducive to peace and mutual
understanding. We believe that interreligious and
intercultural dialogue should aim at promoting social
cohesion, peace and development and should strongly
condemn xenophobia, racism and discrimination in all
its forms and manifestations.
Having said that, Armenia hopes that Azerbaijan’s
opportunity to host the 2016 Global Forum, mentioned
in paragraph 10 of the resolution, which in particular
refers to the promotion of mutual understanding
among different civilizations, cultures, religions and
beliefs, will strongly discourage the Government of
Azerbaijan from further conducting its Governmentsponsored policy of Armenia-phobia and hatred against
Armenians, and persuade Azerbaijan to review and
reconsider its policy of hostility towards a neighbouring
country, while contributing towards amity and mutual
understanding as an important tool in efforts aimed at
achieving peace and stability at the regional and global
levels.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
I give the floor to the representative of Italy to
make a statement after adoption.
Mrs. Gatto (Italy): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) on resolution 69/140,
entitled “Promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace”.
The European Union would like to extend its thanks
to the delegations of Pakistan and the Philippines
for the very constructive spirit in which they led the
consultation process.
The European Union appreciates the efforts of
the main sponsors to take into account some of the
remaining concerns raised in previous years, and
acknowledges that the text has continued to improve
over the years. We appreciate in particular the changes
made in the thirteenth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraphs 10, 12 and 18. However, not all our
concerns were reflected in the text. In particular, the
European Union would like to stress that it continues
to attach importance to always mentioning religion or
belief in conjunction with one another, and to the fact
that freedom of religion or belief applies to individuals
as right-holders who may exercise this right either

A/69/PV.72

within a community, including as religious minorities,
with others or individually.
As the EU highly values the contribution of
civil society to the promotion of intercultural and
interreligious dialogue, it believes that dialogue can be
successful only in an environment where all voices can
be heard, human rights and fundamental freedoms are
respected, and a free and open media landscape exists.
The European Union also believes that it is important
that we reflect on the respective roles of Governments
and civil society. It is particularly important that
Governments themselves take positive actions to create
conditions where the persecution of individuals on the
grounds of their religion or beliefs is not condoned,
rather than expecting civil society or international
bodies alone to take action.
Finally, we trust that the sponsors will look
positively into the suggestion of making this resolution
a biennial initiative.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
Agenda item 128
Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him
Draft resolution (A/69/L.42)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.42.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): I have asked for the
floor today to introduce a draft resolution concerning
the investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him.
It is my pleasure to introduce the draft resolution, as
contained in document A/69/L.42, on behalf of the 20
original sponsors. We are grateful to all those who have
signed up today and of course will warmly welcome
any additional sponsors.
The words and deeds on the pursuit of peace
of Dag Hammarskjöld, the second SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, are well known to the
Assembly. His influence on the role and function of
the Organization was profound even in his lifetime.
But his tenure, marked by vision and pragmatism,

14-6951521/23

A/69/PV.72

also paved the way for policies and practices that
have been mainstreamed and consolidated in ways
we now take for granted. Hammarskjöld promoted
the integrity and independence of the United Nations
and of the Secretary-General — ideals that are rarely
questioned nowadays and that are of crucial importance
as the United Nations has expanded to near-universal
membership. He conceived the concept of preventive
diplomacy and set ground-breaking examples for the
Secretary-General’s direct diplomatic engagement.
Furthermore, in devising the first armed United Nations
peacekeeping mission, the United Nations Emergency
Force, in 1956, he laid the foundation for what remains
one of the most important and visible instruments in
the United Nations toolbox. Dag Hammarskjöld’s
legacy has thus remained relevant throughout the
half-century that has passed since that fateful day in
September of 1961 when he met his destiny. But while
we know a lot about his life and contributions, some
things surrounding the incident in which his life came
to an abrupt and violent end are still unclear.
What we do know is that on the night of
17 and 18 September 1961, a Swedish aircraft carrying
16 people, one of them Dag Hammarskjöld, crashed
near Ndola, in what was then Northern Rhodesia and
is now Zambia. Everyone on the plane died. Over the
years, a number of studies have been published on the
background, circumstances and cause of the crash.
None of them, however, has been recognized as having
arrived at a definitive explanation of the crash. That
also holds true for the investigations of the United
Nations itself.
The General Assembly, through resolution 1759
(XVII) of 26 October 1962, considered the United
Nations inquiry’s report of the crash (A/5069) and
requested that the Secretary-General inform the
Assembly of any new evidence relating to the disaster.
The Secretary-General, in a note of 21 March 2014,
transmitted to the General Assembly the report of the
independent Hammarskjöld Commission (A/68/800,
annex). In the note, the Secretary-General made the
assessment that the report includes new evidence and
suggested that the General Assembly consider three
different options for examining the new information. The
note underlined that Dag Hammarskjöld’s unparalleled
service and sacrifice, and his legacy, compel us to seek
to learn the whole truth of the circumstances leading
to his tragic death and that of the members of the party
accompanying him.

22/23

15/12/2014

Sweden welcomes the report of the Hammarskjöld
Commission and the Secretary-General’s request that
the General Assembly consider it. We join him in
encouraging Member States to release any relevant
records that may bring new information regarding
the plane crash, and welcome all that can be done to
further clarify the matter. Such actions should be
carried out with due regard for the integrity of Dag
Hammarskjöld and the others who were killed, as well
as their families, some of whom are present here today.
We are thus heeding the Secretary-General’s call in
introducing the draft resolution in the Assembly. At
this stage, we consider it proper, in line with what the
Hammarskjöld Commission suggested, not to resume
the United Nations inquiry as a whole but instead to
engage in a focused and measured resumption.
Following informal consultations over the past
few weeks, Sweden has crafted a draft resolution with
three operational elements. Paragraph 1 requests that
the Secretary-General appoint an independent panel of
experts to examine the new information and assess its
probative value. Paragraph 2 encourages Member States
to release any relevant records in their possession and
provide the Secretary-General with relevant information
related to the death of Dag Hammarskjöld and the
members of the party accompanying him. Finally,
paragraph 3 requests that the Secretary-General report
to the General Assembly at its seventieth session on the
progress made. The financial implications of the draft
resolution will be considered by the Fifth Committee
later this week.
Sweden is grateful for the support we have
already received for this initiative, and particularly
for Zambia’s cooperation. We are equally grateful to
Norway, Austria, Myanmar, Peru, Egypt, Ghana and the
Republic of Korea, the Member States that have or have
had nationals who have served as Secretary-General of
the United Nations. Sweden is also very grateful for
the cooperative spirit and flexibility shown by all the
delegations that have assisted us in the initiative.
The purpose of the draft resolution is to help shed
new light on the circumstances surrounding the death
of Dag Hammarskjöld and those on board his flight, not
only by bringing existing documents forward but also
by providing the conditions necessary so that witnesses
whose testimony has so far not been given due attention
can finally be heard. It is my Government’s sincere
hope that we will thus be able to begin our final path
to closure, out of respect for the memory and dignity

14-69515

15/12/2014

A/69/PV.72

of Dag Hammarskjöld, those who perished with him
and those otherwise involved. We therefore seek the
Assembly’s support for the resolution.

resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld and
of the members of the party accompanying him”, will
be considered at a later date to be announced.

The Acting President: I would like to inform
members that draft resolution A/69/L.42, entitled
“Investigation into the conditions and circumstances

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 128.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

14-6951523/23
