S/2008/777

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 December 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 10 December 2008 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the letter dated 3 December 2007 (S/2007/701), in
which the President of the Security Council informed me that members of the
Council had taken note of my recommendation to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) for an
additional year, until 31 December 2008.
I wish to inform the members of the Security Council that during 2008,
UNOGBIS continued to support national efforts to stabilize the country, focusing in
particular on efforts to promote peacebuilding and national reconciliation. To that
end, my Representative worked in close consultation with the Government of
Guinea-Bissau and other national stakeholders, as well as with regional and
international partners, to help resolve various political and security crises, including,
in particular, the challenges that followed the dissolution of the National Assembly
and the collapse of the Government of the Prime Minister, Martinho Dafa Cabi, in
July, the attempted coup and plot to assassinate the President, João Bernardo Vieira,
in August, and the recent armed attack on the President’s official residence in
Bissau. UNOGBIS also cooperated with national authorities in addressing the
growing threat of drug trafficking and organized crime.
Activities leading up to the holding of the successful legislative elections on
16 November 2008 included resource mobilization, civic education and the
strengthening of the capacities of women’s groups. UNOGBIS coordinated the work
of international electoral observers and continued to play a lead role in coordinating
the country’s engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission.
A United Nations Development Programme-financed census of the country’s
armed forces, carried out in March 2008, was a milestone in the security sector
reform process. On 20 August 2008, 30 senior military officers had been transferred
from active service to reserve status at a ceremony marking the start of the security
sector reform programme. UNOGBIS facilitated an inter-agency security sector
reform assessment mission in October, aimed at proposing a United Nations
integrated action plan to support the implementation of the security sector reform
programme.
Throughout 2008, the Government of Guinea-Bissau continued its
collaboration with international financial institutions to improve the fragile situation
of the country’s public finances and to enable Guinea-Bissau to benefit from debt
relief. It also made efforts to put in place the necessary reforms, supported by
08-67579 (E) 080109

*0867579*

S/2008/777

UNOGBIS and other partners, for economic stabilization. However, repetitive
political and security disruptions have complicated efforts to improve the country’s
social and economic indicators.
On 21 November 2008, the Government of Guinea-Bissau requested the
extension of the mandate of UNOGBIS for another year, so that the Office could
continue to assist national efforts to consolidate peace in the country. I would
therefore like to recommend that the mandate of UNOGBIS be extended for an
additional year, until 31 December 2009, to allow the Office to continue providing
support to the Government of Guinea-Bissau.
Accordingly, the mandate of UNOGBIS for 2009 would focus on: (a) assisting
the Peacebuilding Commission in its multidimensional engagement with GuineaBissau; (b) strengthening the capacities of national institutions, including law
enforcement and criminal justice systems, in order to maintain constitutional order;
(c) supporting an all-inclusive national reconciliation and political dialogue process
as an institutionalized peace consolidation framework; (d) supporting and
facilitating the implementation of security sector reform; (e) extending cooperation
to national authorities in their efforts to combat drug trafficking and organized
crime; (f) assisting with the promotion and institutionalization of respect for the rule
of law and human rights; (g) mainstreaming a gender perspective into
peacebuilding, in line with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000); (h) facilitating
efforts to curb the proliferation of small arms and light weapons and contributing to
the collection of small arms and light weapons held illicitly; and (i) enhancing
cooperation with the African Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union and
other partners in efforts to contribute to the stabilization of Guinea-Bissau.
Furthermore, in reference to my letter dated 28 November 2007 (S/2007/700),
in which I indicated my intention to submit to the Security Council, following the
holding of credible and transparent legislative elections in 2008, concrete
recommendations on transforming the current UNOGBIS into an integrated mission,
I have the honour to inform you that I plan to deploy a technical assessment mission
to Guinea-Bissau in the first quarter of 2009 to consult with the Government and the
United Nations Country Team on integration-related strategies. Following the
mission, I would submit recommendations to the Council for action in that respect.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

2

08-67579
