A/75/345–S/2020/898

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
11 September 2020
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 130 (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k),
(l), (m), (n), (o), (p), (q), (r), (s), (t), (u), (v), (w), (x), (y) and
(z) of the provisional agenda*
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
other organizations:
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Latin American and Caribbean Economic System
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of Central African States
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization

* A/75/150.

20-11786 (E)

081020

*2011786*

Security Council
Seventy-fifth year

A/75/345
S/2020/898

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Central European Initiative
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development – GUAM
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Commonwealth of Independent States
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization for Migration
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL)
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
other organizations
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and other organizations is
critical to maintaining international peace and security, promoting and protecting
human rights and implementing the sustainable development agenda. That relationship
has assumed even greater importance in the context of the coronavirus (COVID -19)
pandemic, which demands a collective, coordinated and unified response from all
regions.
The present consolidated report is prepared in accordance with paragraph 4 (l) of
the annex to General Assembly resolution 58/316 and responds to a number of General
Assembly resolutions on cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
other organizations. The report is also being submitted to the Security Council,
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1809 (2008) and its presidential statement of
6 August 2013 (S/PRST/2013/12).
The present report covers the period since the issuance of the previous such
report, on 17 August 2018 (A/73/328-S/2018/592).
The activities and accomplishments described in the report demonstrate the
growing cooperation between the United Nations and regional and other organizations
across a range of issues.

2/19

20-11786

A/75/345
S/2020/898

I. Introduction
1.
The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has plunged the world into an acute
crisis that has exposed the fragility of humankind. It has brought a new level of
complexity to global peace and security challenges and to collective efforts to
prevent, manage and resolve conflict and sustain peace. In that context, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other organizations has assumed an even
greater importance.
2.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolutions on
cooperation between the United Nations and specific regional and other
organizations, adopted at the seventy-third session of the Assembly, when it requested
the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of those resolutions during its
seventy-fifth session.
3.
The Security Council, in its resolution 1809 (2008), requested the SecretaryGeneral to include, in his regular reporting to the Council, assessments of progress
on the cooperation between the United Nations and r elevant regional organizations.
Furthermore, in its presidential statement of 6 August 2013 ( S/PRST/2013/12), the
Council requested the Secretary-General to include in the report recommendations on
ways to enhance cooperation between the United Nations and relevant regional and
subregional organizations and arrangements. The present report is, therefore, also
being submitted to the Security Council.
4.
This consolidated report, prepared in accordance with paragraph 4 (l) of the
annex to General Assembly resolution 58/316, covers the period since the issuance of
the previous such report, on 17 August 2018 (A/73/328-S/2018/592). It highlights
some of the main accomplishments that respond to the relevant General Assembly
resolutions, provides examples of how the United Nations and regional and other
organizations are working together in response to the COVID -19 pandemic, and
includes areas for further enhancing multilateral cooperation.

II. Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and
other organizations
African Union
5.
In the reporting period, the United Nations and the African Union continued to
enhance their cooperation on the basis of a consensus that a strong partnership is
essential to advancing peace and security, sustainable development and human rights
in Africa. In December 2018, I signed a joint declaration on cooperation wit h the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for African Union -led peace support
operations. We also continue to convene United Nations-African Union annual
conferences, instituted in 2017, to monitor progress and exchange on matters related
to peace, security, development and human rights in Africa.
6.
The United Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission engaged in
consultations and joint field visits, including in the Central African Republic, Libya,
Somalia, South Sudan and the Sudan, in support of conflict prevention and resolution
efforts. We also facilitated peaceful elections, in cooperation with the relevant African
regional economic communities and regional mechanisms, such as in Madagascar in
late 2018.
7.
The United Nations scaled up its support to the African Union flagship initiative
on “Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020”. Following Security Council resolution
2457 (2019), it established the Task Force on Silencing the Guns in Africa, under the

20-11786

3/19

A/75/345
S/2020/898

leadership of the Assistant Secretary-General for Africa in the Departments of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to coordinate wide -ranging
support from across the United Nations System. United Nations Resident
Coordinators and Regional Directors of United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes participated in the February 2020 Africa Regional Forum on Sustainable
Development on “Silencing the Guns” in the context of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union. My Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict participated in the African Union
summit high-level dialogue entitled “Stop the War on Children: Dividend of Silencing
the Guns”.
8.
The Office of the Special Adviser on Africa launched the Africa Dialogue Series
in October 2018 as a platform for amplifying the priorities of the African Union. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
agencies, funds and programmes provided support to the African Union for its 2019
theme of “Refugees, Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons: Towards durable
solutions to forced displaced in Africa”.
9.
In March 2019, the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security and the
United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
conducted a joint field visit to Libya. The African Union has been an active member
of the International Follow-up Committee on Libya and co-chairs its security working
group. On 11 and 12 March 2020, my Chef de Cabinet headed a delegation that
included my Special Representative to the African Union and the Acting Special
Representative for Libya at the inaugural meeting of the Contact Group of the African
Union Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya, held in the Congo.
10. The United Nations continued to support the implementation of the African
Union and Lake Chad Basin Commission’s Regional Strategy for the Stabilization,
Recovery and Resilience of the Boko Haram-affected Areas of the Lake Chad Basin
Region. My Special Representatives for Central Africa and for West Africa and the
Sahel undertook joint visits in 2019 to the four Boko Haram -affected countries to
mobilize political will for a comprehensive solution to the crisis in th e Lake Chad
Basin.
11. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINUSCA) worked closely with the African Union and
the Economic Community of Central African States in support of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation, which resulted in the signing in February 2019
of a political agreement between the Government of the Central African Republic and
14 armed groups. This included the support of the Peacebuilding Fund, which
contributed to a dialogue with armed groups to record grievances and inform
discussions that led to the agreement. Regular consultations with women’s civil
society organizations resulted in gender provisions being included in the interim text
and final agreement.
12. The United Nations and the African Union continued to advance peace and
stability in Darfur through the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, including through support to the peace talks in Juba mediated by South Sudan.
The United Nations Mission in South Sudan and my Special Envoy for the Horn of
Africa have been working with the African Union to assist the South Sudan peace
process led by the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development. This partnership
translated into active political and operational support for the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan, which led
to the establishment in February 2020 of the Revitalized Transitional Government of
National Unity. Despite the sustained advocacy of women’s groups, there has been

4/19

20-11786

A/75/345
S/2020/898

negligible adherence to the 35 per cent quota for women laid out in the Revitalized
Agreement.
13. The African Union has taken concrete steps to deepen the institutionalization of
mediation support within the Commission, including by reinforcing the nascent
Mediation Support Unit and the Network of African Women Mediators (FemWise).
The United Nations, through the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
remains committed to working alongside the African Union to ensure a more holistic
approach to mediation support through the reinforcement of technical and knowledge
management capabilities.
14. The United Nations and the African Union continued to advance regional
cooperation and economic integration of the African continent through the
implementation of the African Comprehensive Free Trade Area agreement, which
came into effect on 30 May 2019. The Economic Commission for Africa and the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development continued actively to support
the African Union in the negotiation and implementation of the agreement. In June
2019, the International Trade Centre and the African Union launched the African
Trade Observatory to support the operationalization of the agreement. The United
Nations Industrial Development Organization has proclaimed 2016 to 2025 as the
Third Industrial Development Decade for Africa.
15. The United Nations system and the African Union have continued to work
together to advance their common priority of achieving gender equality and women’s
empowerment. The Deputy Secretary-General and the African Union Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security led the third joint United Nations-African Union highlevel solidarity mission to the Horn of Africa in October 2019. The mission visited
Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Somalia and the Sudan with the aim of enhancing the
participation and leadership of women in peace and political processes across Africa.
The United Nations further collaborated with the African Union Commissio n in
convening the African Women Leaders Network first intergenerational dialogue in
Nairobi in August 2019. Under the leadership of the Deputy Secretary -General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, with support from the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women)
and the Office of the African Union Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security,
the Economic Commission for Africa launched, in January 2020, the African women’s
leadership fund, aimed at financing both first-time and experienced women fund
managers. In 2019, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
African Union Commission joined forces to implement an African Young Women
Leaders Fellowship programme to develop the next generatio n of young African
women leaders and experts. In February 2020, the United Nations Office to the
African Union and the African Union Commission jointly published a publication
entitled “She Stands for Peace: 20 Years, 20 Journeys”, featuring the stories of 20
African women and women’s organizations that have made outstanding contributions
to peace and security on the continent.
16. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs continues to work with
the African Union on the establishment and operationalization of the African
Humanitarian Agency. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights signed memorandums of understanding with the the African Court on
Human and Peoples’ Rights and the African Commission on Human and People s’
Rights in 2019. The the Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to
Protect provided technical assistance to the Conflict Prevention and Early Warning
Division. On 23 July 2019, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
briefed the African Union Peace and Security Council in an inaugural open session
on sexual violence in armed conflict in Africa. I welcome the African Union Peace
and Security Council’s decision to dedicate an annual open session to addressing
20-11786

5/19

A/75/345
S/2020/898

conflict-related sexual violence on the continent. In April 2020, the United Nations,
the European Union and the African Union signed the Spotlight Initiative regional
programme in Africa with the aim of eliminating all forms of violence against women
and girls.
17. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) collaborated with the African
Union Commission in 2019 to accelerate the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals and Agenda 2063. UNFPA has also supported the development
of the call for action on ending female genital mutilation and child marriage.
18. The Office of my Envoy on Youth collaborated with the African Union Youth
Envoy to strengthen youth empowerment within the socioeconomic nexus between
peace and development efforts. This included the participation of my Envoy in April
2019 in the African Union Commission’s Pan-African Youth Forum. In 2019, the
United Nations Office to the African Union, along with other United Nations entities,
supported the African Union Commission’s newly established Youth for P eace Africa
Program in conducting a continental study on the roles and contributions of young
people to peace and security in Africa.
19. The Department of Operational Support continued to strengthen interoperability
and complementarity between the United Nations and the African Union through the
knowledge and expertise exchange programme and the enhanced training for high level operational support programme. In January 2020, the Under-Secretary-General
for Operational Support and the African Union Deputy Chairperson signed a
memorandum of understanding to institutionalize the staff exchange programme.
20. The Economic Commission for Europe cooperates with the African Union on
transboundary water management in Africa, in particular with the African Network o f
Basin Organizations, for the promotion of legal and institutional frameworks in
Africa.
21. Following the outbreak of COVID-19, the Economic Commission for Africa and
the African Union Commission and its related organs have coordinated Africa’s
response to the pandemic, including calling for a $100 billion “debt standstill”,
providing debt relief, and issuing a coordinated trade and investment response, which
led to the African Export-Import Bank’s announcement of a $3 million grant and the
appointment of the special envoys of the African Union to support the continental
fight against COVID-19.
22. The Department of Global Communications coordinated with the Africa Centres
for Disease Control and Prevention to amplify messaging on the spread of the
pandemic and the response efforts of African Governments. UNHCR has engaged the
African Union to raise awareness of the impacts of COVID-19 on refugees, returnees,
internally displaced persons and stateless persons. In March 2020, UNDP developed
a regional project to support the implementation of the Africa Joint Continental
Strategy for COVID-19 Outbreak, which focuses on enhancing support to the African
Union. On 20 May 2020, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Chairperson of the African Commission issued a joint statement calling for
global solidarity and urgent measures to mitigate the impact of COVID -19 in Africa.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is also working with the
African Union on customs, logistics and civil-military coordination. On 16 April
2020, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the
African Union organized a virtual ministerial meeting on the impact of COVID -19 on
food security in Africa.

6/19

20-11786

A/75/345
S/2020/898

Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
23. The United Nations has continued to cooperate with the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Organization, particularly in the work of the Sixth Committee and the
International Law Commission. The Office of Legal Affairs maintained a close
working relationship with the Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization on
subjects such as codification and progressive development of international law,
peacekeeping and ocean affairs.
24. The Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization delivered analytical papers
in support of the Global Pact for the Environment, the Sustainable Development
Goals, the global compact on refugees and the intergovernmental conference on an
international legally binding instrument under th e United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity
of areas beyond national jurisdiction. In 2018, the Asian -African Legal Consultative
Organization organized discussions and consultatio ns on legal issues involved in the
immunity of heads of state.
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
25. The United Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
have a longstanding and mutually beneficial relationship that has steadi ly developed
over the past two decades. With more than 90 per cent of the agreed action lines in
the first ASEAN-United Nations Plan of Action (2016–2020) completed by the end
of 2019, the second Plan of Action (2021–2025) is expected to include new and
expanded areas of technical cooperation. During the tenth ASEAN -United Nations
Summit, held in November 2019, I welcomed the commitment of ASEAN to
multilateralism and called for the urgent upscaling of our efforts on sustainable
development and climate action.
26. In December 2018, ASEAN and the United Nations held a workshop on ASEAN
perspectives on conflict management and conflict resolution. In December 2019, the
fifth ASEAN-United Nations regional dialogue on political-security cooperation was
held in support of the efforts of ASEAN to further strengthen its conflict prevention
capacities. In addition, members of my High-Level Advisory Board on Mediation, the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and UN-Women provided technical
assistance to the first ASEAN symposium on women, peace and security in August
2019.
27. Under the leadership of my Special Envoy on Myanmar, the United Nations
continued to pursue enhanced cooperation with ASEAN to support efforts to address
the ongoing crisis in Rakhine State and alleviate the plight of Rohingya refugees. I
welcome the important role of ASEAN in support of identifying comprehensive and
durable solutions to address the root causes underlying the situation.
28. The ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights and the United
Nations held two formal meetings in 2018 and 2019 to identify areas for cooperation,
including on the environment and freedom of expression. The Office on Genocide
Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect has continued to enga ge in dialogue with
ASEAN on the importance of integrating an atrocity prevention perspective. UNHCR
engaged with ASEAN on the adoption of the ASEAN Declaration on the Rights of
Children in the Context of Migration.
29. Under the leadership of the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United Nations
provided technical assistance to the efforts of ASEAN to advance comprehensive
approaches to counter-terrorism and the prevention of violent extremism through
multisectoral collaboration under the ASEAN Bali work pla n, adopted in November
2019.
20-11786

7/19

A/75/345
S/2020/898

30. The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction has been working
closely with ASEAN in implementing the ASEAN Agreement on Disaster
Management and Emergency Response. In 2019, the Office organized the first
ASEAN technical consultation on risk-informed sustainable development. The United
Nations University also collaborated with ASEAN on disaster management to
implement a capacity-building programme for mid-level managers from all 10
ASEAN countries.
31. The ongoing support of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat) to ASEAN in accelerating the implementation of the ASEAN
Sustainable Urbanization Strategy achieved a significant milestone in November
2018 with the launch of the Strategy. Within the ASEAN-United Nations Action Plan
on Environment and Climate Change (2016–2020), the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) is assisting ASEAN member States in addressing marine debris
issues under the Coordinating Body on the Seas of East Asia’s Regiona l Action Plan
on Marine Litter.
32. In the context of COVID-19, the United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) has intensified engagement to support
the socioeconomic response of ASEAN member States to the pandemic, incl uding
through the ASEAN-ESCAP high-level policy dialogue focusing on building a
resilient ASEAN Community post-COVID-19.
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
33. The United Nations, led by the Economic Commission for Europe, has
continued its collaboration with the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
across the entire spectrum of its work in transport. Through its regional advisory
services, the Commission has organized workshops on trade facilitation for the
members of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization and has worked with
experts to assist in the drafting of a regional trade facilitation strategy.
Caribbean Community
34. From 23 to 24 July 2019, the tenth general meeting between the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) and the United Nations took place in Georgetown. In the
joint statement issued after the meeting, participants outlined practical ways for
enhancing CARICOM-United Nations cooperation.
35. The Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and U NDP provided
support to the CARICOM Implementation Agency for Crime and Security for the
review of the CARICOM crime and security strategy, which was completed in 2019.
That same year, the Office of Counter-Terrorism commenced a partnership with the
Agency to support the implementation of the CARICOM counter-terrorism strategy.
In addition, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), in partnership
with the Agency, led the drafting of the regional agreement for the return and sharing
of recovered assets, which was adopted and opened for signature at the thirtieth
intersessional meeting of the Conference of Heads of Government of CARICOM, in
February 2019.
36. The Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)
continued to work closely with CARICOM to advance the implementation of the debtfor-climate-adaptation-swap initiative, aimed at addressing Caribbean countries’ high
levels of indebtedness and limited access to concessional funding due to their middle income status, and move forward with the creation of a Caribbean resilience fund. As
part of its COVID-19 response, ECLAC organized, with active participation of the
CARICOM secretariat, a series of virtual dialogues on the impact of the pandemic
with ministers and high-level authorities. FAO contributed to the preparation of the
8/19

20-11786

A/75/345
S/2020/898

CARICOM regional COVID-19 agri-food risk management framework and action
plan to help mitigate anticipated disruptions in global food supply chains.
Central European Initiative
37. The United Nations and the Central European Initiative continued to enhance
their cooperation. On 17 July 2019, the Central European Initiative organized an event
in the margins of the United Nations high-level political forum on sustainable
development to facilitate sharing of experiences and best practices in advancing
cooperation in the framework of the Sustainable Development Goals and
strengthening partnerships.
38. In response to COVID-19, the Central European Initiative established a task
force with the Word Health Organization regional office for Europe to step up regional
coordination to better respond to the impacts of the pandemic.
Collective Security Treaty Organization
39. The United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty Organization engaged in
regular information exchanges, visits, conferences and training exercises. In
September 2019, I participated in a ministerial-level meeting of the Security Council
held under the presidency of the Russian Federation on the role of regional
organizations, including the Collective Security Treaty Organization, in combating
terrorism.
40. In November 2018, the Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs held high-level consultations in Moscow with counterparts in the secretariat
of the Collective Security Treaty Organization to discuss issues related to conflict
prevention and resolution in the Eurasian region. In April 2019, the Assistant
Secretary-General of the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
Peace Operations held follow-up high-level consultations in Moscow with
counterparts from the Secretariat of the Collective Security Treaty Organization on
areas of possible practical cooperation.
41. My Special Representative for Central Asia and Head of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia maintained regular
contact with the Secretary General of the Collective Security Treaty Organization to
discuss and coordinate preventive efforts in Central Asia. The United Nations and the
Organization have also cooperated through regional workshops and projects in
support of the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in Central Asia.
42. In December 2019, experts from the Collective Security Treaty Organization
travelled to New York to better understand both United Nations and Collective
Security Treaty Organization modalities for enhancing cooperation on peacekeeping.
Following interest expressed by the Collective Security Treaty Organization and its
member States to contribute to United Nations peacekeeping operations, the
Department of Peace Operations has engaged in consultations with the Collective
Security Treaty Organization on opportunities, requirements and available training.
Subsequently, in a joint letter dated 23 March 2020, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations and the Under-Secretary-General for Operational Support shared
with the Secretary-General of the Collective Security Treaty Organization some of
the areas where United Nations peacekeeping operations either have or anticipate
capability shortfalls, and identified modalities for contributions.

20-11786

9/19

A/75/345
S/2020/898

Commonwealth of Independent States
43. The United Nations continued its cooperation with the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). During consultations held in Moscow and Minsk in April
and May 2019, respectively, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
engaged in discussions with the Executive Committee of CIS on peace and security
issues in the Eurasian region and opportunities for further cooperation and
coordination. In May 2019, the Deputy Executive Secretary of CIS participated in an
expert meeting on regional experiences with conflict prevention and mediation,
organized by the Department in Minsk.
44. My Special Representative for Central Asia and Head of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia has maintained regular
contact with the Executive Secretary of CIS to exchange views and coordinate
preventive efforts in Central Asia. The United Nations and CIS have also cooperated
through regional workshops and projects in support of the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia.
45. UNODC has cooperated with CIS in the framework of the protocol sig ned in
July 2005 with the Executive Committee of CIS. The protocol focuses on the
exchange of information and cooperation in areas related to drug control, crime
prevention and international terrorism in the context of sustainable development and
human security.
46. The Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) works closely with the Interstate
Statistical Committee of the CIS (CISSTAT) to implement a project on reinforcing
statistical capacities in CIS countries to monitor progress towards achieving the the
Sustainable Development Goals. In November 2019, the Deputy Executive Secretary
of CIS participated in the economic forum on sustainable transport and trade
facilitation in Central Asia, organized jointly by ESCAP and ECE in Ashgabat as part
of the United Nations Special Programme for the Economies of Central Asia.
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
47. The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) collaborated with the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries in
the fight against drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. UNIOGBIS
provided technical support to engagement between the Guinea-Bissau Judiciary
Police and the Community on the launch of an inter-institutional cooperation
agreement with the Federal Police of Brazil.
48. The United Nations University has collaborated with the Community of
Portuguese Speaking Countries on a project focusing on digital public services in the
African member States of the Community and Timor Leste and provided support for
the analysis of electronic government strategies.
49. The United Nations and the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries have
further cooperated in strengthening multilingualism and respect for language
diversity. In 2019, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization’s General Conference decided to proclaim 5 May as “World Portuguese
Language Day”.
Council of Europe
50. The United Nations has been in regular consultations with the Council of
Europe. At the technical level, staff of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and the Department of Peace Operations held talks with their counterparts in
the secretariat and other organs of the Council of Europe in December 2018 and 2019

10/19

20-11786

A/75/345
S/2020/898

in Strasbourg, France, establishing an informal practice of annual dialogue on matters
related to the European region as well as on institutional cooperation. 1
51. In 2019, the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations participated in the Lisbon
Forum organized by the Council of Europe, highlighting the importance of building
regional governance for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and the
realization of human rights.
52. In June 2019, the Office of Counter-Terrorism gave a briefing to the Council of
Europe Member States on United Nations support to victims of terrorism. In the
COVID-19 context, the Office partnered with the Council of Europe to organize a
joint webinar in June 2020 on the theme “Cybercrime and terrorism: the criminal
justice response”.
Economic Community of Central African States
53. The United Nations has regularly engaged with the secretariat of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and its member States in line with the
framework of cooperation agreement signed in June 2016 between the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the ECCAS secretariat. As
requested by ECCAS in the ministerial-level Luanda Declaration from 6 December
2019, UNOCA is leading a comprehensive inter-agency effort by the United Nations
system in partnership with ECCAS to analyse and address the security implications
of climate change in the Central African region.
54. UNOCA has supported the ECCAS reform process. The new Commission,
sworn in on 31 August 2020, will provide ECCAS with a mandate and adequate tools
to respond more effectively to the challenges facing the region. The United Nations
continues to support ECCAS in its efforts to consolidate regional integration and build
peace, security and economic and social development throughout Central Africa.
UNOCA has also contributed to the ECCAS strategy on addressing the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
55. UNOCA and the ECCAS secretariat continue to work together in rallying
regional support for the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic. On 4 February 2020, UNOCA and the ECCAS secretariat
met in Libreville to develop an updated common assessment of the situation in the
country in advance of elections scheduled for December 2020. My Special
Representative for Central Africa and the Secretary -General of the Economic
Community of Central African States undertook a joint visit to the Central African
Republic in April 2019 to demonstrate support for the abovementioned Political
Agreement. They also jointly travelled to Cameroon in January 2020 ahead of the
country’s legislative and municipal elections. ECCAS secretariat officials joined
UNOCA staff members in a joint working-level visit to the Congo in March 2020.
56. In October 2019, OHCHR organized two capacity-building seminars on
international human rights and humanitarian law indicators, in Libreville, for high ranking officials from the Eastern Africa Standby Force and the early warning
mechanism for Central Africa.

__________________
1

20-11786

The Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of Peace Operations
were established on 1 January 2019, succeeding the Department of Political Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, respectively, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 72/262 C. For the sake of simplicity, the present text refers only to the newly
configured Departments.
11/19

A/75/345
S/2020/898

Economic Cooperation Organization
57. The United Nations system continues to support the efforts of the Economic
Cooperation Organization in respect of disaster risk reduction. In 2019, the Office for
Disaster Risk Reduction facilitated capacity-building initiatives for the secretariat of
the Economic Cooperation Organization that led to the development of training -oftrainers programmes on the Sendai Framework monitor and the formulation of
national disaster risk reduction strategies.
58. The Economic Commission for Europe collaborated with the Economic
Cooperation Organization in the field of border crossing facilitation and exploring
joint projects to support countries of the Economic Cooperation Organization in
acceding to and/or implementing United Nations transport legal instruments to
facilitate interregional transport connectivity.
59. FAO offered technical support to the Economic Cooperation Organization to
prepare a 2019 overview of food security in the Organization’s countries, which was
shared in December 2019 at the fifth high-level experts meeting of the Organization
on agriculture.
International Criminal Police Organization
60. The United Nations and the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) continued their close collaboration. In December 2018, INTERPOL
became one of two non-United Nations founding signatories of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact. From 19 to 21 March 2019, the
Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate of the Security Council and INTERPOL organized a regional expert
workshop in Singapore on critical infrastructure and the protection of “soft” targets.
In 2019, INTERPOL officially joined the Office’s flagship Countering Terrorist
Travel Programme as a partner to deliver comprehensive capacity-building assistance
to Member States.
61. UNODC and INTERPOL collaborated in the field of countering illicit fire arms
trafficking, providing capacity-building to Member States on firearms trafficking
investigations and the use of the Illicit Arms Records and Tracing Management
System, in addition to planning and implementing joint operations in Latin America
and the Caribbean and in West Africa to detect, trace and investigate illicit firearms
flows.
62. UNIOGBIS and UNODC collaborated with INTERPOL to provide strategic
support to the Government of Guinea-Bissau in combatting drug trafficking and
transnational crime. In April 2019, INTERPOL and MINUSCA collaborated to
provide training to national police and other law enforcement officers at the
international airport of the Central African Republic.
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea
63. United Nations entities are continuing their collaboration with the Executive
Committee of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea, its subsidiary bodies
and its member States on multiple issues and on the basis of the 2010 memorandum
of understanding between the United Nations and the Executive Committee of the
Fund. The United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia
contributed to the development of regional initiatives aimed at addressing the
environmental degradation of the Aral Sea area. In cooperation with the Fund’s
Interstate Commission for Water Coordination of Central Asia, the Regional Centre
continued to draft and distribute the early warning hydrological bulletins on the AmuDaria and Syr Darya Rivers.
12/19

20-11786

A/75/345
S/2020/898

International Organization for Migration
64. In accordance with article 4 of the Agreement concerning the Relationship
between the United Nations and the International Organization for Migration (IOM)
annexed to General Assembly resolution 70/296, IOM may, if it decides it to be
appropriate, submit reports on its activities to the General Assembly through me.
International Organization of la Francophonie
65. The United Nations continued to strengthen its partnership with the
International Organization of la Francophonie. The Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of Peace Operations worked with the
Organization on preventive diplomacy, support to elections and sustaining peace,
particularly in Central Africa. This included multilateral efforts to promote a political
solution to the conflict in the north-west and south-west regions of Cameroon. The
United Nations has engaged with the Organization on major electoral processes in
Central Africa, notably the December 2018 general elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Organization participated, as an observer, in meetings of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, held in November 2019.
66. On 10 October 2018, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Secretary General of the International Organization of la Francophonie signed
a cooperation framework that aims at preventing and addressing sexual violence as a
weapon of war and tactic of terrorism. OHCHR and the Organization collaborated in
developing the capacity of the national human rights institution of Cameroon and
Gabon on monitoring and reporting on human rights.
67. In 2019, UNFPA, in partnership with the International Organization of la
Francophonie and bilateral donors, launched a joint forum in Haiti of UN -Women,
UNDP, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and UNFPA
on women, democracy and peace to increase women and youth participa tion in
decision-making and the quota of women in the legislative elections.
68. The Department of Global Communication collaborated with the International
Organization of la Francophonie to organize and host activities at United Nations
Headquarters in French to celebrate the Printemps de la francophonie.
69. The Office of the Envoy on Youth has an ongoing strategic partnership with the
International Organization of la Francophonie and their Volontariat international de
la francophonie programme. The partnership is aimed at providing volunteering
opportunities to young people from French-speaking countries within the institutions
of the Organization and its partners in order to gain broader understanding of
multilateral cooperation and global priorities.
70. In November 2019, UNCTAD and the International Organization of la
Francophonie jointly organized a first training workshop for climate, commercial and
digital negotiators from francophone countries. In February 2020, they also joined
efforts to help women entrepreneurs in francophone Africa succeed in the digital
economy.
Latin American and Caribbean Economic System
71. The United Nations has strengthened its cooperation with the Latin American
and Caribbean Economic System since the signing of a framework agreement in
October 2017. In December 2019, ECLAC, jointly with the Latin American and
Caribbean Economic System, the Latin American Center for Development
Administration, and the CAF Development Bank of Latin America, organized a

20-11786

13/19

A/75/345
S/2020/898

seminar on the theme “Evaluation of policy impacts for disaster risk reduction and
management”.
League of Arab States
72. The broad-based cooperation between the United Nations and the League of
Arab States (LAS), including on issues of peace and security, was reflected in biennial
general cooperation meetings, sectoral meetings, capacity -building exercises and
staff exchanges. The United Nations continued to assist LAS through training in
conflict prevention, disarmament and electoral preparedness. In 2019, the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs established a liaison office to LAS in Cairo
with the objective of further deepening dialogue and collaboration between the two
organizations.
73. In March 2019, I participated in the LAS summit in Tunis, in which the critical
importance was recognized of enhancing the cooperation between the United Nations
and the Arab States. In June 2019, the Security Council conducted a discussion on
issues of priority to the League of Arab States and outcomes of the Arab summit, at
which the LAS Secretary-General and I gave briefings on issues of concern to the
Arab world. On 12 and 13 January 2020, a sectoral meeting was held in Cairo between
the United Nations and LAS and their specialized organizations on cooperation in the
eradication of multidimensional poverty in the Arab States.
74. LAS has actively supported the efforts of the United Nations in Libya, including
the three-step initiative towards achieving a sustainable ceasefire, the strict
implementation of the arms embargo, a return to the political process, adherence to
international humanitarian law and support for Libyan efforts on ec onomic and
security reforms. LAS is also an active member of the International Follow -up
Committee on Libya, and co-chairs its political working group.
75. The Office of Counter-Terrorism has worked closely with the Arab Interior
Ministers Council to support LAS member States in developing a regional counterterrorism strategy for the Arab region, aligned with the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Council and the Office organized two high -level
meetings in Tunis in September 2019 and February 2020, as well as a regional
consultative expert meeting on preventing and combating terrorism in February 2020.
In addition, the Office for Disarmament Affairs has strengthened its working
relationship with the secretariat of LAS in the field of disarmament and arms control
through staff exchanges.
76. UN-Women and LAS have joined efforts to support LAS member States in
developing and implementing national action plans for women, peace and security.
The Office of my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict participated
in April 2019 in the second regional conference for the Emergency Committee for
Protection of Women during Armed Conflict, in the Arab Region. On 24 July 2020,
LAS and UN-Women launched the Arab women mediators network to mo bilize
efforts to promote the participation of women in peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
77. On 28 and 29 July 2019, in collaboration with OHCHR, LAS organized the third
Arab regional conference on the protection and promotion of human rights, which
focused on the impact of occupation and armed conflict on human rights. The United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East has also
continued its cooperation with LAS, particularly on improving the quality of
education services for Palestinian refugees.
78. In 2019, the Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, in coordination with LAS,
organized a regional partnership meeting to accelerate efforts to implement the Sendai

14/19

20-11786

A/75/345
S/2020/898

Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 and the Arab Strategy for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2030.
79. UNEP facilitated the extraordinary session of the Council of Arab Ministers
Responsible for the Environment in preparation for the fourth session of the United
Nations Environment Assembly. In October 2019, UNEP and LAS, along with the
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) and other partners,
held the sixth Arab round-table meeting on sustainable consumption and production.
UNDP launched a four-year inter-agency regional initiative entitled “SDG Climate
Facility: Climate Action for Human Security” for the period 2019 –2023, in
partnership with LAS, the Arab Water Council, UNEP, the Office for Disaster Risk
Reduction, UN-Habitat and WFP.
Organization for Democracy and Economic Development – GUAM
80. The United Nations has continued to engage regularly with the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development – GUAM. In addition to maintaining contact
with the office of its Secretary General, the United Nations has also continued to
engage with Member States of the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development – GUAM and other relevant stakeholders to share perspectives and to
find sustainable solutions to the peace, security and other challenges affecting the
region.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
81. Collaboration between the United Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has continued to grow. On 10 December 2019, I issued
a joint statement with the Chairperson-in-Office and the Secretary-General of OSCE
to supplement the 1993 Framework for cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations Secretariat and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe, which reflects our shared commitment to further enhance the partners hip.
82. In September 2019, the Office of Counter-Terrorism and OSCE signed a
biennial action plan for the period 2019–2020 with concrete steps to enhance counterterrorism capacity of the OSCE participating States. The regional high -level
conference on the theme “Addressing current challenges related to foreign terrorist
fighters”, co-hosted by the Office and OSCE in February 2020, was the first
deliverable of the action plan. The United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia and the Office have worked actively with OSCE to
implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia.
83. In line with the UNODC-OSCE joint action plans, both organizations actively
collaborate in areas of combatting corruption, crime prevention, border security,
firearms control, countering the financing of terrorism and countering trafficking in
cultural property, human trafficking and the smuggling of migrants. ECE and OSCE
have a longstanding cooperation in co-organizing the “Inland transport security
discussion forum” and in promoting border crossing facilitation, transport
connectivity and infrastructure development.
84. In February 2020, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
addressed the Parliamentary Assembly’s General Committee on Democracy, Human
Rights and Humanitarian Questions. The Office on Genocide Prevention and the
Responsibility to Protect has continued its engagement with OSCE to support civil
society organizations address discrimination and xenophob ia.
85. In March 2020, OSCE and UNHCR signed an addendum to the memorandum
of understanding that was adopted in 1998 to further strengthen their cooperation. In

20-11786

15/19

A/75/345
S/2020/898

the context of the COVID-19 health crisis, UNHCR and the OSCE jointly organized
a webinar on combating hate speech and toxic narratives on refugees and migrants.
Organization of American States
86. The United Nations and the Organization of American States (OAS) maintained
regular consultations. In June 2019, a policy dialogue between the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Department of Peace Operations and the
Department of Sustainable Democracy and Special Missions of OAS was held in
Washington, D.C. to discuss regional trends and issues of common interest. The two
organizations worked together in support of global electoral initiatives, such as the
Declaration of Principles for International Election Observation. The United Nations
and OAS continued to work together in Haiti, including through the Core Group on
Haiti.
87. The United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development
in Latin America and the Caribbean and the OAS Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism shared best practices to build State capacity to prevent and combat the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.
88. OHCHR and the OAS Inter-American Commission on Human Rights continued
to cooperate on situations of concern, including by sharing information, conducting
joint advocacy missions, and issuing joint press releases.
Organization of Islamic Cooperation
89. The United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
continued to enhance their cooperation. In the context of supporting OIC efforts to
mitigate the impact of COVID-19, I joined the virtual interactive discussion with OIC
member States on the theme “COVID-19 solidarity: promoting co-existence and
shared responsibility” on 22 May 2020.
90. The Office of Counter-Terrorism and the General Secretariat of OIC signed a
memorandum of understanding in September 2018 to collaborate on the provision of
technical assistance to Member States, at their request. In March 2020, a technical
mission of the Office travelled to Riyadh to give a briefing on respective counter terrorism initiatives and explore joint capacity-building activities to operationalize
the memorandum of understanding.
91. The Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect continued
working with OIC in the context of the implementation of the Plan of Action for
Religious Leaders and Actors to Prevent Incitement to Violence that Could Lead to
Atrocity Crimes.
92. OHCHR continued to strengthen its engagement with the OIC Independent
Permanent Commission on Human Rights. This included the co-organization of a
seminar on promoting and protecting the human rights of young people for building
peaceful democratic societies and sustainable development, held in Uzbekistan in
October 2019, and a workshop on the universal periodic review, held in Saudi Arabia
in November 2019.
93. UNCTAD worked closely in 2019 with the OIC International Islamic Trade and
Finance Corporation to undertake an e-trade readiness survey for Iraq. ESCWA has
also continued its substantive cooperation with OIC in the areas of statistics and
standardization of data on Islamic banking.

16/19

20-11786

A/75/345
S/2020/898

Pacific Islands Forum
94. The United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum continued to deepen their
partnership. In May 2019, I travelled to the Pacific region and participated in a high level political dialogue with Forum leaders, held in Fiji. The dialogue considered the
need for urgent international action to address the threat posed to the Pacific region
by climate change. Following the visit, my Peacebuilding Fund, administered by the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, in collaboration with the Forum,
the United Nations country team, the Departments of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs-UNDP-UNEP climate security mechanism and other partners, developed an
innovative project to address climate-related security risks for low-lying atoll nations
in the Pacific. The project, co-led by UNDP and IOM, launched in July 2020.
95. The United Nations is supporting the efforts of the Pacific Islands Forum and
regional Governments to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and the humanitarian
disaster caused by Tropical Cyclone Harold. The United Nations has developed a
Pacific humanitarian response plan to harness collective resources and assist Pacific
countries in line with their national priorities. Elements of the plan are being
supported through the United Nations COVID-19 Response and Recovery Fund and
through extensive reprogramming of existing development initiatives in the Pacific.
In July 2020, the Peacebuilding Commission held a wide -ranging debate on how the
international community can further support peacebuilding in the Pacific, faced by
the challenges of the pandemic and climate change.
96. IOM, ESCAP, ILO and OHCHR have launched a multi-country programme in
close cooperation with the PIF Pacific Islands Forum and the Platform on Disaster
Displacement to protect and empower communities affected by climate change and
disasters in the Pacific region.
97. The United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the
Pacific enhanced its work with the PIF Pacific Islands Forum secretariat on issues
related to arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation.
98. UNIDO provided technical support, as part of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities
of Action (SAMOA) Pathway to establish the Pacific Centre for Rene wable Energy
and Energy Efficiency.
99. ESCAP and OHCHR, in collaboration with the PIF Pacific Islands Forum and
the Pacific Disability Forum, have continued supporting Pacific countries with the
implementation of the Pacific Framework for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
100. The United Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization pursued their
cooperation, particularly in the area of peace and security and sustainable
development. In November 2018, I participated in the second high-level special event
entitled “United Nations and Shanghai Cooperation Organization: Cooperation
Aimed at Strengthening Peace, Security and Stability”, highlighting the important
contribution of the Organization in areas of regional diplomacy, promoting
multilateralism and fostering cooperation to manage the most pressing peace and
security issues in Eurasia. I also met with the Secretary-General of the Organization
on several occasions to coordinate efforts to address challenges of mutual concern.
101. In September 2019, I addressed the Security Council during its debate on the
contribution of the Collective Security Treaty Organization, CIS and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization in countering terrorist threats. In November 201 9, I
participated in a United Nations and Shanghai Cooperation Organization high -level

20-11786

17/19

A/75/345
S/2020/898

event entitled “Cooperation to promote peace, security and stability: preventing the
linking of terrorism with organized crime and its financing through drug trafficking ”.
102. In February 2020, the Office of Counter-Terrorism signed a memorandum of
understanding with the Regional Anti-Terrorism Structure of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization that aims to support the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In June 2019, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs attended the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization Summit in Bishkek. My Special Representative for Central Asia and
Head of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia maintained regular contacts with the Shanghai Cooperation Organization at
various levels on political and security developments in the region.

III. Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons; and
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
103. The Office for Disarmament Affairs has been working with the O rganization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Preparatory Commission for
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization to promote disarmament
and non-proliferation education, with a particular emphasis on empowering women.
The two organizations welcomed fellows from the United Nations Disarmament
Fellowship, Training and Advisory Services Programme for intensive study visits in
2018 and 2019.
104. OPCW is a member of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact and, in 2019, served as a vice-chair of the Working Group on
Emerging Threats and Critical Infrastructure Protection, which developed a project
proposal on enhancing inter-agency interoperability and public communications in
the event of a chemical or biological attack.

IV. Observations and recommendations
105. The United Nations and regional and other organizations continue to work
together in evolving and innovative ways to advance Agenda 2030 and the Sustainable
Development Goals, as well as in preventive diplomacy, mediation, countering
terrorism, preventing violent extremism, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, the promotion
and protection of human rights, strengthening the rule of law, gender equality,
combatting climate change and fostering economic, social and environmental
development, and now in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Across all these areas,
we are striving to do more to empower the voices of young people and to promote the
meaningful participation of women. The complexity of the globa l challenges we face
today, which spare no country or region, demands cohesive, collective action and
effective global-regional collaboration.
106. The COVID-19 pandemic has rendered conflict resolution efforts – including
our own – more difficult. To reinforce diplomatic action and help create conditions
for the delivery of lifesaving aid and focus on the response to the pandemic, on
24 March 2020, I called for a global ceasefire. The call resonated across the world
and has been endorsed by 180 Member States, regional partners and more than 800
civil society organizations. However, support for the call has not translated into
concrete improvements on the ground. The Security Council’s reinforcement of my
18/19

20-11786

A/75/345
S/2020/898

call for a ceasefire in its resolution 2532 (2020) of 1 July 2020 was an important step
forward. I urge Member States and regional and other organizations to follow up on
that resolution by using their leverage on conflict parties to help change their
calculations and see the value of ceasefires in the context of broader efforts to combat
COVID-19 and towards sustainable peace.
107. We share a deep commitment to an effective multilateral system, mindful that
multilateralism is not only a matter of confronting shared threats, but also about
seizing common opportunities. We now have the opportunity to build back better,
with inclusive and sustainable economies and just and equal societies that protect
diversity as our goal.
108. To do this, we need a networked multilateralism that can strengthen
coordination among multilateral and regional organizations. As a demonstration of
such networked multilateralism, I hosted the heads of regional and other organizations
for a high-level interactive dialogue on peace and security in New York in June 2018
and intend to convene a virtual meeting to continue this conversation. At this critical
juncture for international cooperation, and as the United Nations celebrates its
seventy-fifth anniversary, extending partnerships between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, has to remain at the forefront of our efforts to advance the interests of the
peoples we collectively serve.

20-11786

19/19
