VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women".
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/61.

Women in public life

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the objectives of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Bearing in mind paragraphs 72 and 73 of the Programme
of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade
for Women, 67 in which equitable representation for women
was called for at all levels in national government and in
international bodies,
Recalling that in article 7 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 71 it
was agreed that States Parties should ensure that women
have the right, on equal terms with men, to participate in
the formulation and implementation of government policy
and to hold public office,
Recalling further that in article 8 of the Convention it
was agreed that States Parties should ensure to women, on
equal terms with men, the opportunity to represent their
Governments at the international level and to participate in
the work of international organizations,
Recognizing that only three years remain before the end
of the United Nations Decade for Women,
l. Notes with concern that women are still not represented on an equitable basis with men in decision-making
positions in a majority of national and international
institutions;
2. Calls upon all Member States, by the end of the
United Nations Decade for Women in 1985, to make special
efforts to nominate and appoint women, on an equal basis
with men and taking due account of the same professional
criteria, to decision-making positions in those national and
international bodies in which they are not equitably
represented;
3. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of the specialized agencies and other organizations
of the United Nations system to make, by the end of the
United Nations Decade for Women in 1985, increased efforts to select and appoint women, in conformity with Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, to decisionmaking positions in the Secretariat and in the organs and
agencies of the United Nations system.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/62.

Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade
for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/133 of 16 December 1976,
containing the criteria and arrangements for the management
of the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for
Women,
Recalling also its resolution 36/ 129 of 14 December 1981 ,
Welcoming the contributions made by Member States and
non-governmental organizations towards the implementation of the goals of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace,

Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the Fund, 72
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the recommendations
of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for
the United Nations Decade for Women at its eleventh and
twelfth sessions; 73
2. Considers that the Fund has a unique contribution to
make in the technical assistance field to the implementation
of the goals of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace;
3. Considers further that the evaluation of projects has
an important role to play in enabling the Fund to fulfil its
objectives;
4. Notes with satisfaction the continuing increase in the
number of projects submitted to and financed by the Fund,
and the catalytic role played by the Fund in promoting the
adoption of innovative and experimental activities by Governments and other funds;
5. Notes the appointment of senior women's programme
officers at the regional commissions within regular budget
resources available to them, and recognizes the valuable
contribution that this is making to the work of the Fund and
thus to the implementation of the goals of the Decade;
6. Urges the executive secretaries of the regional commissions to take further action to use available financial and
personnel resources to strengthen their programmes for
women;
7. Notes with concern that contributions to the Fund
have not been sufficient to enable it to take on all the worthwhile projects submitted to it;
8. Considers that fund-raising and information activities
have a vital role to play in maintaining and increasing the
financial viability and effectiveness of the Fund;
9. Expresses its appreciation for the support which national committees for the Fund, national United Nations
associations and other non-governmental organizations have
given to the work of the Fund;
10. Expresses its appreciation also for the voluntary
contributions to the Fund pledged by Member States, and
its hope that the overa11 level of such contributions will be
maintained or increased;
11. Notes the view of the Consultative Committee on
the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for
Women, as expressed at its twelfth session, that there are
still grounds for concern regarding administrative matters
relating to the Fund, and its hope that specific and concrete
measures will be taken by the Secretary-General on an urgent basis to ensure that these issues are studied and the
necessary action is taken;
12. Notes also the assurance given to the Consultative
Committee that the Secretary-General will do everything
possible to ensure that the Fund is administered efficiently;
13. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to report annually on the management
of the Fund and on the progress of its activities;
(b) To continue to include the Fund, on an annual basis,
as one of the l'rograrnmes for which funds are pledged al
the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development
Activities.
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

72

71

Resolution 34/180, annex.

193

73

A/371421.
Ibid., sect. IV.
