6

General Aaeemhl7 - Tenth See.ion

States, the removal of the threat of war and the reduction of the burden of armaments,

Convinced there/ ore of the need to continue to seek
agreement on a comprehensive programme for disarmament which will promote international peace and security
with the least diversion for armaments of the world's
human and economic resources,
Welcoming the progress which has been made towards
agreement on objectives during the meetings in 1955 of
the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission,
Noting that agreement has not yet been reached on
the rights, powers and functions of a control system,
which is the keystone of any disarmament agreement,
nor on other essential matters set out in General Assembly resolution 808 (IX),
Noting also that special technical difficulties have
arisen in regard to the detection and control of nuclejlr
weapons material,
Recognizing further that inspection and control of
disarmament can best be achieved in an atmosphere
which is free of fear and suspicion,
1. Urges that the States concerned and particularly
those on the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission:
(a) Should continue their endeavours to reach agreement on a comprehensive disarmament plan in accordance with the goals set out in General Assembly resolution 808 (IX);
( b) Should, as initial steps, give priority to early
agreement on and implementation of :
( i) Such confidence-building measures as the plan of
Mr. Eisenhower, President of the United States
of America, for exchan~ing military blueprints
and mutual aerial inspection, and the plan of Mr.
Bul~anin, Prime Minister of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, for establishing control posts
at strategic centres,
(ii) All such measures of adequately safeguarded
disarmament as are now feasible;

2. Suggests that account should also be taken of the
proposals of the Prime Minister of France for exchang·
mg and publishing information re~arding military expenditures and budgets, of the Pnme Minister of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
· for seeking practical experience in the problems of in-

spection and control, and of the Government of India
regarding the suspension of experimental explosions of
nuclear weapons and an "armaments truce";
3. Calls upon the States concerned, and especially
those on the Sub-Committee of the Disarmament Commission, to study the proposal of the Prime Minister of
France for the allocation of funds resulting from disarmament for improving the standards of living throughout the world and, in particular, in the less-developed
countries;
4. Recommends further that scientific search should
be continued by each State, with appropriate consultation
between Governments, for methods that would make
possible thoroughly effective inspection and control of
nuclear weapons material, having as its aim to facilitate
the solution of the problem of comprehensive disarmament;

5. Suggests that the Disarmament Commission reconvene its Sub-Committee and that both pursue their
efforts to attain the above objectives;
6. Decides to transmit to the Disarmament Commission, for its information, the records of the meetings of
the First Committee at which the disarmament problem
was discussed during the tenth session of the General
Assembly, and requests the Disarmament Commission
and the Sub-Committee to give careful and early consideration to the views expressed in those documents.

559th plenary meetinJl.,
16 December 1955.
915 (X). The question of West Irian
(West New Guinea)

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item on the agenda of its tenth
session entitled "The question of West lrian (West
New Guinea)",
H aping that the problem will be peacefully resolved,
Noting the joint statement issued by the Governments
of Indonesia and the Netherlands on 7 December 1955,
Expresses the hope that the negotiations referred to
in the said joint statement will be fruitful.
559th plenary meeting,
16 December 1955.
