92

G.meral Aasembly-Thirtieth Sea■ion

ARTICLB 11
Where it is proved that an act of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punisbment has been committed by or at the instigation of a public official, the victim
shall be afforded redress and compensation in accordance with
national law.
ARTICLB 12
Any statement which is established to have been made as a
result of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment may not be invoked as evidence against
the person concerned or against any other person in any
proceedings.

3453 (XXX). Torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment in relation to detention and imprisonment
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the rejection, in its resolutions 3059

(XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and 3218 (XXIX) of
6 November 1974 of any form of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Reiterating its conviction expressed in resolution 3218
(XXIX) ,that, because of the increase in the number of
alarming reports on torture, further and sustained efforts
are necessary to protect under ali circumstances the
basic human right to be free from torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Welcoming resolution 4 (XXVIII) adopted by the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities on 10 September 1975,32
Having cdnsidered the report of the Secretary-Gen-''
eral33 containing an analytical summary of the information received under paragraph 1 of resolution 3218
(XXIX),
Recalling its request to the Füth United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders that it consider steps to be taken far
the protection of ali persons subjected to any form of
detention or imprisonment against torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirtieth session,
Noting tbe working paper entitled "Health aspects
of avoidable maltreatment of prisoners and detainees"3• submitted by the World Healtb Organization to
the Füth United Nations Congress on the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral prepared under paragraph 4 of resolution 3218
(XXIX), 311
Taking into account that the Fiftb United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders expressed the opinion that, on the
matter of elaborating an intemational code of police
• ethics, there sbould be further expert consideration,
Having adopted the Declaration on the Protection
of Ali Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, annexed to resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Believing that further intemational efforts are needed
to ensure adequate protection for all against torture and
82 See E/CN.4/1180, chap. XXI, sect. A.
sa A/10158 and Corr.1 and Add.1.
H A/CONF.56/9.
111 A/10260.

other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Fifth United
Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders far the elaboration of the Declaration on the Protection of all Persons from Being
Subjected to Torture and Otber Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at
its thirty-second session to study the question of torture
and any necessary steps for:
(a) Ensuring .the effeotive observance of the Declaration on the Protection of Ali Persons from Being
Subjected to Torture and Otber Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
( b) The formulation of a body of principies for the
protection of all persons under any form. ->f detention
or imprisonment on tbe basis of the Study of the Right
of Everyone to be Free from Arbitrary Arrest, Detention and Exile3 6 and the draft principies on freedom
from arbifrary arrest and detention contained therein;
3. Requests the Commit~ on Crime Prevention
and Control to elaborate, on the basis of, inter alia,
the proposals submitted to and conclusions arrived at
by the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, a draft code
of conduct for law enforcement officials and to submit
this draft code to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session, through the Comm.ission for Social Development and the Economic and Social Council;
4. Invites the World Healtb Organization to give
further attention to the study and elaboration of principies of medica! ethics relevant to the protection of
persons subjected to any form of detention or imprisonment against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punisbment;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punisbment" for the purpose of reviewing the progress
achieved in accordance with the present resolution.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3454 (XXX).

Report of the United Natione
Bigh Commiuioner for Refugeee

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Natioos.
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of

bis Office87 and baving beard bis statement,88
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the High Commissioner in carrying out his duties for those of concem
to his Office as well as the special humanitarian tasks
which he is called upon to undertake,
Reaffirming the eminently humanitarian character of
the activities of the High CommiS&oner for the benefit
of refugees and displaced persons,
as United Nations publication, Sales No. 65.xIV.2.
the General A.s.sembly, Thirtleth Seasion, Supplement No. 12 (A/10012) and Supplement No. 12A.
(A/10012/Add.1).
ss Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Third Committee, 2161st meeting,
paras. 1-10.
87 Offecial Records of
