S/2019/783

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 October 2019
Original: English

Implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Region
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2463
(2019), in which the Council requested me to report to it every six months on the
implementation of the commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. 1 It provides
an overview of peace and security developments in the Great Lakes region since the
issuance of my previous report (S/2019/229) and covers the period from 1 March to
31 August 2019.

II. Major developments
A.

Security situation
2.
During the period under review, the security situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remained fragile, as illegal armed groups continued to commit
atrocities against the civilian population and attack the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (FARDC). In addition, cross -border securityrelated incidents, prevailing insecurity in the Central African Republic and sporadic
fighting between Government and opposition forces in South Sudan affected peace
and stability in the Great Lakes region.
3.
In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Allied De mocratic Forces
(ADF) were suspected of perpetrating attacks in the Beni area, including in areas
affected by the outbreak of the Ebola virus disease. Furthermore, alleged links
between ADF and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) raised grave conce rn in

__________________
1

19-16473 (E)

In this context, the region refers to the 13 signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, namely, Angola, Burundi, the Central African Repu blic, the Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, South Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia. In addition, the following four intergovernmental
organizations act as witnesses/guarantors of the Framework: the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern African Development Community and the
United Nations.

021019

*1916473*

S/2019/783

the region. On 18 April, ISIL claimed responsibility for an attack suspected to have
been carried out by ADF on an FARDC camp in Bovata, North Kivu, on 16 April,
during which two soldiers and one civilian were killed. Since then, ISIL has claimed
responsibility for more attacks also attributed to ADF. In a media appearance on
29 June, the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Félix Tshisekedi,
expressed concern over the adoption by ADF of terror tactics linked to ISIL. In its
most recent report, however, the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo did not confirm any direct link between ADF and ISIL.
4.
FARDC and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) contin ued joint military operations
against ADF, including an offensive on 30 May that led to the killing of 26 ADF
combatants in Ngite, North Kivu.
5.
The operational strength of the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda
(FDLR) continued to diminish during the period under review, following the
repatriation of most of its former combatants from camps in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo in 2018, along with sustained joint FARDC -MONUSCO
operations targeting the group. The impact of the death of the FDLR leader, Ignace
Murwanashyaka, in Germany on 16 April was not immediately discernible in the
operational structure and morale of the rebel group. FDLR remained active and
continued to pose a threat in North and South Kivu Provinces through local and
regional networks. The number of cases of conflict-related sexual violence reportedly
committed by FDLR combatants increased in Nyiragongo territory, where most
victims were attacked on their way to collect firewood and charcoal in the Virunga
National Park. Conflict-related sexual violence also continues to be reported in
Rutshuru territory, in the context of clashes between FDLR and Nyatura elements.
6.
In December 2018, the FDLR splinter group Conseil national pour le renouveau
et la démocratie (CNRD) came under significant pressure from the Nduma défense
du Congo-Rénové (NDC-R) militia and was forced to move southward. Abandoning
their positions in North Kivu, hundreds of CNRD fighters and thousands of Rwandan
Hutu civilians travelling with the group relocated to South Kivu in January 2019.
Throughout their southbound movement, which began around 23 December 2018,
several clashes occurred, with casualties reported within CNRD ranks and among
civilians. FARDC and MONUSCO engaged in pursuit of the reb els in South Kivu.
There were allegations of conflict-related sexual violence against minors attributed
to CNRD, in the context of clashes with FARDC in Kalehe, South Kivu.
7.
The P5 coalition, an armed group composed of Rwandan opposition political
organizations, has been weakened by the arrest on 30 April and extradition from the
Comoros of Callixte “Sankara” Nsabimana, the leader of the National Liberation
Front, the military wing of the Mouvement rwandais pour le changement
démocratique. On 23 May, Callixte Nsabimana was charged with 16 crimes, including
terrorism, kidnapping, murder and genocide denial. He pleaded guilty to all charges.
Despite those setbacks, members of the P5 coalition, supported by the local Ngomino
armed group and remaining members of FDLR, were reported to have regrouped and
reorganized in North Kivu and South Kivu.
8.
Similarly, although the presence of the Résistance pour un État de droit au
Burundi in South Kivu had decreased following FARDC-MONUSCO military
operations in early 2019, the group was reported to have been fighting since May
alongside Mai-Mai Yakutumba against the Rwanda National Congress.
9.
In Burundi, the security situation remained calm in most areas. Nevertheless,
security incidents and human rights violations were reported.

2/16

19-16473

S/2019/783

10. In the Central African Republic, armed groups that had signed the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic of
6 February 2019 were reported to have violated provisions of the Agreement and
posed a threat to civilians. For instance, on 21 May 2019, combatants of the Retour,
réclamation et réhabilitation group killed 42 persons, mostly civilians, around Paoua.
The leadership of the group subsequently handed over to the Central African
authorities three combatants linked to the attack, after sustained political engagement
by the guarantors and facilitators of the Agreement, notably, the African Union and
the Economic Community of Central African States, and as a result of military
pressure mounted against the group by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic. During the first six
months of 2019, 102 cases of conflict-related sexual violence were reported, 54 of
which had been committed after the signing of the peace accord, in direct violation
of the Agreement.
11. In South Sudan, sporadic fighting between the South Sudan People ’s Defence
Forces and opposition forces, as well as fighting among opposition groups, continued
in parts of the country. Incidents of intercommunal and intracommunal violence were
also reported and resulted in civilian casualties and displacement. Since the beginning
of the year, the United Nations has documented 211 incidents of conflict -related
sexual violence, mainly occurring in Central Equatoria and Western Equatoria
Provinces.
12. In other parts of the Great Lakes region, cross-border security incidents raised
tensions between some countries during the reporting period. On 24 May, two persons
of Rwandan and Ugandan nationality, respectively, were killed by Rwandan military
forces. On 25 May, Ugandan and Rwandan police delegations discussed the incident,
and, on 27 May, the body of the deceased Rwandan was handed over at the Gatuna
border post.

B.

Political developments
13. The peaceful transfer of power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
outreach by Mr. Tshisekedi towards his peers and a renewed commitment to regional
cooperation and integration, notably by Angola, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, brought about new dynamics in regional relations and
generated significant momentum towards enhanced cooperation. Tensions, including
among neighbouring countries and in relation to dialogue and political processes,
persisted nonetheless.
14. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sylvestre Ilunga Ilunkamba was
appointed Prime Minister on 20 May. On 26 August, the Prime Minister announced
the formation of a Government, following negotiations between the Cap pour le
changement (CACH), the political platform of Mr. Tshisekedi, and the Front commun
pour le Congo (FCC), the platform of the former President, Joseph Kabila. The new
Government comprises 67 members, including the Prime Minister, 5 Vice-Prime
Ministers, 10 State Ministers, 31 ministres aux fonctions, 3 ministres délégués and
17 Vice-Ministers. A total of 23 cabinet positions were secured by CACH, whereas
FCC secured 42 positions. First-time ministers make up over 70 per cent of the
Government. Women comprise 17 per cent but hold key ministerial positions, such as
for foreign affairs and planning. On 3 September, Mr. Ilunga Ilunkamba presented the
programme of the Government to the National Assembly.
15. On 24 April, the National Assembly elected its Bureau, headed for the first time
by a woman, Jeanine Mabunda, an FCC coalition member. On 11 June, the
Constitutional Court announced the invalidation of the election of two senators, both

19-16473

3/16

S/2019/783

from the Lamuka coalition, and 33 members of the National Assembly, 21 of whom
were affiliated with Lamuka and 12 of whom belonged to parties affiliated with FCC.
A total of 32 members of FCC and 1 member of CACH were elected in their place.
The decision triggered protests in Kinshasa and several other cities. The ruling was
partially overturned on 3 and 4 July, following further examination by the Court. On
27 July, the Senate, in which FCC holds a majority of seats, elected as its President
the former Minister of Justice of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Alexis
Thambwe Mwamba, of FCC.
16. Positive developments regarding the participation of opposition politicians in
Congolese politics were recorded, with the return to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of Moïse Katumbi on 20 May, Antipas Mbusa Nyamwisi on 31 May and Jean Pierre Bemba on 23 June. Their return was widely viewed in the context of an
improving political climate, following the first-ever peaceful transfer of power
through elections.
17. In Burundi, preparations for elections began. On 17 April, the National
Assembly passed the new electoral code, and, on 28 June, the Independent National
Electoral Commission announced that presidential, legislative and local elections
would be held on 20 May 2020. In his address to the nation on 1 July, the President
of Burundi, Pierre Nkurunziza, reaffirmed that the elections would be financed
without external support. Consultations within the East African Community on the
way forward for the inter-Burundian dialogue continue.
18. Despite the aforementioned momentum towards greater regional cooperation,
relations between Burundi and Rwanda remained strained. Furthermore, following a
significant deterioration in bilateral relations, Rwanda and Uganda signed a
memorandum of understanding intended to ease tensions and restore friendly
relations between the two countries on 21 August in Luanda (see para. 40 below). The
appearance on 23 May of Callixte Nsabimana in a court in Kigali (see para. 7 above);
the cross-border incident of 24 May (see para. 12 above); the closure by Rwanda of
the Gatuna/Katuna border crossing for renovation; and the advisory issued by Rwanda
warning its citizens against travelling to Uganda fuelled significant tensions between
the two countries during the reporting period.
19. In the Central African Republic, the implementation of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation continued. On 7 March, the National Assembly elected
its Bureau, comprising only 3 women out of 14 membe rs, despite the law on gender
inclusion, which requires a minimum representation of 35 per cent women in State
institutions. On 22 March, a 39-member Government was formed, which included
members representing the presidential majority, armed groups and the political
opposition. On 5 June, the Constitutional Court requested a revision of the electoral
code adopted by the National Assembly on 23 April, citing insufficient compliance
with the Constitution, including with regard to the representation of women.
20. In South Sudan, the leaders of the parties to the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan met in Addis Ababa on
2 and 3 May. The parties observed that pre-transitional tasks critical to the formation
of a Government of national unity had not been concluded. Consequently, they agreed
to extend the pre-transitional period by six months beginning on 12 May.
21. In the Sudan, the President, Omer Al-Bashir, was ousted on 11 April, after
several months of protests in Khartoum. Protests continued, however, as civilians
refused to recognize the Transitional Military Council as the sole transitional
authority. On 6 June, after a violent repression of the protests caused over 100 deaths,
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union suspended the Sudan from all
African Union activities until the effective establishment of a civilian -led transitional
authority. On 17 August, following sustained mediation by the African Union and
4/16

19-16473

S/2019/783

Ethiopia, the Transitional Military Council and the opposition coalition, Forces for
Freedom and Change, reached an agreement to form a civilian-led transitional
Government. Abdalla Hamdok was sworn in as Prime Minister of the transitional
Government on 21 August.

C.

Humanitarian situation
22. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, population displacement remains a
major concern and a continuing source of instability. As at 30 June 2019, the country
was host to 548,153 refugees and asylum seekers and 4.8 million internally displaced
persons. Following a resurgence of intercommunal violence in Ituri Province, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reported
the presence of tens of thousands of people living within host communities and in
sites for internally displaced persons. Accordingly, UNHCR registered 94,612
displaced persons (15,991 households) in Nobili and in nine surrounding localities in
North Kivu, while over 8,600 of the newly displaced were reported to have crossed
into Uganda. Humanitarian organizations began emergency response operations to
meet the needs of newly displaced persons living within host communities and in sites
for internally displaced persons.
23. The humanitarian situation deteriorated significantly in parts of the Democrati c
Republic of the Congo during the reporting period, mostly owing to conflicts among
communities, activities of armed groups and related violence, causing displacements
and raising protection-related concerns. In Masisi territory in North Kivu, over 67,000
people were newly displaced in June and July alone. Meanwhile, in Ituri, tens of
thousands of people fled violence, bringing the number of people displaced in Djugu,
Mahagi and Irumu territories close to 400,000. In the Hauts Plateaux area of South
Kivu, some 180,000 people were also displaced in May and June.
24. The outbreak of the Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo raised concern and required an urgent international humanitarian response.
While efforts were ongoing in the country, neighbouring countries were on high alert,
following the first cases of the Ebola virus disease reported in Uganda on 11 June,
marking the first reported instance of cross-border infection. Following four reported
Ebola cases in Goma, Rwandan authorities temporarily closed the border crossing
between Goma and the nearest Rwandan city of Gisenyi on 1 August, in a bid to
contain the outbreak. The border was reopened later the same day, and Rwandan
officials noted that measures had been implemented to scre en travellers from the
neighbouring Democratic Republic of the Congo. On 16 August, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo confirmed that the Ebola outbreak had spread to a third
province, with new cases confirmed in the Mwenga area in South Kivu. Burundi,
Rwanda and Uganda continue to step up preventive action, including through
enhanced screening at border checkpoints and by vaccinating health workers in border
areas.
25. An estimated 75,000 Burundians have returned to their country since September
2017, mainly from the United Republic of Tanzania. As at August 2019, the number
of Burundian refugees in the region exceeded 400,000.
26. Cases of malaria and cholera sharply increased in the region, notably in Burundi
and Uganda, during the period under review. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Ministry of Health declared a measles epidemic on 10 June. A resurgence
of suspected cases since the beginning of 2019 was recorded, with 87,000 suspected
cases as at 19 May. This is an increase of over 700 per cent compared with the same
period over the previous year. A total of 23 out of the 26 provinces of the country are
affected. Furthermore, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is facing a cholera

19-16473

5/16

S/2019/783

epidemic affecting more than two thirds of its provinces, with a large majority of
cases reported in Haut-Lomami, Haut-Katanga, South Kivu, Tanganyika and North
Kivu Provinces.
27. In South Sudan, the humanitarian situation did not improve. A total of
1.9 million internally displaced persons and 2.3 million refugees were recorded
during the reporting period. On 14 June, the World Food Programme warned that
some 7 million people were affected by acute food shortages, while more than 20,000
were facing catastrophic levels of food insecurity.
28. In the Central African Republic, displacement caused by attacks on civilians
continued. Some 2.9 million people were reported to be in need of assistanc e and
protection. As at June 2019, one in five Central Africans had been forced to leave
home, with 605,000 seeking refuge in neighbouring countries and 594,000 internally
displaced, while an estimated 1.8 million people suffered from a severe lack of food .

D.

Human rights
29. Despite some positive developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the human rights situation in the region remained concerning and included reports of
serious human rights violations, sexual and gender-based violence, restrictions on
political space, impunity, limited access to justice and violations of basic rights and
freedoms. Numerous cases of conflict-related sexual violence were reported in
conflict-affected provinces. From April to June 2019, 170 cases were record ed,
representing a total of 298 victims, 56 of whom were minors. Of the total incidents,
59 per cent were attributed to armed groups and 41 per cent to State actors.
30. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, early measures taken by
Mr. Tshisekedi to open political space resulted in the release of political detainees and
prisoners of conscience, the return of opposition political actors and progress in the
upholding of fundamental liberties, including freedom of speech. However, the
human rights situation did not improve in the provinces affected by armed conflict,
where most human rights violations were documented. According to the United
Nations Joint Human Rights Office, a significant number of violations were
attributable to State agents, in particular FARDC, and armed groups, notably NDC-R,
ADF and FDLR.
31. On 7 June, the military prosecutor of North Kivu issued an arrest warrant for
the leader of the NDC-R militia, Guidon Shimiray Mwissa, on charges of crimes
against humanity, including rape, and the war crime of recruiting child soldiers.
Guidon Shimiray Mwissa and his group had been fighting other armed groups for
control of territory in North Kivu.
32. On 8 July, the International Criminal Court found Bosco Ntaganda, former chief
of staff and commander of operations of Union des patriotes congolais/Forces
patriotiques pour la libération du Congo, guilty on 18 counts of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in Ituri Province in 2002 and 2003, including murder,
rape, sexual slavery and using child soldiers. He was the first person to be convicted
of sexual slavery by the International Criminal Court.
33. In Burundi, human rights violations and restrictions on political space were
reported. Members of the opposition political party, the National Congress for
Liberty, alleged restrictions on their activities and harassment. In May, the Chief
Justice and the Attorney General ordered the confiscation of properties belonging to
32 exiled opposition leaders, civil society activists and media rep resentatives, all
accused of involvement in a 2015 coup attempt. On 18 June, the Ministry of the
Interior suspended the national non-governmental organization, Parole et actions pour

6/16

19-16473

S/2019/783

le réveil des consciences et l’évolution des mentalités, on grounds that its work
threatened peace and stability and tarnished the image of the country.
34. In the Central African Republic, serious human rights violations against the
civilian population were reported, including by parties to the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation. Furthermore, in parts of the country controlled by the
Government, restrictions on fundamental freedoms were reported. The Special
Criminal Court continued its work on over 20 priority cases related to serious crimes
under international law.

III. Implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework
A.

Commitments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
35. Following the peaceful political transition in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Tshisekedi embarked on an outreach campaign within and beyond the
region to, inter alia, improve relations with neighbours and vigorously promote
regional cooperation and integration. In this regard, Mr. Tshisekedi made notable
efforts to revive diplomatic ties and forge alliances within the region.
36. On 8 March, Mr. Tshisekedi appointed Claude Ibalanky as coordinator of the
National Oversight Mechanism, responsible for supervising the country ’s
implementation of its national commitments. The appointment was followe d by an
affirmation by Mr. Tshisekedi of the strong commitment of his Government to
working towards stability and development in the country’s eastern provinces, in line
with the objectives of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.

B.

Commitments of the region
37. Mr. Tshisekedi’s regional outreach efforts and the favourable response of his
peers generated significant goodwill and contributed to creating an environment
conducive to initiatives to strengthen dialogue and cooperation among the signatories
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
38. On 31 May, the Presidents of Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda met in Kinshasa. The leaders agreed to reinforce security cooperation
among their countries and to eventually involve other regional leaders in their joint
effort to eradicate Congolese and foreign armed groups present in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They also agreed to revitalize the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region.
39. During the meeting, the leaders also agreed to rehabilitate the Kolwezi -Dilolo
railway line to connect the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the western
Angolan region of Benguela, a move likely to contribute to economic integration and
development.
40. At the invitation of the President of Angola, João Lourenço, a quadripartite
meeting was held on 12 July in Luanda, bringing together the Presidents of Angola,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. The leaders agreed to:
(a) continue to strengthen cooperation among their countries, notably in the political
and economic areas; (b) seek to resolve differences among their countries through
existing mechanisms and in a spirit of fraternity and solidarity; (c) support the efforts
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and (d) contribute to
the fight against the Ebola virus disease. They also welcomed the political will of

19-16473

7/16

S/2019/783

Rwanda and Uganda to continue dialogue to resolve their differences. Following the
meeting, Mr. Lourenço dispatched emissaries to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. On 26 July, an emissary of Mr. Lourenço also met with
the President of the Congo, Denis Sassou Nguesso, in his capacity as Chairperson of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. A follow-up quadripartite
summit was held on 21 August in Luanda, during which the President of Rwanda,
Paul Kagame, and the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, signed a memorandum
of understanding intended to ease tensions and restore friendly relations between the
two countries. Importantly, the memorandum calls upon each country to refrain from
engaging in any action likely to destabilize the other.
41. On 16 and 17 July, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region chaired, jointl y
with a representative of the African Union, the twenty-fourth session of the Technical
Support Committee of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, held in
Nairobi. Members of the Committee reviewed developments in the region and
progress in strengthening security and economic cooperation, among other matters.
The Technical Support Committee also initiated preparations for the tenth high -level
meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, notably by agreeing on priorities for
the meeting. The meeting will be hosted by the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
Kinshasa in October 2019.
42. The signatories of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework also made
progress in cross-border cooperation to eliminate illegal armed groups. On 30 April,
Burundian authorities handed over seven Rwandan rebels and their equipment to
Rwandan authorities, in accordance with the regional commitment of signatory States
to not harbour rebels or provide support to rebel activities conducted against each
other. The rebels had been arrested in Burundi on 8 April 2019.
43. Regional security cooperation was boosted during the reporting period through
efforts facilitated by the Office of my Special Envoy and the secretariat of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region to strengthen regional security
mechanisms, notably the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism and the Joint
Intelligence Fusion Centre, as well as through confidence-building initiatives detailed
in paragraph 51 below, which were aimed at bringing together the intelligence and
security services of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda
and the United Republic of Tanzania.

C.

Commitments of the international community
44. My Special Envoy held regular bilateral and multilateral meetings with
international partners to keep them informed of developments in the region and ensure
coherent and sustained support for the implementation of the objectives of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. On 6 June, my Special Envoy was represented
at a meeting of the International Contact Group for the Great Lakes Region, held in
Brussels. Participants welcomed his engagement with leaders in the region and
ongoing initiatives on security cooperation and economic integration. They revi ewed
developments in the region and discussed how best to coordinate messages and
actions.
45. In the context of the implementation of the Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework, which is aimed at aligning United Nations development assistance with
the objectives of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, a Burundi -United
Republic of Tanzania cross-border project to support refugees and host communities,
financed through the Peacebuilding Fund and implemented by UNHCR, the
International Organization for Migration and the United Nations Development
Programme, was completed at the end of March. Discussions were initiated with the

8/16

19-16473

S/2019/783

European Union, with the assistance of the Peacebuilding Support Office, to scale up
this resilience and conflict mitigation project in other border areas.
46. On 8 May, in Bujumbura, Burundi, my Special Envoy attended, alongside the
Executive Secretary of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
the Head of Delegation of the European Union, the first meetin g of the steering
committee on regional projects supported by the European Union, totalling
€10 million and implemented by the German Agency for International Cooperation
and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
47. The Office of my Special Envoy continued resource mobilization efforts to
secure adequate funding for projects deemed to have a catalytic role in strengthening
cooperation among the signatories of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
and tackling the root causes of violence and conflict in the region.

IV. Implementation of the road map of my Special Envoy
A.

Good offices of the Secretary-General
48. During the period under review, my Special Envoy engaged with signatory
countries, co-guarantors and other stakeholders to provide support and coordination
for the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, including
by holding meetings with Heads of State and senior government officials in Angola,
Burundi, the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Rwanda and
Uganda. In addition to listening to his interlocutors in order to understand how best
to support the region in its commitment to achieving the objectives of the Framework,
my Special Envoy carried out my good offices and encouraged the leaders to sustain
the ongoing trend towards improving bilateral relations and deepening regional
cooperation and integration.
49. During his engagement, my Special Envoy welcomed the renewed political will
demonstrated by the leaders of the region to strengthen ties among their countries,
address differences through trust and dialogue, constructively manage cross -border
incidents and advance regional cooperation and integration through a combination of
approaches. He encouraged his interlocutors to strengthen cooperation on a common
agenda centred on sustainable development and economic growth, which are critical
to achieving lasting peace, and pledged the continued support of the United Nations,
working in close collaboration with the other guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. During meetings with the Presidents of the Congo and
Angola, on 18 April and 23 May, respectively, my Special Envoy stressed the
importance of building trust among the signatories and underscored my readiness to
provide my good offices whenever needed.
Neutralization of illegal armed groups
50. Pursuant to the decision made at the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism, in which participants called for renewed efforts to neutralize
armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, my Special Envoy
and his Office continued to assist the signatory States o f the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework in strengthening regional cooperation against armed groups.
51. Accordingly, the Office of my Special Envoy and the co-guarantors of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, in conjunction with the Nat ional Oversight
Mechanism of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, organized the first in a series
of confidence-building meetings with the aim of bringing together the intelligence
and security services of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rw anda,

19-16473

9/16

S/2019/783

Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania, on 5 and 6 June in Kinshasa. The
meeting provided an opportunity to develop a shared assessment of the activities of
foreign armed groups operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to build confidence among the intelligence services, with a view to fostering cross border cooperation and collaboration.
52. Participants highlighted the need for sustained political will and concrete
actions to address the mistrust among the countries affecte d by the activities of illegal
armed groups. They agreed to establish a working group to develop proposals for
enhanced cooperation and support to ongoing operations against armed groups. While
the Government of Burundi did not attend the meeting, it affir med its support for the
process and committed to attending future meetings. My Special Envoy, together with
the other guarantors, will pursue this effort as an important initiative to build
confidence and enhance cooperation among high-level intelligence and security
officials in the region. Consultations with experts from the countries concerned are
ongoing.
53. Mindful of the importance of strong regional mechanisms for the neutralization
of illegal armed groups, my Special Envoy and his Office continued to help to build
the capacity of existing regional mechanisms, with a view to rendering them fully
operational. Following a mission to Uganda in February 2019 to assess the capacity
of the Joint Follow-up Mechanism on the Allied Democratic Forces, my Special
Envoy discussed the findings of the mission with the members of the Mechanism
during the twenty-fourth session of the Technical Support Committee of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework.
54. My Special Envoy also supported a capacity-building workshop for the
Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, held from 7 to 9 May in Rwanda. During the workshop, measures to
strengthen the Mechanism were recommended, including through greater
involvement in resource mobilization and good offices by the guarantors of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, to bolster the relevance and effectiveness of
this confidence-building instrument.
Repatriation of disarmed foreign combatants
55. The Office of my Special Envoy continued to support the follow-up mechanism
on the repatriation of disarmed combatants, which was established by decision of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism and brings together the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, with the backing of the guarantors of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. Building on the positive dynamic created by the
repatriation to Rwanda of all former FDLR members and dependants from transit
camps in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in November 2018, the two
Governments discussed ways to complete the repatriation of all disarmed former
members of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23) present in Rwanda.
56. In view of the importance of the successful reintegration of former FDLR and
M23 combatants for lasting peace in the region, the Office of my Special Envoy,
together with MONUSCO and other United Nations entities, has remained committed
to reinforcing disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes and
programmes in the signatory States. In this context, the Office of my Special Envoy
will pursue ongoing efforts, alongside MONUSCO, to encourage the repatriation of
more FDLR combatants and dependants from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It will also continue to support the Rwanda Demobilisation and Reintegration
Commission, in cooperation with the United Nations Development Programme.

10/16

19-16473

S/2019/783

Support for dialogue and political processes
57. During a visit to Kinshasa from 14 to 18 April, my Special Envoy and my
Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo met with
Mr. Tshisekedi and senior government officials. My Special Envoy welcomed and
encouraged the commitment of Mr. Tshisekedi to give priority to the stabilization of
the eastern provinces, notably by strengthening ties with neighbouring countries to
jointly tackle security challenges. Mr. Tshisekedi confirmed his intention to promote
regional integration as a means to lasting peace and development. My Special Envoy
took note of the installation of legislative bodies in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, following the general election of December 2018, and ongoing coalition talks
over the composition of the cabinet. He called for the swift formation of an inclusive
and gender-balanced Government, capable of meeting the expectations of the
Congolese people and overcoming the political and security challenges confronting
the country.
58. My Special Envoy continued this advocacy during a visit to Goma, North Kivu,
on 16 and 17 May, during which exchanges with provincial and local authorities and
civil society organizations highlighted the urgent need for decisive governmental
action to restore State authority and protect civilians.
59. In close coordination with my Special Envoy for Burundi, my Spec ial Envoy
for the Great Lakes Region visited Bujumbura from 6 to 9 May, during which time he
engaged with senior government officials and regional and international actors on the
political and security situation in Burundi. In view of the general elections planned
for May 2020, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region emphasized to his
interlocutors the importance of a credible and inclusive electoral process. During a
meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burundi, Ezéchiel Nibigira, the
Minister highlighted the need to capitalize on the peaceful transfer of power in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to make progress in the neutralization of negative
forces operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, which threaten
regional stability and undermine trust among the countries of the region.
60. During consultations with senior government officials from the region and
senior representatives of the African Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and the European Union, held in Bujumbura, my Special Envoy called
for concerted support for the ongoing dialogue process in Burundi.
Advancing women and peace and security
61. Following the “solidarity missions” undertaken in 2018 by the Advisory Board
of the Women’s Platform for the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, the
Office of my Special Envoy, in partnership with the African Union Commission, the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation of the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women),
facilitated follow-up advocacy visits by the Advisory Board to Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, from 5 to 7 June and 9 to 12 June, respectively.
62. In Burundi, the delegation met with senior government officials and, during a
meeting with the First Lady, Denise Nkurunziza, requested Mrs. Nkurunziza to
continue her effort to unite Burundian women from all segments of society. The
Advisory Board further stressed the importance of peace and national cohesion and
the need to ensure inclusive participation, in particular that of women, in the elections
scheduled for 2020.
63. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the delegation met with, among
others, Mr. Tshisekedi, the National Assembly Speaker, Jeanine Mabunda, and
19-16473

11/16

S/2019/783

Mr. Ilunga Ilunkamba. All interlocutors committed to addressing discriminatory
provisions in national legislation, in particular as they relate to women.
Mr. Tshisekedi informed the delegation of his exchanges with the President of
Rwanda and noted their shared determination to strengthen the role of women in
political and economic decision-making. Meetings were also held with women
political leaders and representatives of political parties and civi l society organizations
from North Kivu and South Kivu, who requested support for national institutions to
promote the rule of law and justice, with particular attention to the needs of women.
64. The Office of my Special Envoy also continued to collabora te with the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and other partners to implement
the decisions made at the meeting of ministers in charge of gender issues held on
23 November 2018 in Kampala, notably those related to the regional action plan for
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
Addressing population displacement
65. My Special Envoy’s advocacy of concerted action to address the situation of
refugees in the region contributed to the holding of a high-level regional meeting of
ministers in charge of refugee issues, from 5 to 7 March in Kampala. The ministers
agreed on the urgent need to tackle the causes of forced displacement, mobilize funds
to respond to the humanitarian needs of displaced populations and implement durable
solutions, with priority given to protracted refugee cases. They called upon the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region to develop a strategy and action
plan to promote durable solutions for refugees in the region. The Office of my Special
Envoy is collaborating with UNHCR, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region and other partners to support the implementation of the outcome of this
meeting.
66. In a related development, the Office of my Special Envoy contributed to the
Ministerial Conference on the Eradication of Statelessness in the Great Lakes Region,
jointly organized by the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
UNHCR and hosted by the Government of Kenya on 18 April. Participants of the
meeting adopted the extended action plan for the period 2017–2024 on the eradication
of statelessness.
Judicial cooperation
67. From 13 to 15 May, the Office of my Special Envoy, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region jointly convened a high-level regional consultation on justice,
good governance and combating impunity. Participants of the meeting adopted the
Nairobi Declaration on Justice and Good Governance, in which Ministers of Justice
of the Great Lakes region undertook to strengthen the rule of law, promote justice,
uphold human rights and eradicate impunity for serious human rights violations. The
Office of my Special Envoy also continued to work with the signatory States to
address cross-border cases of serious crimes, with a focus on those related to the illicit
exploitation and trade of natural resources.
Natural resources
68. My Special Envoy continued to support regional efforts to curb the illicit
exploitation and trade of natural resources, with the aim of removing financial
incentives for armed groups and criminal networks. On 26 April in Paris, in the
margins of the thirteenth Forum on Responsible Mineral Supply Chains, organized by
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development, the Office of my Special Envoy facilitated
12/16

19-16473

S/2019/783

consultations among senior representatives of Burundi, the Demo cratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda on how best to strengthen political commitment and
agree on joint actions to enhance cooperation to combat the illegal exploitation of
natural resources. Participants stressed the importance of promoting a co mmon
agenda centred on greater economic integration. As a way forward, they requested the
Office of my Special Envoy to develop an options paper that will form the basis for
further discussions among the countries concerned.
Economic cooperation
69. My Special Envoy and his Office continued to assist with preparations for the
Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference, scheduled to be held in Rwanda from
18 to 20 November 2019. On 3 and 4 May, the Office of my Special Envoy, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Rwanda Development
Board convened a regional consultation in Kigali, involving representatives of the
private sector, investment promotion agencies, regional women’s business groups and
development partners. Participants reviewed progress in the implementation of
projects considered during the first Private Sector Investment Conference for the
Great Lakes Region, held in 2016 in Kinshasa, and agreed to focus at the Great Lakes
Investment and Trade Conference on cross-border trade and investment as critical
enablers of economic integration. Subsequently, the organizing committee convened
the first planning meeting on 28 and 29 May in Nairobi.
70. My Special Envoy subsequently attended the twelfth United States -Africa
Business Summit, held in Maputo from 18 to 21 June, during which he participated,
alongside the Prime Minister of Uganda and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Rwanda, in a panel discussion to promote greater engagement by the private sector in
the Great Lakes region.
71. In view of the plan to highlight cross-border projects during the forthcoming
Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference, and as part of his familiarization visits
in the region, my Special Envoy met with the Executive Secretary of the Econom ic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries in Gisenyi, Rwanda, on 17 May. They
discussed, among other topics, opportunities to revitalize the Economic Community
of the Great Lakes Countries and considered its benefits to its member States, notably
in terms of cross-border infrastructure development. My Special Envoy committed to
raising the topic during his future engagement with the leaders of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.

B.

Partnerships with regional organizations and mechanisms,
international partners and United Nations entities
Regional organizations and mechanisms
72. My Special Envoy continued to give priority to collaborating and coordinating
with regional organizations during the reporting period. On 6 May, he met with the
Executive Secretary of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
Zachary Muburi-Muita, in Bujumbura, and, on 24 May, he met with the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African Union, Smail Chergui, in Addis
Ababa. During both meetings, he sought to coordinate initiatives to better tackle peace
and security challenges in the region, including stabilizing the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, defusing tensions among some neighbouring countries and
supporting ongoing political and dialogue processes. The meetings were
complemented by regular working-level consultations with regional organizations
and mechanisms. The Office of my Special Envoy also remained in close contact with
the secretariat of the Southern African Development Community.

19-16473

13/16

S/2019/783

73. Throughout the period under review, the Office of my Special Envoy maintained
a strategic partnership with the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
for the implementation of programmes and activities related to the P eace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. This included joint efforts to strengthen existing
security mechanisms, empower women, enhance judicial cooperation, advocate
human rights and promote economic cooperation and cross-border investment.
Cooperation with other United Nations entities
74. In order to ensure coherence in the delivery of United Nations support to
political processes in the region, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region
regularly consulted and coordinated his actions with my Special Representative for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of MONUSCO, my Special Envoy
for Burundi and my Special Representative for Central Africa.
75. In that context, on 12 and 13 April, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region attended a meeting of Heads of United Nations offices in Central Africa,
convened by the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and
held in Sao Tome and Principe. Furthermore, the Office of my Special Envoy
participated in the forty-eighth ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, facilitated by UNOCA,
on 28 May in Kinshasa.
76. On 10 and 11 July, my Special Envoy attended the African Regional High -level
Conference on Counter-Terrorism and the Prevention of Violent Extremism
Conducive to Terrorism, organized by the Office of Counter-Terrorism in Nairobi. On
12 and 13 July, my Special Envoy participated in a meeting on the implementation of
the comprehensive regional prevention strategy for the Horn of Africa, organized by
the Office of my Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa in Nairobi.

V. Observations and recommendations
77. The Great Lakes region witnessed positive developments and initiatives during
the reporting period. I am encouraged by the steps taken by the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Félix Tshisekedi, to strengthen relations with
neighbouring countries, as well as the efforts undertaken by him and other leaders,
notably the President of Angola, João Lourenço, the President of Uganda, Yoweri
Museveni, and the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, to advance regional
cooperation. I encourage all the leaders in the region to continue supporting these
efforts.
78. Differences among the signatory States of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, compounded by the threat posed by foreign armed groups and the illicit
exploitation and trade of natural resources, are best addressed through dialogue and
cooperation. I welcome, therefore, the confidence-building meeting held on 5 and
6 June in Kinshasa, which brought together the intelligence and security services of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of
Tanzania and provided an important forum for information-sharing and collaboration
towards neutralizing foreign armed groups operating in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I also welcome the commitment by the Government of
Burundi to participate in future such meetings. My Special Envoy and his Office wil l
continue to support this initiative.
79. The region and the international community must seize the current momentum
to make progress in overcoming challenges to peace and sustainable development.
Advancing economic cooperation and integration, including through the improved

14/16

19-16473

S/2019/783

governance of natural resources, will boost social and economic development
throughout the region.
80. I welcome and encourage the ongoing efforts to strengthen regional security
cooperation mechanisms, notably the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism and the
Joint Follow-up Mechanism on the Allied Democratic Forces. I call upon all
signatories of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework to meet their
obligations and fulfil their commitments under these mechanisms to better equip them
to discharge their mandates. My Special Envoy will continue to mobilize support in
this regard.
81. I commend the cooperation between the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Uganda in the context of the follow-up mechanism on the repatriation of
disarmed combatants. I urge regional and international partners to back the efforts
undertaken by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda in this regard. I
encourage the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda to expedite
the repatriation of former M23 combatants.
82. I am concerned about the persistent challenges to the exercise of basic political
freedoms and human rights in parts of the Great Lakes region. I call upon
Governments to uphold their related commitments, notably those under the African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance, and to create the conditions
necessary for the voices of all stakeholders to be heard in local and national decision making.
83. I welcome the formation of a new Government in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I also welcome the steps taken by Mr. Tshisekedi to implement the
confidence-building measures stipulated in the 31 December 2016 political
agreement, including the release of political prisoners and the return of exiled
political actors. I encourage all Congolese stakeholders to continue to work towards
national unity and the consolidation of the country’s democratic institutions.
84. I take note of the preparations for the elections to be held in May 2020 in
Burundi. I urge the Government and all stakeholders to create the conditions for
peaceful and inclusive elections that contribute to durable peace, stability and
development, in full respect of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for
Burundi of 2000.
85. I commend the continuing efforts to advance the women and peace and security
agenda in the region. In this context, I welcome the role played by the Advisory Board
of the Women’s Platform for the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. I call
upon all national and regional stakeholders to implement the regional action plan for
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), notably by achieving
the agreed quota for the representation of women in peace and political processes by
2020.
86. Combating impunity remains key to delivering peace, security and
development. I am strongly encouraged by the adoption of the Nairobi Decl aration
on Justice and Good Governance in May 2019. I am also heartened by the
collaboration among signatories of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
to address cases of serious human rights violations, including in the context of the
Great Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network. The Office of my Special Envoy will
continue to support these efforts, in cooperation with the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region.
87. I deplore the continuing forced displacement in the Great Lakes region. I urge
Governments to take all actions necessary to address this cause of suffering and
instability in the region, notably by implementing the recommendations of the high -

19-16473

15/16

S/2019/783

level regional meeting of ministers in charge of refugee issues, held in March 2019. I
call upon regional and international partners to support these efforts.
88. I welcome the consultation facilitated by the Office of my Special Envoy with
a view to initiating a political dialogue towards improving governance in the
exploitation of natural resources, curbing illegal exploitation and trade and
transforming natural resources into drivers of shared prosperity. I urge the leaders of
the region to pursue this dialogue and request the international community to support
it.
89. I wish to thank my Special Envoy and his team for their tireless support for the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

16/16

19-16473
