S/PV.8403

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8403rd meeting

Friday, 16 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu/Mr. Yao Shaojun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-38368 (E)
*1838368*

S/PV.8403

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; His Excellency Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security; and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
Empowerment of Women.
Mr. Chergui is joining today’s meeting via video
tele-conference from Addis Ababa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the joint African Union-United Nations
high-level visit to South Sudan, which we undertook
from 7 to 9 October. That was the first joint visit that
also included UN-Women and focused on strengthening
the partnership between our two institutions to achieve
inclusive and gender-responsive peace and security in
South Sudan. The African Union (AU) was represented
by its Commissioner for Peace and Security, my friend
and colleague Ambassador Smaïl Chergui; former
Vice-President of Uganda, member of the Panel of the
Wise and co-Chair of the Network of African Women in
Conflict Prevention and Mediation, or FemWise-Africa,
Dr. Specioza Kazibwe; and the Executive Director of
UN-Women, my colleague Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka.
I represented the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
As the Council knows, the revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan had just been signed on 12 September,
2/22

16/11/2018

and while it is pivotal to the peace process, scepticism
about its ability to deliver a sustainable peace this
time around remains a concern. Our objective was to
express support for the revitalized peace agreement
and to encourage its full and timely implementation,
while emphasizing the importance of the representation
and meaningful participation of women in the peace
process and the need for the Government to ensure
a protective environment for civilians, in particular
women and girls.
I wish to again commend the mediation efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which was supported by the African Union and
international partners and was critical in securing the
revitalized agreement. The agreement provides a road
map for an inclusive political settlement of the conflict,
but its signature is only the first step in a process that
still has many challenges ahead. The pre-transitional
period is critical and will require the South Sudanese
leaders to assume their responsibilities and pave the
way for the full implementation of the agreement.
Honouring the provisions for women, in particular the
guarantee of their 35 per cent representation across
the executive arm, the IGAD Council of Ministers and
the pre-transitional institutions will be of particular
importance to achieving an inclusive and durable peace.
Our consultations in the country were telling in that
regard. While hopeful, the confidence of the women
we spoke to in Bentiu — both from the town and the
protection-of-civilians site — was low. They noted
that, despite the agreement, their families were still
falling victim to the violence. They stressed that this
is not their war. They appealed to us and their leaders
not to forget them, to create a protective environment
and to ensure that women are included as key actors in
the full implementation of the agreement. The women
representatives from civil society and the Government
in Juba echoed similar sentiments and stressed the
need to respect the cessation of hostilities and to
prioritize women’s engagement in monitoring the quota
implementation. They also called on the African Union
and the United Nations to use all avenues to encourage
their leaders to implement the agreement. It is
imperative that women be represented in the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism, the Strategic Defence and Security Review
Board and the transitional justice and reconciliation
mechanisms, as stipulated in the agreement. At the
18-38368

16/11/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

local level, mechanisms enabling their voices to be
heard would also be critical.
Turning to developments in South Sudan, although
slow, the parties are taking initial steps towards the
implementation of the agreement. Since our visit on
15 October, the transitional national legislature has
ratified the revitalized agreement, paving the way for
its incorporation into the Transitional Constitution. On
21 October, the National Pre-Transitional Committee
held its first meeting to begin coordinating activities
for the pre-transitional period. The participation of
Mr. Riek Machar and other opposition leaders in the
peace celebrations on 31 October in Juba, President Kiir’s
apology to the people of South Sudan for the immense
suffering exacted by the conflict, and the release
of political prisoners — including two high-profile
political opposition detainees — are all positive gestures
towards confidence-building and reconciliation.
During the peace celebrations, President Kiir and
Riek Machar had a face-to-face meeting that served
as a confidence-building event in itself and paved the
way for the National Pre-Transitional Committee and
the reconstituted National Constitutional Amendment
Committee to hold meetings in Juba. To that end, on
5 November the National Constitutional Amendment
Committee drafted a constitutional amendment bill,
incorporating the agreement into the 2011 Transitional
Constitution of South Sudan. In addition, the National
Pre-Transitional Committee convened its second
meeting on 7 November.
We have also observed some specific localized
confidence-building measures in recent weeks between
the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces — formerly
the Sudan People’s Liberation Army — and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO),
indicating some efforts to open lines of communication.
The first was a meeting between the two sides in Pagak,
Upper Nile, in October, at which the South Sudan
People’s Defence Forces and SPLA-IO negotiated free
movement in the town. Over the past two weeks, there
have been reports of similar discussions in multiple
locations across Unity, Jonglei, Western Bahr elGhazal, Eastern Equatoria and Central Equatoria. We
are hopeful that those initial signs of goodwill are a
demonstration of a stronger commitment to the current
process than that which was seen in 2015.
Notwithstanding those developments, I must
continue to stress that there can be no viable or

S/PV. 8403

sustainable peace unless the parties adhere to a
permanent ceasefire, silence the guns, disengage forces
and include women as key players. While significantly
reduced, there are still continued reports of fighting
between the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces
and opposition forces, and between the SPLA-IO and
various break-away factions of the opposition groups in
Central Equatoria. Sporadic clashes have also occurred
between the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and
SPLA-IO in various areas of southern Unity, and road
ambushes and attacks between the two groups have
continued in the Baggari area of Western Bahr elGhazal.
Those incidents, together with the continuing
intercommunal violence in parts of Jonglei and Lakes,
continue to take a toll on civilians and exacerbate
displacement and humanitarian needs. Reports of
recruitment, including of children, by the parties in
several parts of the country also betray our confidence
in the parties to implement the agreement in full. The
country’s leaders and the parties will have to demonstrate
their genuine commitment to making difficult decisions
and compromises for its effective implementation. In
that respect, I cannot overemphasize the crucial role of
the Security Council, the African Union, IGAD and the
region to continue to hold the parties accountable and
ensure that they abide by their obligations under the
Agreement. It is clear that the solution to the conflict
in South Sudan can only be political and not through
military action.
The United Nations stands ready as a continued
partner of peace in supporting South Sudan. The
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
will continue to provide support, performing tasks
within the bounds of its mandate. With respect to any
possible evolution of the UNMISS mandate, including
the Regional Protection Force, it will ultimately be for
the Security Council to decide. However, the following
principles would need to be applied: first, a continuing
priority of the protection of civilians in the mandated
tasks of UNMISS; secondly, the need to preserve a
single peacekeeping force with one unified command
and control structure; and thirdly, that any addition to
the force would have to be carried out consistent with the
principles of peacekeeping and the standards to which
we hold all troop- and police-contributing countries.
We encouraged the parties, as well as IGAD, to
engage with us and with Security Council members
on these matters. In this vein, during the IGAD chiefs

18-383683/22

S/PV.8403

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of defence staff/forces meeting held on 22 October
in Khartoum, they mandated an assessment team
to explore the possible addition of contingents from
countries in the region to the Regional Protection Force.
We understand that the assessment team concluded its
one-week visit to South Sudan on 10 November.
Consolidating this hard-won peace will be our
foremost challenge in the weeks and months ahead, and
time will be our greatest enemy. We are all too familiar
with the consequences of delayed implementation
timelines or realization of peace dividends for the
people of South Sudan, who have suffered for far
too long.
During our visit, our advice to the authorities
was to concretely demonstrate, without delay, their
commitment to working together with all stakeholders
to develop a detailed plan of action to implement the
various aspects of the agreement, including security. A
demonstration of such commitment would encourage
international partners to play their role. In this regard,
we stand ready to engage with the African Union, IGAD
and our subregional partners, including with the AUled African Women Leaders Network and FemWise, to
continue to support the implementation of an inclusive
and durable peace in South Sudan.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui: Mr. President, I, too, wish to thank
you for this opportunity to brief the Security Council
on the joint African Union and United Nations highlevel visit to South Sudan, which we undertook from
7 to 9 October. As my colleague and friend Jean-Pierre
Lacroix indicated, this was the first joint visit that also
included UN-Women as well as the African Union
Panel of the Wise and FemWise. Indeed, this mission
underscored our resolve to strengthen our institutional
partnership aimed at achieving an equitable peace in
South Sudan.
I wish to inform the Council that our joint mission
provided a similar briefing to the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council at its 800th meeting, held
here in Addis Ababa on 10 October. The Peace and
Security Council commended President Salva Kiir
Mayardit and the other South Sudanese parties for the
signing of the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, on
4/22

16/11/2018

12 September. It also recognized that this remains the
only viable option for addressing the current political,
social, economic and security challenges facing South
Sudan and for ensuring lasting peace.
As the Council is aware, the African Union and
the United Nations signed the revitalized Agreement
as guarantors, which in itself comes with major
responsibilities. Therefore, it was only logical to
undertake this visit early enough to express support for
the revitalized peace Agreement while encouraging the
parties to faithfully implement it. The African Union
Commission believes that the Agreement offers the
South Sudanese a unique window of opportunity to
deliver an inclusive, lasting and just peace.
However, as my colleague mentioned, both the
AU and the United Nations are very much aware of
the scepticism surrounding the ability of the parties
to deliver on their commitments. As a result, some
international partners are yet to sign as guarantors.
However, as the African Union and the United Nations,
we felt duty-bound to engage the Government of South
Sudan, at the highest levels possible, and emphasize
the need for the full implementation of the Agreement
and the importance of women’s representation in the
peace process.
I should like at this point to commend the efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), especially the leadership of the Sudan, Uganda
and Ethiopia in delivering this peace Agreement. The
African Union shares the view that the responsibility
to fully implement the Agreement now rests with
the South Sudanese parties. Therefore, the African
Union wishes to convey to the parties that our two
organizations can successfully mobilize international
support for the current process if the South Sudanese
live up to their commitments. I made this point very
clearly this morning during the 66th IGAD Council of
Ministers meeting here in Addis Ababa.
In this connection, our joint mission underscored
the imperative for the Government to create an
environment conducive to the return of opposition
groups during the pre-interim period. We therefore
take note of and applaud the decision by the National
Assembly to ratify the revitalized Agreement on
15 October, which paves the way for its incorporation
into the transitional Constitution. We now look forward
to the successful completion of the work of the National
Pre-Transitional Committee aimed at, among other
18-38368

16/11/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

things, facilitating an environment conducive to an
inclusive implementation process.
The coming together of the signatories to the
Agreement, including Mr. Riek Machar, during the
peace celebrations on 31 October in Juba, gives further
hope that the implementation may be on the right track.
In this regard, we commend the leaders for making
conciliatory and confidence-building statements
during those celebrations. During our visit, there was
concern over the status of political prisoners as well
as prisoners of war. As my friend Jean-Pierre Lacroix
stated, their release is a further testament to the fact
that the parties are more serious about implementing
the current Agreement.
Meanwhile, I wish to inform the Council that on
14 November, the African Union High-level Ad Hoc
Committee for South Sudan met with the Chairperson
of the AU Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, to
exchange views on how best to support the peace process.
As the Council will recall, the Ad Hoc Committee is
composed of South Africa as Chair, Algeria, Chad,
Nigeria and Rwanda. There was consensus that the Ad
Hoc Committee should sign the revitalized Agreement
as a guarantor, since it had not done so on 12 September.
It was also agreed that a meeting would be convened
between the Ad Hoc Committee and the IGAD Special
Envoy on 19 November to exchange views on the
tasks to be undertaken by the member States and the
AU Commission.
The Ad Hoc Committee will use the interaction to
reach a better understanding and appreciation of the
implementation progress, in preparation for its planned
visit to South Sudan, to be undertaken soon.
The African Union Inter-Departmental Task Force
on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development
undertook a mission from 7 November to 9 November
to South Sudan. The aim was to ascertain the current
and future needs of the African Union, with a view to
enhancing its capacities to accompany the people of
South Sudan in their efforts to attain lasting peace.
The team has reported findings similar to those of our
joint mission and has underscored the need to support
this revitalized Agreement. The visit will be used to
express continental support for the peace process and
underscore the fact that there can be no sustainable peace
unless the parties adhere to a permanent ceasefire and
ensure an inclusive process. This is given the fact that
those that are called on to support the peace process,

S/PV. 8403

including the AU and the United Nations, can offer
their best assistance to the people of South Sudan only
in a conflict-free environment. I should therefore like
to inform the Council that the AU has been called upon
to assist both the independent border commission and
the Technical Boundaries Committee. In this light, the
ongoing clashes are of concern to our member States.
In this regard, we also note with concern that
the National Salvation Front has not yet signed the
Agreement and continues to disapprove of it. All efforts
should be undertaken to engage the Front on its concerns
and ensure that it joins the peace process, especially by
those countries that have influence on this movement.
Before I conclude, I wish to commend the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan for its excellent
work in protecting civilians under very challenging
circumstances. The Mission should be supported in
whatever way possible to ensure that it accomplishes
its assigned tasks. I wish also to commend the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism, and pledge the AU’s continued
support to the two institutions. We call on them to
provide IGAD, the AU and the United Nations with
timely reports and proposals on how to proficiently
support the Agreement, and our Councils should stand
ready to respond appropriately.
I fully concur that the agreement provides an
unparalleled opportunity for the people of South Sudan to
realize lasting peace. The success of the implementation
process will require considerable coordination and
cooperation between our organizations and IGAD.
There can be no doubt that some challenges will emerge.
Therefore, we should all be prepared to address them
in a swift and coordinated manner. Such coordinated
approaches would help us to persuasively insist on an
inclusive implementation process that ensures that the
interests of all communities would be catered to, if not
already accommodated in the agreement.
Last but not least, the gender dimension of the
joint visit showed that, unfortunately, violence against
women has not stopped, and we must devote more
effort and attention to that critical issue. Let me say
once again that, sooner or later, justice will be done.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.

18-383685/22

S/PV.8403

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council today on
our joint African Union (AU)-United Nations mission
to South Sudan, which was the first-ever of its kind
undertaken by UN-Women and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), undertaken
jointly with the AU, represented by Mr. Chergui and
Ms. Specioza Kazibwe of FemWise. That augurs well
for reinforcing the nexus linking development, peace
and security, and humanitarian assistance. In our
meeting with the Government of South Sudan, that was
also appreciated.
Our collaboration with DPKO is an important
development, given the role that it plays in mission
settings as a peacekeeper, peacemaker and protector of
civilians, a considerable number of whom are women.
In their own right, women are defenders of peace and
are critical to invest in for the sustainability of all peace
efforts. I join my colleagues in commending South
Sudan on the signing of the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, and
I welcome the important provisions of the agreement
that address women, especially the 35 per cent quota
for women in the composition of the executive branch
of the revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity of the Republic of South Sudan. The women truly
welcomed the agreement and called for the immediate
cessation of hostilities. They called on all leaders of
warring factions and armed parties to communicate
with their followers and inform them of the peace
agreement, as the fighting had not completely subsided.
They also said that the same message must be conveyed
to militias and non-organized forces. They are anxious
for progress and are forging ahead with reconciliation,
even though among themselves, as women, they had no
disputes or hostilities to resolve.
What they had in common, as they said, was that
they all found themselves caught up in a man’s war in
which they all had been victims of sexual assault, their
families were killed, and their livelihoods destroyed.
They had no access to the leaders in their country,
who, they said, were responsible for the crisis. They are
asking us, as the United Nations and African Union,
to help them ensure their contact with the leaders and
that the leaders are held accountable. They believe
that implementing the 35 per cent affirmative action
quota is critical at all levels and within all branches
of the Government, not just at the national executive
level. Furthermore, women want to ensure that the
6/22

16/11/2018

constitutional review process includes them so that
their needs and concerns are considered right from the
start. They requested the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the AU to ensure the
continuous monitoring of the inclusiveness and
effectiveness of the agreement and that the monitoring
process begins now with the pre-transitional structures.
We have been reviewing events in South Sudan
since our mission. We are concerned that, despite
the guarantees, the parties have yet to honour their
commitment to ensuring women’s meaningful
participation in the implementation of the revitalized
agreement. In particular, honouring the 35 per cent
affirmative action principle has yet to take root. Of the
new bodies, the National Pre-Transitional Committee
now has 10 members, one of whom is a woman,
amounting to 10 per cent. The National Constitution
Amendment Committee has 15 members, two of whom
are women. There are no women in the Independent
Boundaries Commission, the Technical Boundaries
Committee or the Joint Transitional Security
Committee. The Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism is also expected
to include 31 per cent women. None of those recently
formed institutions meets the 35 per cent quota. It is
important that we not fail to overlook those statistics
and take appropriate corrective action.
That is where members of the Security Council
come in. They can be of support. They can encourage
the parties to ensure that women are included in a timely
manner before it is too late. I urge IGAD and African
Union colleagues to ensure that the peace agreement
is also implemented in a manner that honours the
commitments made.
The women also urged that they be included in
security sector reform and security institutions so
that those institutions can properly fulfil their role in
protecting all the people of South Sudan, including
women and girls. They outlined the importance of being
included as women in leadership and participatory
roles so that the security institutions are reconstituted
in a manner that is gender-sensitive and focuses on the
protection of civilians from gender-based violence,
including the protection of all citizens — men
and women alike. The inclusion of women is also
essential for reorganized security forces, and, with the
recruitment of women at a minimal level of 35 per cent
into commissioned and non-commissioned cadres, to
change the face of the security forces and curb negative
18-38368

16/11/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8403

masculinities, prioritize gender within disarmament
and demobilization, including in the organization of
cantonments, and strengthen accountability for conflictrelated sexual violence. South Sudanese women stand
ready to meaningfully participate in bringing peace to
their country. They want women in the diaspora to also
play a role in South Sudan.

to make sure that the very important commitments are
met and delivered.

Women see our briefing today as an opportunity
to make sure that members of the Council are aware of
their appreciation of the revitalized agreement, as well
as their commitment to taking their destiny into their
own hands, while paying attention to the threats posed
to the full implementation of the agreement. They want
their keen interest to participate to also be seen as a
willingness to play a constructive role in the success
of the peace agreement. The women fear systematic
exclusion and need to be assured that reparations will
take into account what they have suffered and what
they have lost, including in the aftermath of surviving
sexual violence. They highlighted that it is crucial
that the Transitional Justice Mechanism deter and
punish sexual and gender-based violence, and called
for accountability mechanisms for transitional justice,
including the hybrid court for South Sudan. They also
called for the participation of civil society organizations
in the implementation and monitoring processes, which
will ensure the inclusion of women’s leadership, voice
and agency. The appreciation of the women of this
particular agreement was encouraging, and they see
it as a real opportunity to deal with one of the most
devastating conflicts in the world today, through the
prism of gender equality.

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix,
Commissioner
Chergui and Executive Director Mlambo-Ngcuka
for sharing their impressions from their October
visit to South Sudan and their perspectives on recent
developments in the country.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and DPKO for their efforts to promote women’s
participation and protection under very challenging
circumstances and the manner in which they are able
to collaborate and cooperate with the Government of
South Sudan. The women with whom we met were very
grateful for the existence of the peacekeeping mission
and trusted their lives to UNMISS. We also discussed
issues affecting female peacekeepers and how the
United Nations can attract more female peacekeepers.
That is a commendable peace agreement, and we
are ready to support it in any way that we can and
ensure the success of its implementation. I ask the
Security Council to join us, with the team that visited
South Sudan, in insisting that the parties do everything

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

The United States appreciates the continued
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union on South Sudan, particularly the
emphasis on the role of women in the ongoing peace
process. We have consistently seen the marginalization
of women in South Sudan in previous peace processes.
It is time for the voices of women to be heard and for
their contributions to be genuinely taken into account.
Regarding recent developments in South Sudan, the
United States, the international community and, most
importantly, the South Sudanese people have started to
hear encouraging rhetoric from South Sudan’s leaders
on some topics.
We have heard about a new era of peace and
prosperity, an admission of responsibility for actions
that spurred horrific violence and a promise of
forgiveness across party lines. We have heard leaders
commit to reconciliation and healing and pledge to
include all parties in the political process, particularly
civil society and women. We have also noted some
progress on the deliverables of the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The National Pre-Transitional Committee is
now established. Permanent ceasefire and transitional
security arrangement workshops have been held, with
the promise of more to follow. Some political prisoners
and prisoners of war have been released.
While we acknowledge those initial steps, we
cannot ignore clear evidence from the ground that runs
counter to the lofty rhetoric of South Sudan’s leaders.
Violent conflict continues in parts of the country
and Government and opposition groups continue to
perpetrate atrocities against civilians. Individuals or
entities who conduct those attacks against civilians or
who take any action that extends or expands conflict

18-383687/22

S/PV.8403

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

should be targeted with sanctions. Many political
prisoners remain in custody, with no prospect of a
free or fair trial or any hope of release, including Peter
Biar Ajak, who was arbitrarily detained at the Juba
airport in late July. We also remain deeply concerned
that journalists and civil society organizations face
ongoing intimidation and censure. Humanitarian
workers continue to be blocked both physically and
bureaucratically from delivering life-saving assistance
through taxes and fees, expulsion, detainment and even
physical harm.
Peace in South Sudan is possible only if its political
leaders match their actions to their rhetoric and make the
necessary commitments to following through on their
own agreements. A key component of implementing
the peace agreement is the provision of security in
Juba and creating the conditions to establish the new
Government. Security arrangements must be made
in the open and in coordination with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan. We commend regional actors,
particularly the Sudan and Uganda, for their leadership
and commitment in supporting peace in South Sudan.
We are counting on them to uphold the arms embargo
that is preventing the flow of weapons into South
Sudan, which would destabilize the country and the
region. We note the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development’s ongoing assessment of the feasibility of
regional support to enhance security in Juba.
We underscore that any decision to reconfigure
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan is the
prerogative of the Security Council and must not impact
the impartiality of the Mission or its current mandated
tasks, which are vital to the well-being and safety of
hundreds of thousands of South Sudanese. While the
peace celebration held in Juba on 31 October delivered
to the world images of enthusiasm and joy at the
prospect of peace in South Sudan, what remains first
and foremost in our minds is the reality of the conflictinduced suffering of the South Sudanese people. The
United States continues to support the people of South
Sudan and their aspirations to freedom, peace and
prosperity. In doing so, we continue to call on the leaders
of South Sudan to stop the violence, match rhetoric
with tangible actions and move swiftly to implement
past agreements and build on a fragile peace.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix,
Commissioner
Chergui and UN-Women Executive Director Mlambo8/22

16/11/2018

Ngcuka for their comprehensive briefing. We welcome
the joint visit to South Sudan that took place in October,
and see it as an example of enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
which can be instrumental to advancing the peace
process in South Sudan.
I visited Juba in June in my capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan, and my observations on
the humanitarian and socioeconomic situation broadly
concur with the information we just received. During
my visit, including in the protection-of-civilians camps,
I witnessed an immense scale of human suffering and
saw with my own eyes the devastating effect of the
conflict in South Sudan on the civilian population,
especially the most vulnerable — women and children.
The major difference between my visit and our
briefers’ joint field mission is the political context and
the fact that, in September, South Sudanese parties
signed a revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Poland
welcomes that development and sees it as a significant
step in the peace process. At this point, I would like to
commend the determination of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and its member States to
broker a new peace agreement in South Sudan.
Two months after the singing of the new agreement,
we have seen some encouraging events. The peace
process, however, is still fragile, some areas of
concern remain and the civilian population is yet to
experience the dividends of peace. We are seriously
concerned about reports of the deliberate targeting of
civilians, serious human rights violations and abuses,
sexual and gender-based violence, the alarming levels
of food insecurity and the continued impediments to
humanitarian assistance.
The immediate end of violence is a precondition to
the improvement of the situation of the South Sudanese
population. It is therefore critical that all parties
immediately observe the provisions of the Agreement
on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians
and Humanitarian Access of December 2017. We also
believe that the transitional security arrangements need
to be put in place without any further delay.
We are also convinced that no agreements will
be durable without inclusiveness. We welcome the
inclusion in the revitalized agreement of the provisions
on women’s representation in the pre-transition,
18-38368

16/11/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

transitional and other decision-making bodies and
institutions. We stress the importance of putting those
provisions into practice. It is our strong belief that South
Sudanese women can play a vital role in peacebuilding
and State-building, as well as reconciliation efforts. In
that context, I would like to emphasize the necessity
of providing a more protective environment for women
and girls in South Sudan.
The people of South Sudan want peace more than
anything else, and after years of suffering they urgently
deserve it. They deserve stability, food security,
education for their children and State institutions that
care for citizens, protect them and provide them with
basic services. With the revitalized peace agreement,
the leaders of South Sudan have a unique opportunity
to rebuild the country. We truly believe that this time
all signatories will demonstrate real commitment and
determination to bring durable peace and stability to
South Sudan.

S/PV. 8403

of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan on
12 September. In that regard, my country welcomes
the return of Mr. Riek Machar, First Vice-President of
South Sudan, to Juba on 31 October.
However, my delegation remains concerned about
the difficulties with regard to the full and inclusive
implementation of the revitalized Agreement, which
should promote a return to peace, thereby offering the
South Sudanese people the prospects for development
and a decent life to which they have aspired for a little
over five years.
My delegation therefore reaffirms its support for
the ongoing political process. In that regard, it urges
the South Sudanese parties to join the current positive
regional dynamic for a return to peace and stability,
with the support of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the African Union, the United Nations
and other partners.

Last but not least — and as always, when we discuss
the issue of South Sudan in the Council — let me take this
opportunity to express my country’s appreciation to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for
its tireless efforts in extremely difficult circumstances.
We thank UNMISS personnel and praise the Mission’s
role in the protection of civilians and ensuring an
environment conducive to humanitarian actors to
deliver their assistance.

My country believes that the political process should
also be extended to women, who are underrepresented
in the institutions entrusted with implementing the
revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. Unfortunately, we
note the presence of only one woman on the National
Pre-transitional Committee, which monitors the
implementation of the Agreement, that is, a rate of 10 per
cent, which is well below the 35 per cent envisaged.

Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing of the
Security Council, focusing on the consideration of the
developments in the situation in South Sudan and the
extent of the challenges facing that country. We would
like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women,
and Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, for the quality of their briefings.
My delegation also welcomes the recent joint visit of
their respective organizations to South Sudan.

On the security front, my delegation notes with
regret the acts of vandalism and the attacks against
the population by certain armed groups. We therefore
believe that, in order to address that troubling situation,
there is a compelling need to pay particular attention to
the thorny issue of the unification of the army.

Côte d’Ivoire follows with interest the development
of the situation in South Sudan, which calls for
comments on the political process, security issues and
the humanitarian and human rights situation.
With regard to the political process, my delegation
welcomes the efforts of the leaders of the region and all
other bilateral and multilateral partners, which led to the
signing of the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution

Côte d’Ivoire would also like to urge the Government
of South Sudan to work harder to end hostilities and to
ensure the protection of civilians. It further calls on the
Government of South Sudan to implement the necessary
security sector reforms, at the heart of the revitalized
Agreement, and to implement, in collaboration with
the other South Sudanese parties, the arrangements
contained in the Khartoum Declaration of Agreement
between Parties of the Conflict of South Sudan.
The humanitarian and human rights situation
remains equally alarming. My country notes with
great concern the persistence of sexual violence,
violence against children and attacks on humanitarian
workers, as well as obstacles to helping those in need.

18-383689/22

S/PV.8403

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

My delegation also condemns the kidnappings and the
recruitment of child soldiers.
Given that situation, Côte d’Ivoire would like to
reaffirm the need for the effective implementation of
the principle of accountability so that the perpetrators
of human rights violations are held accountable for their
acts before the competent international judicial bodies.
My delegation urges the South Sudanese leadership to
create security conditions conducive to the provision of
humanitarian assistance and to the safe and dignified
return of displaced persons to their areas of origin.
In conclusion, my country believes that only
the determined commitment of the South Sudanese
leadership in good faith can ensure the success of the
peace process and reassure international partners.
In the same vein, it is necessary that the South
Sudanese authorities comply with the requirement for
transparency in the management of oil revenues.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Mr. Smaïl
Chergui and Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for their
very enlightening briefings. I would like to mention
three major issues of concern for France.
First, the difficult situation and the suffering of
women in South Sudan, who remain marginalized. That
was the main focus of the joint mission that the briefers
conducted as part of the women and peace and security
agenda. I thank them for having done that. It was
essential in order to highlight that common priority. It
was also an important example of the joint work of the
United Nations and the African Union.
France shares the comments that the briefers made
and is deeply concerned about the seriousness of the
facts brought to light in the Secretary-General’s report
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2018/250), which
highlights hundreds of cases of gang rape and genital
mutilation used as weapons of war, often leaving
irreparable scars. France condemns in the strongest
terms those criminal acts, of which women and
children, because they are the most vulnerable, are the
primary victims.
We urge that the joint communiqués and commitments
be fully implemented, that those responsible be
identified, tried and punished, including those in the
ranks of the army and that the protection of women, as
well as the investigative mechanisms, be strengthened.
In that regard, France calls on the South Sudanese
10/22

16/11/2018

authorities to strengthen the specialized police units
by ensuring women’s access to them. We support the
efforts of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), UN-Women and Special Representative
Pramila Patten to ensure that what has been promised
on paper is translated into action and made a reality.
France hopes that the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan makes full use of the sanctions against those who
commit and sponsor sexual violence. The cooperation
between the Panel of Experts on South Sudan, UNMISS
and the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict is
essential in that regard.
The situation of children is also extremely worrying.
The report of the Secretary-General on that subject
reminds us that since 2014, more than 600 children
have been victims of sexual violence (see S/2018/865,
para. 54), and those are only verified violations.
The actual number is undoubtedly much higher. We
must act, and we welcome the fact that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mrs. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter, has visited the field, as has the
Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict, which
will discuss the draft conclusions in the coming days.
The second major issue that I wish to address today
is the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, signed on
12 September. It provides for the involvement of women
and young people in the peace process, which is crucial
and which, I hope, will guarantee its success.
The signing of the Agreement is an encouraging
development, which, on behalf of France, I wish to once
again commend. My country hopes that the Agreement
reached will lead to a lasting and inclusive peace. That
is our hope and that of millions of South Sudanese
women and men who yearn for peace and a better life.
We do not want peace on paper alone.
The current period is crucial for the success of the
peace. Now is the time to build trust among the parties,
strengthen the ceasefire, win the support of the people,
and make the security and institutional arrangements
necessary for the implementation of the Agreement.
In that regard, we welcome the holding of the first
meeting of the National Pre-transitional Committee in
Khartoum on 21 and 22 October. We call on the parties
to continue in that direction.
18-38368

16/11/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Finally, on the third issue, I would like to say a word
about the humanitarian situation in South Sudan, which
must continue to mobilize us. Seven million South
Sudanese still need humanitarian aid and nearly half of
the population is severely malnourished. The first signs
of the positive impact of the peace agreement in terms of
improving the food situation and humanitarian access
are encouraging. It is essential that they endure over the
long term. It is also crucial to do everything possible to
protect humanitarian personnel, who continue to be the
target of attacks, and to continue our efforts to ensure
that such crimes do not go unpunished.
The Security Council can count on France’s
ongoing commitment with regard to such issues.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix, Commissioner Smaïl Chergui and
Executive Director Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for their
respective briefings.
The African Union-United Nations joint mission
to South Sudan, which took place at the beginning of
October, could not have been more timely. It provided
an opportunity to express support for the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and to shed light on the
remaining challenges that need to be addressed as a
matter of urgency.
The inclusion of women in the implementation of
the revitalized Agreement needs particular attention.
We are encouraged by the expressed commitment of
the parties to the fight against sexual and gender-based
violence. The perpetrators of that crime should be held
to account as a matter of urgency. We also have no
doubt that the provisions of the revitalized Agreement,
which stipulate the fair participation of women in the
executive as well as other branches of the Government,
will be implemented faithfully.
It is opportune that this meeting is taking place
following today’s extraordinary session of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Council of Ministers in Addis Ababa to discuss the
situation in South Sudan. The implementation of the
revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan remains the only viable
option to ensure lasting peace in South Sudan and
address the current political, social, economic and
security challenges facing the country. We understand
the scepticism about the implementation of the
revitalized agreement. However, the signing of the

S/PV. 8403

agreement by the majority of the parties to the conflict,
as well as the positive developments that followed,
clearly indicate the commitment of the parties to
implement the revitalized agreement.
The fighting across the country has decreased
significantly. The National Pre-transitional Committee
has started its work to establish a road map for
the transitional period in South Sudan. The peace
celebration day event in Juba on 31 October under the
theme “Celebrating the Dawn of Peace, Appreciating
Friends, Cherishing Reconciliation and Unity”, which
took place in the presence of the leaders of countries
of the region, sent a strong message to the people of
South Sudan of the commitment of the parties to fully
implementing the peace agreement. Countries of the
region have expressed their readiness to help them in
that endeavour.
The international community has a historic
opportunity to end the cycle of vicious violence in
South Sudan and bring about tangible results to the
country’s people, who have suffered for far too long.
That opportunity should not be allowed to slip away
simply because earlier attempts have failed to bring
about the desired results. As there is no plan B, it is
imperative to seize the momentum. The full support
of the international community for the implementation
of the peace agreement is critically important. All
possible efforts should therefore be made in support of
the successful completion of the pre-transitional period.
The Security Council has a particular role to
play in ensuring the implementation of the revised
peace agreement. IGAD has requested the support
of the Council in ensuring the full deployment of the
Regional Protection Force and a further review of its
mandate so that it will be in a better position to support
the implementation of the revised peace agreement.
We hope the Council will respond positively to that
request. The Chiefs of Staff of the IGAD countries
have been working to assess the operational needs and
the additional tasks of the Regional Protection Force
in the light of the revised peace agreement and the
current situation on the ground. The results of those
assessments will be communicated to the Council as
soon as they become available.
The support and assistance to IGAD and other
parties provided so far by the African Union, the United
Nations, IGAD partners and the wider international
community should be extended to the implementation

18-3836811/22

S/PV.8403

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the agreement as well. Maintaining unity of purpose
among IGAD, the African Union and the United Nations
in the quest for lasting peace, security and stability in
South Sudan still remains vital in the post-revitalization
period. IGAD is resolved more than ever to ensure
that the agreement is implemented. Improvements
in the relations among countries of the region would
add impetus to the successful implementation of
the agreement.
Even though we are encouraged by the progress
made so far, we would like to underscore the
importance of nurturing trust among the parties for the
full implementation of the revitalized agreement. More
confidence-building measures should be undertaken
and, in that regard, we welcome the holding of meetings
in Yei and Kajo-keji between senior field commanders
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition
and the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and the
agreements reached between them. Confidence-building
measures of that kind should continue because without
them it will be difficult to proceed to the transitional
period. We would also like to highlight the urgency
of implementing the pre-transitional period tasks as
stipulated in the peace agreement’s implementation
matrix to lay the foundation for the transitional period.
The longer the pre-transitional period takes, the less
likely it will be to make meaningful progress. We hope
the parties will stay committed to doing so.

16/11/2018

Today I will address three issues: the transitional
process, the role and empowerment of women and
humanitarian concerns.
With regard to the transitional process, the signing
of the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan turned a new
page in the history of that country. As we reiterate
our support for the peace process in all its phases and
welcome the decrease in hostilities, we express our
concern about some individuals who continue their
violations against the security and safety of the people
of South Sudan, who aspire to peace, reconciliation,
justice and development.
With regard to the role and empowerment of women,
lessons can be learned from war — and one of them
is that women are its main victims. They are also the
ones who first call for peace. Their role in negotiations,
transitions and sustainable peace is important and
vital. Women should not suffer from war and their
role should not be disregarded in peace. According to
what we have heard today and to what was stipulated
in the revitalized Agreement on the quota of women,
they deserve to participate more in decision-making.
We look forward to the completion of legal procedures
on the establishment of a hybrid court for South Sudan
to implement the Peace Agreement so that justice will
reign and women, men and children can enjoy justice.

Ensuring the further reduction of conflict and the
total cessation hostilities is critically important. While
it is a necessary condition for the implementation of
the peace agreement, silencing the guns in South
Sudan would also facilitate the delivery of much-need
humanitarian assistance. The parties need to prioritize
the implementation of the permanent ceasefire on
cessation of hostilities, the protection of civilians and
humanitarian access. The restoration of a permanent
ceasefire is essential for unhindered access to the
affected population and the safety of humanitarian
personnel and assistance delivery.

With regard to humanitarian concerns, many
problems continue to destabilize peace, such as the
inability of approximately 4.5 million refugees and
internally displaced persons to return, the fact that
nearly 70 per cent of children are unable to go to school
and the increase in the cost of daily living. Successfully
achieving peace in South Sudan hinges upon addressing
those humanitarian challenges. Any step that does
not take into account the participation of women, the
education of children and ending hunger will face the
most difficult obstacles. Only by seriously addressing
those challenges will South Sudan reap the benefits of
security and stability.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, the Executive Director of
UN-Women and the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security for their briefings and for their visit
to South Sudan from 7 to 10 October in order to closely
assess the situation there.

Let me recall the presidential order of November
2017, which removed taxes on humanitarian workers.
We encourage the Government of South Sudan to
continue implementing that order. We call on parties
that still hinder humanitarian work and access to
assistance to stop their inhumane practices, as innocent
people in need are paying the price.

12/22

18-38368

16/11/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, we thank the Government of
South Sudan for cooperating with the joint African
Union-United Nations delegation, and we encourage
it to continue its cooperation with both organizations
in order to serve the interests of South Sudan and its
friendly people.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix, African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security Chergui and
Executive Director of UN-Women Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, for their briefings and their very active
engagement in South Sudan, including in their joint
visit to the country. I think that the visit serves to show
the strong partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations, which is very welcome.
The briefers brought to our attention the horrible
and difficult situation for many women and girls in
South Sudan and the need for meaningful political
participation for them.
I just returned from South Sudan last week,
having led a visit of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The historic
and significant developments in the Horn of Africa,
triggered by the reconciliation process between Eritrea
and Ethiopia, have dramatically changed the dynamics
in the region and opened a new chapter of peace and
cooperation. Those dynamics also provide new positive
momentum for South Sudan, which needs to be built on.
In that regard, I want to commend the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the facilitators for their
efforts in having reached the revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The Agreement is now the only game in town.
We must all weigh in to ensure its implementation.
I was in South Sudan for only three days, but
the people all testified to a new atmosphere of hope
for peace. The region’s continued engagement in
monitoring progress and holding the parties to account
will be vital. The Council must continue to support their
efforts. We believe that the Council should be actively
engaged, and that means acknowledging progress made
by the South Sudanese parties as well as pointing out
where they fall short of their commitments.
What is needed now is a clear political will to
implement what has been agreed upon and to engage
in genuine peacebuilding and reconciliation. We
welcome the steps taken so far, including the reduced
levels of fighting. At the same time, we are concerned

S/PV. 8403

by continued reports of military clashes. A complete
cessation of hostilities by all parties, the Government
and armed groups alike, must be unconditional, as all
of the briefers have pointed out. That is a prerequisite
for a meaningful political process. There must be
consequences for violations of the Agreement, including
targeted measures against those who incite violence or
seek to derail the peace process.
The spirit of inclusiveness must be safeguarded in
the coming political process. The process will be viable
only if it includes all stakeholders, in particular youth,
women and civil society. In that regard, we strongly
welcome the provisions for including 35 per cent
women in the transitional Government, as an increase
in the political representation of women is crucial for
lasting peace.
Part of the way forward will also be advancing
accountability and transitional justice mechanisms,
including through establishing a hybrid court. The
culture of impunity for crimes committed in the
conflict, not least acts of sexual violence, must come
to an end. Sexual and gender-based violence is now a
stand-alone sanctions criterion, which should serve as
a stern reminder.
We also remain strongly concerned by the continued
dire humanitarian situation. Rapid, safe and unhindered
delivery of relief across South Sudan must be assured.
Humanitarian workers are doing admirable work and
must be allowed to carry out their work safely. I have
stressed the need for the Government to build trust and
support all the people working on the humanitarian
side. Revisiting the issue of registration fees is one of
the urgent ways for the Government to move forward.
The conflict in South Sudan has had a devastating
effect on the children in the country and has left deep
scars in the next generation. The revitalized Peace
Agreement represents an opportunity to now finally
turn a corner and make the protection of children a
priority. We were encouraged by the commitment to
improve the situation of children affected by armed
conflict expressed by our interlocutors during the visit,
but action is key.
The demobilization, release and reintegration of
hundreds of children in 2018 and the recent accession
by the Government to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, on children and
armed conflict, are important positive steps. During the
visit we presented recommendations to the Government

18-3836813/22

S/PV.8403

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

on the way forward. That included the need to work with
the United Nations to expand the current action plan,
which is focused on recruitment, into a comprehensive
action plan that would address all grave violations
against children.
Another important recommendation that we
made was to continue to facilitate the release and
reintegration of children as part of the implementation
of the peace Agreement, and to allocate sufficient
funds for the reintegration of former child soldiers. In
that regard, the Security Council should also consider
whether the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan should be adjusted to that new situation,
including the possibility of adding a stronger emphasis
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
the capacity-building component.
We also undertook a field visit to the towns of
Bor and Pibor, in the eastern parts of the country. We
met with children affected by the armed conflict and
visited reintegration programmes for former child
soldiers. It became very clear that the reintegration of
children cannot take place in a vacuum. If there are
no schools or health services, then reintegration will
not lead to the desired results, neither for the victims
nor for society as a whole. Hopefully, the Agreement
now signed will also trigger the Government, with the
support of the international community, to invest in
long-term development.
Protecting the children of South Sudan is our
moral obligation. But it is also an investment for the
future, critical to prevent conflict and sustain peace.
The challenges ahead for the country are immense, and
the path to peace will be very difficult. We must not
be naive, but the revitalized Peace Agreement provides
an opportunity that now must be seized. The Council
should step up its engagement in the next few months
and work closely with the region, while encouraging
progress and making sure that the parties live up to
their commitments. Including women and protecting
children should be a priority, for all of the reasons that
we heard in the briefings today.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I thank all of
the briefers for sharing their assessment of progress
in South Sudan following the visit. It is important
and welcome to see such joint African Union-United
Nations activity.
The signing of the revised Peace Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
14/22

16/11/2018

South Sudan, in September, was a significant moment
in the peace process. Let me again publicly take the
opportunity to welcome that important step taken by
the parties. We also applaud the role of the region. The
deal would not have been agreed without the work of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), and in particular by Ethiopia, the Sudan,
Uganda and Kenya. We welcome their engagements in
monitoring progress and holding the parties to account
for implementing the Agreement. If I understood the
Ethiopian Ambassador correctly, let me also welcome
IGAD’s intention to approach the Security Council
to discuss any proposal to deploy troops to support
the Agreement.
As our briefers made clear, some significant progress
has been made since the revised Peace Agreement was
signed, which we warmly welcome. That includes in
particular the establishment of key transitional bodies,
the return of Riek Machar and other opposition leaders to
Juba for the Peace Day celebrations, the release of some
prisoners and the holding of National Pre-transition
Committee meetings, all of which is to be welcomed.
I was struck by the Swedish Ambassador’s comment
about the tangible sense of hope that he perceived while
he was there and that everything we do must be to
sustain that hope.
Despite the promising start, we remain concerned
that several fundamental provisions of the Agreement
are yet to be implemented and the targets set out in the
time frame are being missed. We are deeply concerned
by the reports of continued violence, in particular
around Wau and Yei, which threatens to undermine
the Agreement and violate the commitments made by
all parties in the cessation of hostilities, numerous
ceasefire agreements and the revised Peace Agreement.
We are also concerned that the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism are
being denied access to areas, such as south of Wau, to
carry out their, including monitoring the implementation
of the ceasefire as mandated by the Council and IGAD.
Secondly, we have yet to see the full and unfettered
humanitarian access that has been repeatedly promised.
That has been improved in some areas, but elsewhere
obstructions continue, including around greater Bagari,
where access was denied for several months early this
year, and has recently been blocked again, and where
we know there are people in famine-like conditions.
18-38368

16/11/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Bureaucratic obstructions also continue, including
taxes and fees that divert tens of millions of dollars
from providing food, water and shelter for the most
vulnerable in South Sudan. We call on the Government
to South Sudan to introduce a temporary waiver from
income taxes for international stuff of humanitarian
and development organizations, as well as a waiver
from other taxes, fees and permit costs and fees for as
long as the current acute humanitarian crisis continues.
We call on the opposition to cease attempts to impose
illegal charges. As of September, the World Food
Programme assessed that 6.1 million people, over half
of the population, were facing severe food insecurity.
The humanitarian community is in South Sudan as a
lifesaver, not a revenue raiser.
Thirdly, more must be done to ensure that the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan is supported across South
Sudanese society. That includes increasing the
transparency of Government revenue so that the people
of South Sudan can see that it is being used for their
benefit. Fundamental rights and basic freedoms must
also be respected, including the freedom of expression,
the opening of civic space and the release of the
political detainees that are still being held. To build
confidence in the peace Agreement, its implementation
must be truly inclusive. We welcome the focus of the
visit on women’s participation. I found the words of
the Executive Director of UN-Women particularly
important in that regard during her briefing today.
I especially noted her comments on the security
institutions, the need to end gender based violence
and the need to ensure the representation of women.
We know that female involvement in peace processes
makes them much more likely to be sustained. That is
in everybody’s interest.
Tackling impunity will also be essential to building
confidence in the peace process and preventing future
grave violations. We call on the Government of South
Sudan to sign the memorandum of understanding
with the African Union to establish the hybrid court
to ensure perpetrators are held to account for their
appalling crimes.
I want in particular to highlight our concern about
the impact of the conflict in South Sudan on children.
The Secretary-General’s recent report on children
and armed conflict (S/2018/865) finds that children
have been deliberately targeted and killed, very young
girls have been subjected to gruesome gang rape and

S/PV. 8403

children have been abducted and their schools have been
destroyed. We welcome the recent visit of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, as mentioned by the Swedish Ambassador,
and the work on a comprehensive action plan to address
that issue. We urge the signatories of the action plans to
implement them in full.
Let me conclude by repeating that we are strong
supporters of the peace deal and we applaud the efforts
of the region in achieving it. There has been welcome
progress, but there needs to be so much more. It is
essential that the parties demonstrate their commitment
to the agreement by addressing all outstanding issues
urgently. That is because it is the people of South Sudan
who are suffering most from hunger and from violence.
It is for the sake of the people that we must all redouble
our efforts.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me at the outset to thank the joint
African Union-United Nations delegation that visited
South Sudan for their excellent briefing. We welcome
the visit made by this joint delegation, led by Smaïl
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, and Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, who travelled to
South Sudan to help underpin the revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, signed in Ethiopia in September, which
reflects the importance of women’s participation in
the peace process in South Sudan. We also thank
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of UN-Women, for her comprehensive briefing to the
Security Council.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea is concerned
about reports of persistent sexual violations in South
Sudan, which is why we urge the parties to the conflict
to fulfil their commitments to punish sexual violence,
including by removing the perpetrators of such crimes
from the armed and security forces and protecting the
victims. We note the trial initiated by the Government
of South Sudan against 11 soldiers accused of rape, and
we urge it to continue to work in collaboration with
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan to ensure
accountability in responding to the needs of women and
girls affected by rape.
We remind the parties of their obligation to
create an environment in which women and girls
are not threatened and can go about their lives in an

18-3836815/22

S/PV.8403

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

environment where they are not so easily sexually
abused. The Council must make it a priority to find a
definitive solution to the situation.
We believe that the participation of women in the
political process in South Sudan is indispensable because
when women intervene in the resolution of a conflict,
they help to keep the family together and contribute
their work to the solution of educational, social and
economic development problems. Consequently, the
duty of women in South Sudan is to be present in the
endorsement, implementation and verification of the
final agreements to put an end to the conflict. It is said
that to properly educate a woman means to properly
educate a society.
Equatorial Guinea unequivocally deplores sexual
violence in armed conflict and in times of peace, as
well as the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war.
We believe that it is one of the worst attacks on human
dignity and we share the deep concern that everyone
in the Council feels about the growing trend of those
unacceptable acts in the world. We would like to
highlight the exceptional work of the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict network, the appointment of a Victims’ Rights
Advocate and the commitment to zero-tolerance of that
type of abuse.
Equatorial Guinea would like to call on the
parties involved in conflicts to commit themselves
to ensuring the protection of civilians, in accordance
with international humanitarian law — always taking
into account the primary responsibility of national
Governments in that regard, respecting the sovereignty
of countries and supporting their efforts in the
implementation of the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.
We cannot isolate violence, including sexual
violence, from the root causes of conflict. Peace
cannot be achieved without investing in the sustainable
development of countries and in gender equality. That
is the most effective conflict prevention strategy. In that
regard, we would like to acknowledge the aspirations
of the African Union Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, including their
clear focus on people-driven sustainable development,
anchored in gender equality, women’s empowerment
and equitable economic growth between countries and
within countries.
16/22

16/11/2018

We would also like to acknowledge the collaborative
framework and the commitment of the African Union
and the United Nations to the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda and to the fight
against sexual violence in armed conflicts, the impunity
of the perpetrators of such atrocities and accountability
for the crimes.
Equatorial Guinea reaffirms the key role of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), resolution
1820 (2008) and other related resolutions in ensuring the
participation and empowerment of women in conflicts
and promoting actions to prevent sexual violence in
such situations.
In conclusion, in conflict situations and in
international responses to them, Equatorial Guinea would
like to recommend the coordinated implementation of
good practices in the training of all contingents recruited
in predeployment preparations by the organizations in
charge of coordinating peacebuilding missions, through
the integration of a gender perspective and rigorous
training on sexual exploitation and abuse. We also
recommend ongoing support for the various elements
of the United Nations architecture for combating sexual
violence in armed conflict and for their collaboration
with United Nations agencies responsible for counterterrorism, organized crime, humanitarian response
and sustainable development, with a view to ensuring
the recovery and reintegration of victims, especially
children born of sexual violence and women who have
survived such indignities.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like
to start by thanking all three briefers for the valuable
joint visit to South Sudan last month, and for their
briefings today in the Council. I would like to also
thank them for emphasizing the need for tangible action
to ensure the meaningful participation of women in the
political process and in future security arrangements.
In the light of that, I want to reiterate that the women of
South Sudan should be at the centre of all of our efforts.
It is they who suffer most from the ongoing brutal and
widespread fighting. It is they who dared to call for peace
long before their political leaders were willing to listen.
Today I would like to make three points on the following
topics in support of the women of South Sudan — the
implementation of the revitalized peace Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, accountability, and unhindered access for the
18-38368

16/11/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS) and humanitarian actors.
My first point concerns the implementation of the
peace Agreement, whose signing we welcome, and we
thank the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the African Union for its leadership in that regard.
We also welcome the ratification of the Agreement by
South Sudan’s National Assembly. We are nonetheless
concerned about reports of ongoing fighting in Wau,
Yei and Unity states. The full implementation of the
peace Agreement, and success in silencing the guns
in South Sudan, constitutes the only way forward.
However, successful implementation will require
women’s full and meaningful participation, as they
offer a vital perspective in the analysis of conflict. It
is also they who show leadership in building bridges
between opposing factions. Their full and meaningful
participation increases the inclusiveness, transparency
and sustainability of peace processes. That is why
the Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly welcomes
the 35 per cent quota for women’s participation in the
South Sudan Agreement and would like to encourage
all parties to meet the quota and ensure the meaningful
participation of women in all instruments and processes
related to the peace Agreement.
That brings me to my second point, the need for
accountability. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
underlines the importance of chapter V of the peace
Agreement, which deals with accountability and
transitional justice. There can be no sustainable peace
if impunity persists. That clearly also applies to sexual
violence in conflict. As we highlighted during the Arria
Formula meeting of 22 October, we must move from
a culture of impunity to a culture of deterrence. That
is why we remind all parties in South Sudan that the
Security Council has the ability to sanction perpetrators
of sexual violence. However, sanctions can never be a
substitute for full accountability, which is why we echo
the call by the African Union Peace and Security Council
on 10 October for the signing of the memorandum
of understanding on establishing a hybrid court. We
also welcome the signing of a joint communiqué on
the prevention of sexual violence by the Government
of South Sudan, and call for its full implementation.
Ensuring justice is essential for reconciliation and for
paving the way for sustainable peace.
My third point concerns the need for unhindered
access for UNMISS and humanitarian actors. UNMISS
personnel risk their lives on a daily basis to provide

S/PV. 8403

security to civilians throughout South Sudan. We urge
UNMISS to continue to strengthen its forward-leaning
posture in order to protect civilians from physical
violence, including sexual violence. We regret that we
continue to see reports of violations of the status-offorces agreement, and again urge the Government of
South Sudan to ensure full freedom of movement for
UNMISS. We also urge full and unhindered access for
humanitarian workers, as they are providing essential
support to the population. The peace Agreement
provides an opportunity to strengthen the people’s
resilience. That especially helps women and children,
and with them, the future of South Sudan. Humanitarian
actors are on the front line of those efforts, sometimes
paying the highest price.
In conclusion, there is light at the end of the tunnel.
The signing of the peace Agreement represents a
historic step, but the work is not done. In fact, it has
just started. Let us work together to ensure that this
light shines for all the people of South Sudan and that
women play a decisive role in shaping the future.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix, Mr. Smaїl Chergui, the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, and Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of UN-Women,
for their detailed information about their joint visit to
South Sudan.
The Russian Federation has consistently held
the view that the situation of women, like that of the
country’s entire civilian population, will significantly
improve as the South Sudanese peace process advances.
The key to stabilizing the Republic of South Sudan lies
in a sustainable ceasefire and the start of an inclusive
national reconciliation process. In that regard, we
attach great importance to the signing by the parties
on 12 September of the revitalized peace Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. Needless to say, the agreements reached will
still require a significant clarification of the details,
but that makes them no less important. The main thing
is that the South Sudanese parties have shown their
willingness to reach a compromise and their desire to
settle their existing disputes by peaceful means.
I would like to once again pay tribute to the
coordinated mediation efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), which made
it possible to reach a successful conclusion to the

18-3836817/22

S/PV.8403

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

revitalization process for South Sudan’s peace
Agreement. The countries of the region have essentially
achieved the impossible by restarting the negotiation
process from scratch and for more than a year patiently
helping the parties to find points of convergence. IGAD
kept the initiative to revitalize the Agreement moving
forward even when many of us had lost hope.
We note that today the parties in the region continue
to demonstrate the same united approach to the
settlement in South Sudan as before, which is extremely
important for further support to the peace process.
Considering the South Sudanese people’s sentiments
and their increasing hopes for peace and welfare that
the Ambassador of Sweden shared with us, we would
like to urge all our Security Council colleagues to
genuinely and practically continue to support the
Sudanese peace process and the relevant efforts of
regional organizations.
We also welcome the desire of the guarantors of
the Agreement to assist with the implementation of
the peace Agreement by providing national troops
from the Sudan, Uganda, Djibouti and Somalia to the
Regional Protection Force. That represents a practical
embodiment of the principle of African solutions to
African problems, as well as an opportunity for effective
cooperation between the United Nations, the Security
Council and regional organizations. We are aware of
the regular contacts between the General Chiefs of
Staff of the IGAD countries on issues relating to the
implementation of the Agreement, and we are ready to
consider substantive proposals for the organization of
the Regional Protection Force.
We have noted the first efforts of the South
Sudanese to implement the revitalized Agreement,
and we urge the country’s politicians to demonstrate
goodwill in ensuring full compliance with its
provisions. Ultimately, the welfare of ordinary South
Sudanese depends on them.
We realize that the timetables agreed on by the
parties are fairly ambitious, but the fact is that only
complete and comprehensive fulfilment of their
commitments will help to foster mutual trust among
the parties and spare them a recurrence of the mistakes
made in the efforts to achieve a South Sudanese
settlement in the past.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the Chinese presidency
for convening this timely meeting. We are also grateful
18/22

16/11/2018

to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka and Mr. Smaïl Chergui for their briefings.
The signing of the revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan
is a fundamental step towards peace in that country. It
has enabled us to reach an encouraging moment that is
reflected in fewer confrontations and the willingness
of the parties to demonstrate their commitment to the
political process. We want to highlight the presence
of Mr. Riek Machar and President Salva Kiir standing
together in Juba on 31 October at the celebration of
the signing of the Agreement, and we must continue
to build trust between the parties in order to achieve a
lasting peace.
All of our efforts should be geared to the
implementation of the Agreement, which will enable us
to build a sustainable peace. That will not be possible
without the active participation of women. In that
regard, we welcome the initiative of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, UN-Women and the African
Union in making a joint visit to the field and focusing
specifically on the urgency of promoting the presence
and participation of women in the implementation of
the Agreement.
Throughout its almost two years as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, Bolivia has
emphasized the importance of building an inclusive
peace process in South Sudan, and we see the efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) as also having been directed at that goal. With
specific regard to women’s participation, we stress that
the Agreement provides that both in the pre-transition
phase and during the transition itself, the Council
of Ministers and other decision-making bodies and
institutions must guarantee a quota of at least 35 per
cent for women’s representation. Progress has been
made in that regard, but the parties will have to work
even harder to attain at least that percentage.
We want to point out that the Secretary-General’s
message during the open debate on women and peace
and security in October (see S/PV.8382) focused on
the importance of inclusive peace processes and how
women’s active participation is directly linked to a
more sustainable peace. There are various goals that
should be prioritized during this stage and the next
in order to promote the agenda on women and peace
and security, the drive to achieve gender parity in field
operations, the participation of women at all stages
18-38368

16/11/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of peace processes — in decision-making roles rather
than merely limited to advisory functions — and the
implementation of a peace and security approach based
on gender, among other things. This is a good moment
in South Sudan to promote the implementation of those
objectives, along with the importance of creating a
protective environment for women, combating sexual
violence and developing transitional justice to ensure
accountability, among other things, for which the
establishment of a hybrid court under the leadership of
the African Union will be crucial.
While we commend the progress made in the
political arena, South Sudan continues to present major
challenges on the security, humanitarian and economic
fronts. Consolidating the political process is the only
way to address the root causes of the conflict, and the
Agreement is a promising step forward in that regard.
We highlight the commitment that the Government
and opposition have shown in signing it, and we
encourage them to continue along that path. The proper
implementation of the Agreement requires even greater
commitment and stronger political will on the part of
all of the parties involved. The ongoing collaboration
of the Transitional Government and the opposition
with the countries of the region and the United Nations
should therefore be further strengthened at this stage.
Secondly — and we should emphasize this
point — the cooperation of the international community
is essential to mobilizing the political and financial
resources needed to help implement the Agreement.
Thirdly, it is very important to ensure that the Security
Council stays united and works together with the
African Union and IGAD, especially in restoring trust
with the parties. We must therefore maintain a neutral
and constructive position, and for that it is vital that we
coordinate our actions with those of the wider region.
It is also crucial that the parties ensure an optimal
operating environment for the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and for humanitarian
workers, in accordance with international law and
international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, we reiterate our gratitude to the
countries of the region for the leadership that they
have demonstrated, which has enabled significant
progress to be made in the political process. We also
thank UNMISS, UN-Women and the African Union for
raising this timely issue and for their commitment to
the political process in South Sudan.

S/PV. 8403

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for
the important briefings by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka and Mr. Smaïl Chergui
following the joint African Union-United Nations visit
to South Sudan in October.
Peru has been monitoring the peace and
reconciliation process in South Sudan with high
expectations and stresses the importance of the Council’s
continuing support to the people of South Sudan at this
crucial time. We believe that the implementation of the
revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan will be a complex
process, requiring the sustained political commitment
of the parties and the support of South Sudan’s citizens,
the international community and the relevant regional
and subregional organizations.
In our view, confidence-building is of major
importance, through concrete measures such as full
compliance with the cessation of hostilities, unhindered
access for humanitarian aid throughout the country, the
release of political prisoners and full accountability
for the atrocity crimes that have been committed. We
underscore the need to improve the security situation
following the completion of the various transitional
agreements, as well as to form a transitional Government
of national unity within the established time frame. We
also emphasize the importance of concerted action by
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the United Nations in
reconfiguring the Regional Protection Force.
We want to highlight the fact that the visit by the
senior officials who are here with us today focused on
the empowerment and participation of women. Women
have been the main victims of the conflict and their
voices have not truly been heard. Now they are called
on to play a key role in the peace process, as well as
in security-sector reform. The evidence has shown
that greater participation by women at every level of
social and political life tends to produce more effective
conflict resolution and consolidation of peace. Women
provide perspectives on the future and on unity that
are essential to building and sustaining peace. We
emphasize in that regard the importance of complying
with the 35 per cent quota established for women’s
representation throughout the pre-transition and
transition phases in the Council of Ministers and other
Government bodies and institutions where political
decisions are made. That will undoubtedly enable more

18-3836819/22

S/PV.8403

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

effective progress to be made in tackling gender-based
sexual violence. We consider it essential to develop the
necessary capacities for ensuring that South Sudan’s
many victims get the comprehensive care they need.
We also believe it essential to guarantee access to
justice. The recent convictions of 10 soldiers accused of
murder and rape in 2016 must set a precedent whereby
crimes and their perpetrators, direct or indirect, are
duly investigated, prosecuted and punished. We hope
that the peace process will enable a more effective
response to the current humanitarian situation,
particularly with regard to the acute food insecurity of
almost 60 per cent of the population, which requires
innovative mechanisms to address the serious situation,
such as rapid joint responses that combine support for
emergency food production and food assistance.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate how important it is
that the Council remain united in providing the political
support and follow-up required to continue making
progress on the South Sudanese peace process, as well
as working in close coordination with the African
Union and IGAD, which have been fundamental to the
progress that has been made.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix; African Union
(AU) Commissioner Smaïl Chergui; and UN-Women
Executive Director Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka for
their comprehensive briefings on their joint visit to
South Sudan.
The delegation of Kazakhstan commends them
for their efforts to promote to promote the meaningful
participation of women in the peace process and
congratulates them on the successful first-ever joint
trip to South Sudan. We also thank the Government of
South Sudan for facilitating this visit. We welcome the
increased collaboration between the United Nations and
the African Union, as well as between the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and UN-Women, aimed at
enhancing the women and peace and security agenda as
an important tool for conflict prevention and resolution
in South Sudan.
The signing of the revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan on 12 September was a significant step
towards peace in the country. We highly commend the
concerted work of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the AU and the United Nations,
as well as the mediation efforts of Ethiopia, the Sudan
20/22

16/11/2018

and Uganda, which helped to secure the peace deal.
This is a good example of the cherished notion of
African solutions to African problems. We have high
expectations that this historic agreement, signed after
five years of fighting, will lay the foundations for
durable peace and stability in the country and finally
put an end to the human suffering.
However, it is deeply worrying that the humanitarian
and human rights situation in South Sudan remains very
difficult. Civilians, especially women and children,
continue to bear the brunt of the crisis, suffering
violence and displacement. Food insecurity is at a
critical level. The hostilities between the Government
and the opposition, as well as violations of the status-offorces agreement, persist. The latter relate in particular
to restrictions on movement, interference with the
implementation of mandated tasks for the protection
of civilians, and the monitoring and investigating of
human rights.
We thus call on all parties in South Sudan to
demonstrate genuine political will to implement the
Agreement, stop the ongoing violence by bringing
their forces under control and strictly comply with
international humanitarian law. The parties need to
implement a permanent cessation of hostilities and take
all appropriate measures to ensure the safety, security
and freedom of movement of the personnel of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
The Council, in turn, needs to remain united in
supporting the parties in South Sudan, UNMISS,
IGAD and the AU in implementing the provisions of
the Agreement. The international community should
also make every effort to build trust and confidence
between the parties and provide adequate and sustained
funding for humanitarian assistance, peacebuilding and
economic development.
Women and young people play an important role
in implementing the Agreement. It is therefore critical
to build women’s capacity, improve their access to the
country’s political leadership and, most of all, empower
them to be engaged in early-warning, mediation and
confidence-building processes among local populations.
True progress on women’s empowerment in South
Sudan, as in many other countries, requires a total
social transformation involving the State, the judiciary
and the educational system, grass-roots communities,
religious leaders and civil society. It is evident that lack
of access to high-quality, inclusive education is the
18-38368

16/11/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

main obstacle to achieving women’s empowerment in
South Sudan. Efforts must also be made to strengthen
women’s economic security and promote their economic
empowerment. Adequate and sustainable financing
aimed at ensuring that UNMISS has sufficient gender
expertise, authority and capacity is equally important.
To conclude, Kazakhstan pledges its unfailing
support to efforts aimed at achieving peace and stability
in South Sudan and reaffirms the special contribution
of women to making it a reality.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Chergui, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union (AU);
and Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women, for their briefings.
I welcome the United Nations-African Union joint
visit, which will be helpful in tackling African regional
hotspot issues through United Nations-AU cooperation.
Progress has been made recently in terms of the
implementation of the revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. China welcomes these developments. However,
there is a still a long way to go in achieving durable
peace and stability. The international community
and the Security Council must fully recognize the
complexity of the issues involving South Sudan and
provide constructive help in tackling the difficulties it
is currently facing.
I wish to stress the following two points.
First, it is important to fully respect South Sudan’s
leadership in managing its domestic affairs, while
encouraging the South Sudanese Government to be
more proactive in terms of initiatives. The international
community should provide assistance that is in line
with the needs of the Government and the people so as
to avoid imposing a solution.
Secondly, it is important to continue to support
the good offices of the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
The focus should be on ensuring that the parties
effectively honour their commitments, achieve a
complete cessation of violence, gradually implement

S/PV. 8403

the various provisions of the Agreement and facilitate
confidence-building among political parties.
Women are a major force in the maintenance of
international peace and security. China believes that
the South Sudanese Government should play a major
role in the implementation of the revitalized Agreement
and supports it in its efforts to provide full protection
for the rights of women and children.
The implementation of the revitalized Agreement
will be a lengthy process. As a country ravaged by
protracted conflict, South Sudan has seen setbacks
in its economic and social development, leading to
substandard living conditions in many parts of the
country. In addition, the conflict has created large
numbers of internally displaced persons. These issues,
if not dealt with in a timely fashion, will affect peace and
stability in the country. The international community
must therefore ramp up its humanitarian assistance and
economic support to the country, and, in conjunction
with promoting the peace process, help the South
Sudanese Government with its national reconstruction
and enhance its development capacity. The focus should
be on agriculture, energy, infrastructure, education
and health.
At the same time, attention should be paid to the
full participation of women and young people. China
commends the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) for the important contribution that it has
made in maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan
and supports the Mission in its efforts to continue to
discharge its functions in line with the Council’s
Mandate, so as to provide support to the political
process in the country.
China supports peace and development in South
Sudan, and, under our commitment made at the Beijing
Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation,
we recently provided RMB 300 million in aid to the
South Sudanese Government and RMB 100 million in
emergency humanitarian food assistance. In order to
help improve medical care, in particular to enhance the
level of service to women, we provided assistance in
the construction of the Juba teaching hospital and the
Rumbek women’s hospital.
China will, as always, actively support and
constructively participate in the peace process in South
Sudan and play a constructive role in the realization
of durable peace and sustainable development in
the country.

18-3836821/22

S/PV.8403

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Mr. President, allow
me to express our delight at reporting to you under
your presidency for the second time. My delegation
also would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Commissioner Chergui and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women, for their presentations and their recent and
timely visit to South Sudan.
My delegation would like also to thank the
Permanent Representative of Sweden for leading the
delegation of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict to South Sudan recently.
As the Security Council knows, in Addis Ababa
on 12 September, South Sudanese political leaders
signed the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. The
long-awaited Agreement was the culmination of efforts
by the leaders of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), led by Prime Minister Abiy
Ahmed of Ethiopia, President Omer Al-Bashir of the
Sudan and President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda,
who were its brokers. The Government of the Republic
of South Sudan is grateful to them, the region, the
African Union (AU), the United Nations and the
international community.
While we appreciate the Security Council’s
concerns, we would like to remind members that we are
at the pre-implementation stage of the Agreement. The
role and participation of women are enshrined in the
Agreement and will be enhanced when we implement it.
As the Council meets today to discuss issues
regarding South Sudan, I want to point out that a
time of peace in South Sudan has arrived. The people
of South Sudan are excited that the Government and
the opposition leaders have signed the revitalized
Agreement. I would like to reassure the Council by

22/22

16/11/2018

recalling the statement that our President made on
15 September in which he pledged that the Government
would implement the Agreement in good faith and
appealed for forgiveness and reconciliation among the
people of South Sudan. We are indeed hopeful that the
peace Agreement will unite the people of South Sudan
as a result.
Since the peace celebration ceremony held on
31 October in Juba, which was attended by South
Sudanese opposition leaders, regional and African
leaders and representatives from the international
community, confidence-building elements have already
been visible to the people of South Sudan. Although
it was behind schedule, the Parliament has ratified
the revitalized peace Agreement, political detainees
have been pardoned and freed and the National
Pre-transitional Committee has been meeting in Juba
and Khartoum. Most reassuring of all, however, is that
several opposition delegations have visited Juba and
been met by President Salva Kiir Mayardit over the past
several days.
Those are all reassuring signs that most of the
stakeholders are determined to make the peace
Agreement work. Moreover, contrary to what most
observers believed at the beginning, the national
dialogue has been holding public discussions around
the country in an environment of transparency and
openness that many thought would not be possible a
few months ago. What is most encouraging is that some
opposition parties have been considering how best to
join the national dialogue process, especially when the
latter has been considering issues of the utmost concern
to the opposition.
In conclusion, we would like to thank those
who provided us with words of encouragement and
comments during the process of implementation. We
urge the Council to join the Secretary-General, the
AU and IGAD in the endeavour of making sustainable
peace a reality in South Sudan.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

18-38368
