129

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3416 (XXX).

Employment of women in the
Secretariat

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind Articles 8 and 101 of the Charter
of the United Nations and those declarations and instruments adopted by the United Nations acknowledging the equality of status of meo and women, ínter alia,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights35 and the Declaration on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women, 36
Recalling its resolution 3007 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 expressing a desire to avoid any discrimination between staff me:tJ?-bers on the grounds of sex,
Further recalling its resolution 30-09 (XXVII) of
18 December 1972, in paragraph 3 of which it urged
the organizations in the United Nations system to take
appropriate measures to ensure equal opportunities for
the employment of qualifi.ed women at the senior and
Professional levels and in policy-making positions,
Reaffirming the request made by the General Assembly in resolution 3352 (XXIX) of 18 December 1974
that the Secreuµ-y-General and the executive heads of
all organizations in the United Nations system take ali
necessary measures in arder to ensure that an equitable
balance between men and women staff mem.bers at all
levels in the United Nations system be achieved by the
end of the Second United Nations Development Decade
and that increased attention be given to the recruitment
and promotion of women as well as to the assignments
given to them,
Further reaffirming resolution 8 of the World Conference of the Intemational Women's Year, 37 held at
Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
N oting tbe limited progress made to date in the recruitment and promotion of women in the senior and
policy-making positions and the declining percentage
of Professional women staff members in the Secretariat,
as noted in the reports of the Secretary-General on the
composition of the Secretariat,
l. Reatfirms that equitable distribution of the positions between men and women in the Secretariat is a
major principie goveming the recruitment policy of the
United Nations;
2. Urges Member States to intensify their efforts to
seek and recommend qualified wom,en candidates for
Professional posts in the Secretariat;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to make every
effort during each of the next two biennia, 1976-1977
and 1978-1979, to fill a number of posts subject to
geographical distribution equivalent to 5 per cent of
the mid-point of the desirable range of each region for
the appointment of qualified women, with priority being
given to candidates from countries which are not represented or are under-represented in the Secretariat,
while not adversely affecting opportunities for the recruitm.ent of qualified men from the same unrepresented
and under-represented countries; ·
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to intensify
regular and publicized recruitment missions, in co• Resolution ·2200 A (XXI).
se Resolution 2263 (XXII).
37 See Report of the World Conference of the lnternational
Women's Year (United Nations publicatioo, Salea No.
E.76.IV.1), chap. Ill.

operation with United Nations information centres and
resident representatives throughout the world, in order
to increase the number of women candidates for Professional posts;
5. Recommends that the Secretary-General should
pay special attention in the Staff Development Programme to training which would assist women, particularly from developing countries, to increase their
career opportunities;
· 6. Further requests the Secretary-General to include
in his reports on personnel questions to the General
Assembly at its thirty-first session information on steps
taken to improve the status and conditions of service
of women in the Secretariat and on other action taken
pursuant to the present resolution.
2430th plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3417 (XXX).

Composition of the Secretariat
A

R.ECRUITMENT OF NATIONALS OF
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the composition of the Secretariat, 38
N oting that, according to the statistical information
contained in the report, 64.5 per cent of 1:he staff
rnembers who occupy senior posts in the Secretariat are
nationals of developed countries,
Noting further that the developing countries constitute 73 per cent of the membership of the United
Nations,
Believing that the principie of equitable geographical
distribution of the staff requires the Secretariat to reflect adequately the diversity of cultures and attitudes
of all the Member States,
Further believing that to achieve the objectives and
goals of the United Nations, especially with respect to
the developing countries, the latter should be appropriatel y represented at policy-making levels,
1. Requests the Secretary-General ,to take such steps
as he considers appropriate to increase the number of
staff members recruited from among nationals of de-veloping countries for senior posts in the Secretariat;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the results of his efforts.
2410th plenary meeting
8 December 1975

B
RECRUITMENT OF NATIONALS OF
UNDER-REPRESENTED COUNTRIES

The GeneralAssembly,
Taking note of the observations contained in paragraphs 7, 9, 10 and 11 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the composition of the Secretariat,a11
Requests the S~retary-General to take all necessary
measl!res to. ~ru1~ the staff members subject to geographical d1stribution from the countries unrepresented and under-represented in the Secretariat, in particular from the developing countries, in accordance
38 A/10184.
39 Jbid.
