34

General Assembly -

Noting the statements made in the Fourth Committee by the representative of the Administering
Authority and by the Prime Minister of Western
Samoa,28
1. Recommends that the Administering Authority,
in pursuance ::if Article 76 b uf the Charter of the United
Nations, take steps, in consultation with a United
Nations Plebiscite Commissionet, to organize, under the
supervision of the United Nations, a plebiscite in
Western Samoa under New Z<'.aland administration, in
order to ascertain the wishes of the inhahitants of the
Territory concerning their future;
2. Recommends further that the plebiscite should
lake place in the month of May 1961 and that the
que.,tions to be asked should be.
"1. Do you agree with the Constitution adopted by
the Constitutional Convention on 28 October 1960?
''2. Do yc,u agree that on 1 _Tan~1ary 1962 \Vestern
Samoa should become an independent State on the
basis of that Constitution?" ;
:::. Recommends further that the plebiscite should be
conducted on the basis of universal suffrage with all
adult citizens of 'vV estern Samoa being entitled to vote;
4. Decides to appoint a United Nations Plebiscite
Commissioner for Western Samoa who shall exercise,
on behalf of the G:eneral Assembly, all the necessary
powers and functions of supervision, and who shall be
assisted by observers and staff to be appointed by the
Secretary-General in consultation with him;
5. Requests the United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner to submit to the Trusteeship Council a report
on the organization, conduct and result of the plebiscite ;
6. R.equests the Trusteeship Council to transmit to
the General Assembly, for consideration at its sixteenth
session, the report of the United Nations Plebiscite
Commissioner, together with any recommendations and
observations it considers necessary.
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.

*

*

*

At its 954th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1960, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee,'9 appointed Mr. Najmiuldine Rifai (United Arab
Republic) United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner for W eslern
Samoa.

1579 (XV). Question of the future of
Ruanda-Urundi
The General Assembly,
Having received the reports of the Trusteeship
Council30 and of the United Nations Visiting Mission
to Trust Territories in East Africa, 1960,31 on the
Trust Territory of Ruanda-Urundi called for under
General Assembly resolution 1419 (XIV) of 5 December 1959,
Noting from the report of the Trustees?iP C:ouncil
that it is the Administering Authority's mtentton to
hold early in 1961 elections on the basis of universal
28 Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Fourth Committee, 1081st meeting.
2 0 !bid., Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 44, docu-

ment A/4663, para. 10.
so Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/4404),
part II, chapter II.
31 Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (T/1551).

Fifteenth Session

adult suffrage, and under the supervision of the United
Nations, for the purpose of constituting national assemblies for Rnamla an<l Urundi,
Noting further the statement of the Administering
Authority that the elections arc scheduled to begin on
15 January 1961, and its invitation to the United
Nations to send a mission to Ruanda-Urundi about 15
December 1960 to see the actual implementation of the
arran!{ements for the elections, such as the, cmnposit!on
oi the electoral rolls, the course of the election campaign
and the organization of the poll,:i~
Being conscious of its responsibility to ensure that
the supervision of the elections by the United Nations
is efTective, an<l that the elections, which will furnish
the basis for the Territory's independence, are held in
proper conditions so that their results are completely
iree of doubt or dispute,
Having heard the views of the petitioners belonging
to various political parties and groups of RuandaUrundi,
l. Considers that the necessary conditions and atmosphere must be brought about expeditiously to ensure
that the legislative elections, which will lead to the
establishment of national democratic institutions and
furnish the basis for the national independence of
Ruanda-Unmdi in accordance with the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, take
place in an atmosphere of peace and harmony ;
2. Urges the Administering Authority to implement
immediately measures of full and unconditional amnesty
and to abolish the emergency regime so as to enable
political workers ant! leaders who are in exile or imprisoned in the Territory to resume normal, democratic
political activity before the elections ;
3. Considers that the expeditious return and rehabilitation of thousands of victims of recent disturbances in Ruanda who were compelled to take refuge
away from their homes in Ruanda or abroad will assist
the process of reconciliation, and urges the Administering
Authority and the local authorities concerned to adopt
all possible means to that end;
4. Recommends that a conference fully representative
of political parties, attended by United Nations observers, should be held early in 1961, before the
elections, in order to compose the differences between
the parties and to bring about national harmony ;
5. Appeals to all parties and political leaders of
Ruanda-Urundi to exert their efforts to achieve an
atmosphere of understanding, p~ce and harmony for
the good of their Territory and people as a whole on
the eve of independence ;
6. Calls upon the Administering Authority to refrain
from using the Territory as a base, whether for internal
or external purposes, for the accumulation of arms or
armed forces not strictly required for the purpose of
maintaining public order in the Territory;
7. Recommends that the elections scheduled to be
held in January 1961 should be postponed to a date
to be decided on at the resumed fifteenth session of
the General Assembly in the light of the recommendations of the Commission referred to in paragraph 8
below, so that, in addition to the fulfilment of the purpose
of the preceding paragraphs of the present resolution,
32 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 45, document A/C.4/455.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

the arrangements for the elections can be completed
under the supervision of the United K ations;
8. Decides to set up a United Nations Commission
for Ruanda-Urundi, composed of three members, who
will be assisted by observers and staff to be appointed
by the Secretary-General in consultation with the
Commission ;
9. Requests the Commission to proceed immediately
to Ruanda-Urumli to perfon°1 the following tasks on
behalf of the United Nations:
(a) To supervise the elections to be held in RuandaUrundi in 1961 on the basis of direct, universal adult
suffrage, and the preparatory measures preceding them,
such as the compilation of the electoral rolls, the conduct
of the election campaign and the organization of a system
of balloting which will ensure complete secrecy;
(b) To attend, as United Nations observers, the
political conference envisaged in paragraph 4 above and
the round-table conference to be convened after the
elections to determine the future evolution of the
Territory towards independence;
( c) To follow the progress of events in the Territory
before and after the elections, to lend its advice and
assistance, as appropriate, with a view to advancing
peace and harmony in Ruanda- Uruncli, ancl to report
to the Trusteeship Council or the General Assembly,
as necessary ;
10. Requests the Commission to submit an interim
report on the implementation of the present resolution
to the General Assembly at its resumed fifteenth session:
11. Endorses the observation of the Trusteeship
Council that in view of the essential community of
interests and the facts of history and geography; the
best future for Ruanda-Unmdi lies in the evolution of
a single, united and composite State, with such arrangements for the internal autonomy of Ruanda and Unmdi
as may be agreed upon by their representatives.
960th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.

*

*

*

At its 960th plenar'J' meeting on 20 December 1960, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee,!! appointed the members of the United Nations
Commission for Ruanda-Urundi.
The Commi.ssion is composed as follows: Mr. Max Dorsinville (Haiti), Chairman, Mr. Majid Rahnema (Iran) and
Mr. Ernest Gassou (Togo).

35

1580 (XV). Question of the Mwami
The General Assembly,
Considering that a division of op1111on has ansen m
Ruanda-Urundi with regard to the institution of monarchy and with regard to the person of the µresent
Mwami of Ruanda,
Considering further that such a situation poses a
constitutional question of far-reaching importance which
should be settled in accordance with the freely expressed
wishes of the people of the Territory,
Noting that, on several occasions, the M wami has
stated his desire to be a democratic and constitutional
sovereign,
Noting further that the M wami of Ruanda, in a
memorandum to the United Nations Visiting Mission
to Trust Territories in East Africa, 1960, has accepted
the idea of a referendum to decide this <ruestion,
Haviny perused the statement of the Mwami to the
Fourth Committee, 34
l. N ates with regret that the Administering Authority has arbitrarily suspended the powers of the
l\-1 wami of Ruanda and has not allowed him t() return
to Ruanda to resume his duties as Mwami;
2. Requests the Administering Authority to revoke
the measures adopted by it to suspend the powers of
the M wami, and to facilitate his return to Ruanda to
enable him to function as M wami pending the ascertainment of the wishes of the people on this question ;
3. Decides that a referendum should be held under
the supervision of the United Kations Commission for
Ruancla-Urundi established under General Assembly
resolution 1579 (XV) of 20 December 1960, in order
to ascertain the wishes of the people concerning the
institution of the M wami, and if necessary, the present
M wami of Ruanda;
4. Requests the United Nations Commission for
Ruanda-Urundi, after studying the situation on the spot,
to submit to the General Assembly, at its resumed
fifteenth session, recommendations concerning the
timing of the referendum and the questions to be put
therein.

960th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.
aa Ibid., document A/4672, para. 25.
84 Ibid., document A/C.4/467.
