S/2020/1180

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 December 2020
Original: English

Situation in South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2514
(2020), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to 15 March 2021 and requested the Secretary-General to
report on the implementation of the Mission’s mandate every 90 days. It covers
political and security developments between 1 September and 30 November 2020, the
humanitarian and human rights situation and progress toward s the implementation of
the Mission’s mandate.

II. Political and economic developments
2.
Following extensive deliberations, delayed in part owing to restrictions related
to coronavirus disease (COVID-19), on 20 October, the parties to the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan agreed
to the allocation of all 79 counties according to the responsibility -sharing ratio of the
Agreement. On 21 October, the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir Mayar dit, called
upon the parties to submit their nominees for the positions.
3.
While 9 of 10 governors appointed in the last quarter have resumed their
functions, all other state and county executive and legislative positions remain vacant.
The impasse over the appointment of the Upper Nile governor persists. The Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition (SPLM/A-IO) maintained that
Lieutenant General Johnson Olony was the only viable nominee and refused to
consider an alternative.
4.
On 27 October, representatives of the National Democratic Movement, the
Federal Democratic Party and the South Sudan Liberation Movement, all members of
the South Sudan Opposition Alliance, requested the intervention of Mr. Kiir with
regard to the nomination of Alliance representatives in the greater Equatoria region.
On 15 November, those parties and the South Sudan Patriotic Movement accused two
Alliance leaders, Josephine Lagu and Joseph Bakosoro, of preventing their
participation in meetings held on the nomination process in the Equatorias.

20-16135 (E)

111220

*2016135*

S/2020/1180

Implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
5.
On 14 September, the National Constitutional Amendment Committee submitted
the Constitutional Amendment (No. 8) Bill 2020 which aims to remedy the changes
made earlier by Constitutional Amendment (No. 6) Act 2020 incorporating the
Agreement into the Transitional Constitution. No progress has been observed to date.
6.
In-person meetings of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission resumed on 30 September. The interim Chairperson, Major General
Charles Tai Gituai, called for the reconstitution of the Transitional National
Legislative Assembly, the graduation of the necessary unified forces and the
appointment of the Governor of Upper Nile. At the meeting, the Joint Transitional
Security Committee reported that it had completed the development of eligibility
criteria, curricula and syllabuses, established 17 training centres across the country
and prepared five centres in the greater Equatoria region for the graduation of the
necessary unified forces. It highlighted the ongoing operational challenges owing to
a lack of funding. The Joint Defence Board submitted a report on the harmonized
command structures of the security agencies, which has yet to be endorsed by the
principals. It was noted in the October quarterly report of the reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission that, while the permanent ceasefire was
largely holding, COVID-19-related disruptions, a lack of resources, intercommunal
clashes, an increasing number of incidents of defection and a lack of political will
impeded the implementation of the Agreement. In a meeting held on 26 November,
the Commission, inter alia, urged the parties to immediately reconstitute the
Assembly and the Council of States and observe the 35 per cent quota for women in
the institutions of transition.
7.
Following demands by civil society and women’s organizations, the acting
Secretary-General of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement, Jemma Nunu Kumba,
announced on 13 October that the 35 per cent quota for women would be implemented
in the remaining positions allotted to the party. Thus far, the quota has been met by
only the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism (41 per cent of women) and the reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (35 per cent of women). On 17 November,
Regina Joseph Kapa was appointed as the interim Secretary-General of SPLM/A-IO,
following the resignation of Peter Tingo, on 10 Novembe r. Mr. Tingo cited the
leadership failure of the First Vice-President, Riek Machar, as the reason for his
decision. Significantly, the two main parties in the country are now led by women.
Peace process developments
8.
Internal fissures emerged within the South Sudan Opposition Movements
Alliance, resulting in the suspension of the South Sudan United Front/Army from the
coalition on 25 September. On 5 October, the Real Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement was also suspended after having criticized the decision. From 9 to
12 October, the Community of Sant’Egidio hosted the fourth round of talks between
the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity and the South Sudan
Opposition Movements Alliance in Rome. The parties resolved to meet on
30 November to continue deliberations and recommit to the 2017 Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities between the Government of the Republic of South Sudan and
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (in Opposition). In addition, the
participation of the South Sudan Opposition Movements Alliance in the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism was
discussed, and a declaration of principles document was signed.
9.
From 9 to 13 November, the Community of Sant’Egidio con vened a workshop
in Rome on integrating the South Sudan Opposition Movements Alliance into the
2/19

20-16135

S/2020/1180

Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism. The workshop was focused on reaching a common understanding of the
obligations of the signatories to the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement and the
modalities of working as part of the Mechanism. In accordance with the Rome
Declaration on the Peace Process in South Sudan of 12 January 2020, the armed
groups within the South Sudan Opposition Movements Alliance – the National
Salvation Front, the South Sudan National Movement for Change and the United
Democratic Revolutionary Movement – will be represented equally in all Mechanism
structures from January 2021 onwards. In the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement,
sexual and gender-based violence, inter alia, are prohibited and the parties are called
upon to take specific measures to protect vulnerable persons.
10. Following a leadership council meeting held on 14 November, the South S udan
Opposition Movements Alliance resolved to call for reunification of the Alliance and
engaged with the South Sudan National Democratic Alliance to reconcile. On
18 November, the South Sudan United Front/Army and the Real Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement faction issued a statement reporting that they had decided to
work towards maintenance of the unity of the South Sudan Opposition Movements
Alliance and reached out to the South Sudan National Democratic Alliance to
consider reunification.
Defections and change of allegiance among the parties
11. Defections continued to threaten trust among the parties and undermine the
implementation of the Agreement. On 26 September, SPLM/A -IO announced the
defection of Major General Moses Lokujo, an influential leader in greater Yei area,
to the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces. Following his defection, Mr. Lokujo
reportedly gave the remaining SPLM/A-IO forces in the Kajo Kaji area, including
those stationed at a Moroto training centre and a Panyume cantonment site, four days
to leave. Subsequently, the forces of Mr. Lokujo and SPLM/A-IO clashed in late
September and again in late November, resulting in statements on 30 September by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and on 1 October by the
reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, condemning the
defection. Furthermore, on 26 November, the Commission reiterated serious concerns
about increasing incidents of defection by military personnel and tasked the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism with
verifying the alleged incidents that had occurred at Moroto, as well as with reporting
to the Commission.
12. More defections followed, including those of the SPLM/A -IO caretaker
Governor Anthony Fada Taban; the former SPLM/A-IO Spokesperson in Bagari,
Nichola Gabriel Adam; and Brigadier General Alfred Angelo Kumaiki, who declared
their allegiance to Mr. Kiir. On 4 November, a senior SPLM/A -IO member, Brigadier
General Simon Wieu Garang, also resigned, citing differences with First VicePresident Machar. On 9 September, Lieutenant General Nicodemus Deng Deng Aliir,
the former Chief of General Staff of the National Democratic Movement, defected to
the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces. On 12 October, nine South Sudan United
Front/Army members, led by Major General Nhial Tot, defected to the South Sudan
People’s Defence Forces. On 23 October, the National Salvation Front commander in
Kapoeta, General Lokai Iko, and the Chair of the Internat ional Relations Committee
of the National Salvation Front, Lako Jada Kwajok, resigned, citing discontent with
the leadership of the National Salvation Front.
13. On 4 October, a prominent opposition member informed the media that
77 political cadres from the ruling Sudan People’s Liberation Movement faction had
defected to SPLM/A-IO.

20-16135

3/19

S/2020/1180

Regional engagements and developments
14. On 15 September, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union held its
945th meeting on the situation in South Sudan. The Council, inter alia, expressed deep
concern about the slow pace of implementation of the transitional security
arrangements and urged the Government and signatories to mobilize funding for the
training, graduation and deployment of the necessary unified for ces.
15. On 3 October, in Juba, Mr. Kiir presided over the signing of the Juba Peace
Agreement between the Transitional Government of the Sudan, the Sudan
Revolutionary Front and the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi. The Heads of
State of Chad, Djibouti, Ethiopia and Somalia attended the ceremony.
16. On 28 and 29 October, the Sudan and South Sudan held an ordinary meeting of
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism. The Mechanism reaffirmed its full and
unwavering commitment to the cooperation agreemen ts of 2012 and decided, among
other things, to operationalize the reopening of border crossing points.
Other major national developments
17. From 3 to 15 November, the National Dialogue Conference was held in Juba.
More than 500 participants, 50 per cent of whom were women, including 274 grass roots women’s and youth organizations and representatives, deliberated on issues
related to governance, security, the economy and social cohesion. SPLM/A -IO and
the National Democratic Movement did not participate.
18. On 16 September, Mr. Kiir dismissed the Minister for Finance, Salvatore
Garang, appointing Athian Diing Athian in his place. On 17 September, Mr. Kiir
disbanded the board of Nile Petroleum Corporation, subsequently appointing a new
board, chaired by the Minister of Presidential Affairs, Nhial Deng Nhial. On
7 October, Mr. Kiir appointed Patrick Mugoya as the new Commissioner General of
the National Revenue Authority. On 2 November, Mr. Kiir relieved the Governor of
the Central Bank of South Sudan, Jamal Abdallah Wani, of his duties, appointing the
former Governor, Dier Tong Ngor, in his place.
Economic situation
19. The economic situation continues to deteriorate owing to the low price of oil,
the main source of export revenue. In late August, the Central Bank announced that
it had run out of foreign exchange reserves and that salary arrears for government
employees had reached about five months. The depreciation of the South Sudanese
pound has also contributed to inflation amid complaints of the increasing cost of
essential goods. Several measures have been adopted to deal with the crisis, including
the establishment of an economic crisis management committee by Mr. Kiir. The
national budget process for 2020/21 is behind sched ule, and the government’s
resource envelope for 2020/21 indicates a fiscal deficit of more than 50 per cent of
the estimated $1.3 billion budget. Deficit financing support measures have continued.
In November, the International Monetary Fund approved $52.3 million for South
Sudan to address the impact of COVID-19. However, there are no clear indications
of how the deficit will be funded.

III. Security situation
20. The permanent ceasefire continued to hold in most parts of the country. Overall,
fewer security incidents were reported owing to widespread flooding. Increased
livelihood pressures, a result of economic deterioration owing to the COVID -19
pandemic, led to an increase in economically motivated violence and criminality,
4/19

20-16135

S/2020/1180

including heightened sexual and gender-based violence targeted in particular at young
girls, with a notable increase in forced child marriage and adolescent pregnancy. Job
demands and related violence are on the rise in Eastern Equatoria, Jonglei, Lakes,
Unity and Upper Nile.
Greater Upper Nile region
21. Uncertainty related to the formation of the state government in Upper Nile and
activities aimed at undermining the appointment of Mr. Olony led to targeted attacks
on Shilluk leaders, allegedly committed by Padang Dinka. They included an attack
on the Paramount Chief of Lelo and four other sub-Chiefs of the Shilluk communities
on 22 October. Another incident of killing of Shilluks was repor ted on 2 November,
when two Shilluk men were killed in Malakal town. The incidents, together with the
killing of the former Public Prosecutor in Malakal town in July, brought the number
of Shilluks recently killed to three.
22. Tensions between SPLM/A-IO and the forces of Major General James Ochan
were reignited in Maiwut on 25 October, when the groups engaged in an exchange of
fire. The incident occurred when Cie-Waw farmers, who are associated with
Mr. Ochan, attempted to cultivate land in areas located south of Maiwut, but were
pushed out by SPLM/A-IO elements. The farmers returned afterwards, escorted by
Mr. Ochan’s soldiers.
23. Demands for employment opportunities resurfaced in late October, resulting in
violent protests in Renk, which led to the evacuation of humanitarian workers
following threats from young people, who vandalized and set fire to a humanitarian
warehouse that stored essential medicine and vaccine supplies. Similar demands and
threats were observed in Malakal and Bunj. Local young peopl e maintained the
perception that jobs were being taken away from them and offered to non -local South
Sudanese nationals.
24. In Unity, Mayom remained a hotspot, characterized by attacks and revenge
attacks involving local armed young people aligned with go vernment forces. In
September, several areas were attacked by armed young people from Warrap. One
such attack resulted in the killing of at least 10 people and the raiding of a large herd
of cattle. The incident appeared to be a revenge attack prompted by an earlier attack
by the Bul Nuer in Warrap. Young people on both sides have mobilized to launch
further attacks. The group from Warrap is also said to be fleeing the disarmament
exercise, and their presence in Mayom may therefore disrupt the prospective
disarmament in Unity.
25. The situation in Jonglei remained calm but fragile following the series of attacks
between the allied Dinka and Gawaar and Lou Nuer and the Murle previously
observed in the Greater Pibor Administrative Area. Since then, fighting yo ung people
from Dinka and Nuer have withdrawn from the Greater Pibor Administrative Area
and returned to their respective communities. While national and local efforts
continued to push for dialogue and reconciliation among these communities, the
intercommunal tensions remained unresolved, with both sides remaining vigilant. In
parallel, as the conflict among the Dinka, Nuer and Murle subsided, the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area experienced a resurgence of intracommunal and intercommunal
violence linked to Murle infighting and cross-border cattle raids at Maruwo Hills,
involving the Jie and Toposa from neighbouring Eastern Equatoria.
Greater Equatoria region
26. The National Salvation Front has remained active in the Equatorias following
its ousting from main towns and strategic areas by aligned forces of the South Sudan
People’s Defence Forces and SPLM/A-IO in previous months. Many of their activities
20-16135

5/19

S/2020/1180

involved roadside ambushes and robberies along main supply routes, as well as
abductions and recruitments while engaging in clashes with government and
SPLM/A-IO forces.
27. Following the defection of Mr. Lokujo, his forces and SPLM/A -IO clashed on
28 and 29 September, with each side accusing the other of having initiated the attacks.
28. In Western Equatoria, tensions continued along the border with the Central
African Republic as a result of activities of armed Ambororo and former Seleka
groups and the alleged mobilization of Azande young people to fight former Seleka
inside the Central African Republic territory. The Azande young people are reported
to have been hired by a businessman from the Central African Republic, with backing
from Major General James Nando, the former SPLM/A-IO Commander who had
defected to the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces in March. The appointment of
Lieutenant General Alfred Futiyo as Governor of Western Equatoria State continued
to generate discomfort among some Azande political and military elites, while some
Azande politicians attempted to rally for the formation of an i ndependent
administrative area in Tambura.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
29. In Warrap, Tonj East County remained a hotspot with a new cycle of intra-Dinka
violence flaring up. Luanyjang armed young people clashed with an alliance of Thiik
and Akok on 6 and 7 October, which led to the killing of at least 10 people, the burning
down of a market and the theft of cattle. A similar attack was carried out on
30 October. Luanyjang also clashed with Thiik, Akok and Jalwau in November, with
some 16 people killed and 48 injured.
Intercommunal conflict
30. Severe flooding across large parts of the country, including in Warrap, Lakes,
Upper Nile and Jonglei, and the related restrictions of movement for cattle keepers
and armed civilians led to a significant reduction in communal conflict. Some
observers attributed the reduced violence to flooding and the possible presence of
civilian disarmament forces in Warrap and Lakes. Notwithstanding the decrease,
cross-border communal violence and cattle theft still occurred in Warrap and Unity
in early September. Intercommunal violence, triggered by a cattle raid in southern
Warrap conducted by young people, led to the killing of civilians, while in Lakes,
intercommunal conflict persisted in the central and western area s of the state. Such
violence on the part of young people may be attributed to an increase in bride prices,
competition over grazing land and water owing to the approaching dry season, and
unemployment.
31. Revenge attacks continued in Jonglei between Murle and Jie and Murle and Lou
Nuer, but on a reduced scale owing to severe flooding in the state. The flooding has
also led to the displacement of civilians, who have fled Jonglei and Lakes for
Mangala, in northern Central Equatoria. The Government subsequen tly declared
Mangala town an internally displaced persons site on 23 September. The Mangala
area is contested by a number of other ethnic groups, and UNMISS is working with
local communities to prevent the emergence of conflict, given the unprecedented
numbers of newly displaced civilians situated there.

IV. Humanitarian situation
32. The humanitarian situation in South Sudan remained dire owing to flooding,
armed conflict and intercommunal violence. Violence in greater Equatoria resulted in

6/19

20-16135

S/2020/1180

displacement, civilian casualties, arbitrary arrests, abductions, the harassment of
humanitarian workers and the disruption of humanitarian operations. In Central
Equatoria, armed clashes forced civilians to seek refuge in Uganda and suspended
humanitarian operations, affecting some 24,500 people.
33. In Warrap, intercommunal fighting caused the displacement of some 18,000
people and led to civilian casualties. Some 1.6 million people have remained
displaced internally, in addition to another 2.2 million in five nei ghbouring countries.
Heavy rains and floods further affected more than 1 million people in 8 of the
10 states since July, displacing more than 400,000 people. More than 19,000 refugees,
who returned spontaneously, were recorded in September and October, br inging the
number of returnees in 2020 to nearly 110,000. Hunger resulting from food insecurity
persisted in communities across the country. Insecurity, conflict and severe flooding
had a significant impact on livelihoods, decreased agricultural production and
impeded access to markets, in particular for those in urban areas.
34. Humanitarian access deteriorated, with ongoing hostilities negatively affecting
access and repeated acts of violence perpetrated against humanitarian workers and
assets.
35. In November, two South Sudanese aid workers were killed in separate incidents
in Pibor and Canal and Pigi, in Jonglei, while delivering critical nutrition services.
The incidents brought the number of humanitarian workers killed this year in South
Sudan to nine, thereby tripling the total number of humanitarian workers that had
been killed in 2019. A total of 124 aid workers have lost their lives since the conflict
broke out, in late 2013.
36. Numerous attacks on clearly marked humanitarian vehicles were observe d, with
at least nine ambushes causing injuries to humanitarian personnel and damaging
assets. In Renk and Bentiu, direct threats related to employment practices were issued
to humanitarian workers. In October, a boat convoy transporting food was ambushed
by armed actors in Lakes. One cargo vessel was sunk, and three of the cargo vessel
staff were shot. One person remains missing and is presumed dead. The resurgence
of armed conflict in parts of Central Equatoria also had an impact on humanitarian
operations.
37. A total of 103 incidents in which humanitarian access was impeded were
reported between September and November. Forty-five aid workers were relocated
owing to security or other concerns. The lifting of COVID-19-related restrictions on
movement eased internal travel, but aid workers still faced harassment and intimidation.
38. More than 6 million people were provided with life-saving assistance and
protection services between January and September. The figure represents 80 per cent
of the revised target of 7.6 million people targeted through the humanitarian response
plan for 2020, including those assisted through COVID-19-related response activities.
As at 30 November, $974 million has been secured against the $1.9 billion requested
in the humanitarian response plan, including more than $30 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund.
39. Illnesses such as malaria, measles and waterborne infections continued to affect
people in the rainy season. Vaccine-derived polio was confirmed in Warrap and
Western Bahr el-Ghazal in October, two months after Africa was declared free of wild
poliovirus.

20-16135

7/19

S/2020/1180

V. Implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
40. The Mission continued to provide a comprehensive response to threats to
civilians through key leadership engagement, community-level conflict resolution
initiatives and the progressively outward-facing posture of peacekeepers, along with
programming support aimed at enhancing stability and addressing conflict driver s.
Primary threats against civilians comprised killings, injuries, abductions and sexual
violence.
41. UNMISS continued its efforts towards returning stability to Jonglei and the
Greater Pibor Administrative Area by prioritizing complementary immediate - and
medium-term actions to prevent and mitigate further violence. For example, UNMISS
supported a dialogue held among Dinka Bor, Lou Nuer and Murle community leaders
in Juba, led by the Governor of Jonglei and the Chief Administrator of the Greater
Pibor Administrative Area, which resulted in an agreement to engage further at the
grass-roots level. The Mission provided substantive support to the High -Level
Committee, led by the Vice-President, James Wani Igga, to resolve intercommunal
violence in Jonglei and the Greater Pibor Administrative Area. A multi-agency
community violence reduction programme was planned with assistance from the joint
UNMISS-United Nations country team reconciliation, stabilization and resilience
trust fund, through which the Mission will join forces with other United Nations
entities and two international non-governmental organizations. The project, which
targets young people and other marginalized groups, is aimed at bringing
communities together to identify the root causes of conflict and develop interventions
to reduce violence and promote increased accountability.
42. In parallel, UNMISS conducted patrols to key violence-affected areas, in
particular in Jonglei. In Western Equatoria, where increased criminality and forced
recruitment by the National Salvation Front had been reported, UNMISS established
temporary operating bases to respond to emerging threats. The Mission reinforced its
presence in Central Equatoria following clashes in late September and in Warrap
following increased communal violence and attacks by young people on communities
along the Wau-Kawajena-Tonj Road. In addition, UNMISS conducted patrols in areas
of return, including in Greater Malakal; Akobo and Uror in Jonglei; and Lainya and
Yei in Eastern Equatoria, to create conditions conducive to resettlement. The Mine
Action Service responded to requests from various authorities and community
members for the removal of explosive ordnance from residential compounds, along
roadsides and in villages in greater Equatoria, Lakes, Unity, Upper Nile and Western
Bahr el-Ghazal.
43. In support of implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan at the grass-roots level, local conflict
management, reconciliation and the promotion of social cohesion, UNMISS
conducted 25 workshops, community dialogues, peace campaigns and dissemination
of local and national peace agreements, as well as capacity-building activities for
traditional authorities, women and young people. A total of 1,971 participants,
including 800 women, were assisted through such activities.
44. Building on the road map outlined in my report on future planning for the
protection of civilians sites in South Sudan (S/2019/741), and in order to enable an
expanded outward protection posture in violent hotspots, the Mission continued its
efforts towards transforming protection of civilians sites into internally displaced
persons camps under the jurisdiction of the Government, in line with chapter III of
the Agreement and on the basis of comprehensive security risk assessments. During

8/19

20-16135

S/2020/1180

the reporting period, the sites in Bor, Wau and Juba were officially redesignated as
internally displaced persons camps. The Mission will continue to fulfil its mandated
responsibilities to protect civilians, including through patrols in the vicinity of the
former protection of civilians sites. The Mission will also support the Government in
fulfilling its responsibility, in particular through support for the South Sudan National
Police Service. Furthermore, UNMISS will continue to support the unhindered
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the camps and retain readily deployable quick
reaction forces for emergency interventions.
45. In all three locations, the transitions were a result of close coordination and joint
planning between the Mission and humanitarian partners operating at the sites and
extensive engagement with relevant stakeholders, including the authorities in Juba
and the states, security forces and police, as well as with representatives of internally
displaced persons. In each case, the Mission signed a memorandum of understanding
with the respective State governors, ensuring their commitment to provide security
and protection to the internally displaced persons in the camps. In both Bor and Wau,
the Mission facilitated direct engagement between internally displaced persons and
the State governors to increase trust. Moreover, in Juba, the Mission, along with
partners, supported the drafting of an agreement on peaceful coexistence between the
internally displaced persons communities in the sites and the surrounding host
communities.
46. On 5 October, as part of efforts towards supporting authorities in assuming their
responsibilities for the provision of law and order in the newly redesignated internally
displaced persons camps, the UNMISS Police Commissioner signed an agreement on
operational coordination with the South Sudan National Police Service. The
agreement enables UNPOL to be co-located at police posts near the redesignated
internally displaced persons camps to continue to strengthen community policing
capacities, including through the provision of logistical support, technical assistance,
training, coaching, mentoring, monitoring and the conducting of coordinated patrols.
47. Building on the successful transitions and lessons learned, efforts are
proceeding in an equally inclusive and consultative manner towards preparing the
redesignation of the remaining protection of civilians sites in Bentiu and Malakal,
which host 130, 458 people.
48. The redesignation of the protection of civilians sites provided the military
component with a security dividend that will allow for a phased reduction of
uniformed personnel and enhanced force projection to protect civilians through more
mobile, robust, nimble and agile deployments. The expected recommendations of the
independent strategic review, along with an envisioned reinforcement of the UNMISS
rule of law component and reconfiguration of current policing expertise, will enable
the Mission to further enhance technical and advisory support to national actors in
order to re-establish the national criminal justice chain and ensure respect for the rule
of law, contributing to a protective environment and strengthening the government
capacity to protect civilians.
49. Similarly, UNPOL continued to expand its outward protection posture and
footprint beyond protection of civilians sites. A total of 661 confidence - and trustbuilding patrols, 64 short-duration patrols, 2 long-duration patrols, 11 dynamic air
patrols and 536 high-visibility patrols were conducted. A total of 1,274 UNPOL
patrols were gender-responsive.
50. The UNMISS force conducted 21,472 patrols, including 1,163 short -duration
patrols, 166 long-duration patrols, 127 dynamic air patrols and 28 riverine patrols. A
total of 5,399 patrols were conducted in and around protection of civilians sites.

20-16135

9/19

S/2020/1180

Rule of law and accountability
51. UNMISS continued to provide support for national accountability measures
regarding security incidents affecting protection of civilians sites. In all, 27 persons
suspected of being responsible for serious security incidents within the protection of
civilians sites were detained in UNMISS detention facilities. UNMISS referred
9 persons to national authorities for investigation and prosecution. The Mission
coordinated with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to deploy
assessment missions and mobile courts to Malakal, which continued.
52. On 25 November, UNMISS supported the military justice directorate of the
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces to deploy a team consisting of judges,
prosecutors and defence counsel to Bor and Bentiu to review and reduce the backlog
of pending cases for suspects held in military prisons.
53. To mitigate migration-related violence in Warrap and Western Bahr el-Ghazal,
UNMISS, in coordination with other partners, continued to advance the
implementation of a reconciliation, stabilization and resilience trust f und-funded
project. Specifically, UNMISS led comprehensive modalities planning and
preparation to ensure the establishment of a mobile special court. In addition to
investigating crimes, the mobile special court will serve as a rapid response
mechanism to deploy to hotspot locations to promote accountability at the onset of
violence and deescalate tensions during the impending migration season.
54. On 24 November, an integrated high-level consultation was held to raise the
awareness of and consult with the heads of each justice component from both states
on the mobile special court and to secure their concurrence to identify a dedicated
justice team.
55. In parallel, from 14 October to 18 November, UNMISS undertook consultations
across Western Bahr el-Ghazal and Warrap to raise the awareness of communities and
obtain their input on the mobile special court and on areas that required strengthening
to address challenges that had arisen during the previous migration. The consultations
will serve as the framework for an interstate conference enabling an agreement among
state representatives on strengthened mechanisms to assist with peaceful migration,
as well as a broader awareness-raising mechanism across the states with regard to the
modalities and operation of the mobile special court.
56. Following an initial desk review of the South Sudan criminal law framework,
UNMISS is supporting the South Sudan Law Review Commission to form a technical
working group to review and agree on proposed amendments to the Code of Evidence
Act, 2006; the Penal Code Act, 2008; and the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, 2008.
The consultative review is aimed at increasing the compliance of South Sudan with
international and regional standards and best practices and harmonizing all natio nal
criminal laws. UNMISS continued to coordinate with UNDP, the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women) and the
Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Welfare to develop a draft Family Law for
South Sudan, on which a stakeholder meeting was held on 11 November.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights violations
57. UNMISS documented a total of 134 incidents, including arbitrary killings,
abductions, conflict-related sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and detention (including
proxy detention), torture and ill-treatment, forced military recruitment and the looting
and destruction of civilian property. The incidents resulted in at least 212 civilian
casualties (126 killed and 86 injured), including at least 27 women and 19 children.
Of those incidents, 73 were attributed to self-defence groups; 10 to SPLM/A-IO; 8 to

10/19

20-16135

S/2020/1180

the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces; 9 to the National Salvation Front; 7 to the
South Sudan National Police Service; 5 to the National Secur ity Service; 1 to the
necessary unified forces; 1 to joint South Sudan People’s Defence Forces, South
Sudan National Police Service and National Prison Service of South Sudan personnel;
and 1 to clashes between the National Salvation Front and SPLM/A -IO. Attribution
for 19 other incidents is pending.
58. After the surge in subnational organized violence and associated human rights
abuses reported between May and mid-August, abuses documented during the
reporting period were reduced to levels comparable to those of the same period in
2019, presumably mainly a result of heavy rains and flooding in the regions usually
affected by such violence. However, heavily armed self-defence groups continued to
wreak havoc in locations such as Lakes and Warrap. An alarming increase in the
abduction of civilians by the National Salvation Front and other armed elements,
primarily for the purpose of forced military recruitment, was documented in the Yei
area of Central Equatoria. Also of concern were violations involving the g overnment’s
forced disarmament campaign in the Tonj region of Warrap state were of concern.
59. UNMISS continued to receive reports of censorship, harassment and arbitrary
arrest and detention by the National Security Service of journalists, activists and other
civilians expressing views that were critical of or dissented from those of the
Government. At least five journalists were arbitrarily arrested and detained in
connection with their professional activities during the reporting period.
60. Imposition of the death penalty remained of concern, in particular in the light
of inadequate safeguards to protect due process and fair trial rights. One execution
was documented during the reporting period, bringing the total number of confirmed
executions carried out in 2020 to three. During the same period, five death row
inmates were released after appeals processes launched by civil society actors.
61. In early September, at a district court martial held in Yei, which had been
launched in July, it was announced that 26 South Sudan People’s Defence Forces
soldiers had been convicted for their involvement in various offences committed in
the southern counties of Central Equatoria primarily between 2019 and 2020. The
figure included 13 soldiers convicted of rape and 4 of attempted murder and causing
grievous harm. Civilian courts in various locations convicted one Forces soldier of
murder and convicted four South Sudan National Police Service personnel, three
SPLA-IO personnel and one member of the Forces of sexual crimes against eight
underage girls.
62. UNMISS carried out 22 human rights due diligence policy risk assessments
before travel and material assistance was provided to non-United Nations security
forces in support of the implementation of the peace process.
Children and armed conflict
63. The number of children affected by grave violations decreased, from 55 to 23
(12 boys, 10 girls and 1 child of unknown sex).
64. Eight boys were verified as victims of recruitment and use and five girls were
verified as survivors of rape, five children (two boys and three girls) were abducted,
five children (three boys, one girl and one child of unknown sex) were victims of
killing and maiming (two children killed and three children maimed). One attack on
a health-care facility and three incidents of denial of humanitarian access were
verified. Incidents of military use of schools (two) and hospitals (one) by the South
Sudan People’s Defence Forces in Central Equatoria state were verified. Children
were most affected in Central Equatoria (seven girls), Western Equatoria (six boys
and one girl), Warrap (one boy, one girl and one child of unknown sex), Eastern
20-16135

11/19

S/2020/1180

Equatoria (two boys), Jonglei (one boy), Lakes (one boy), Unity (one boy) and
Western Bahr el-Ghazal (one girl).
65. Government security forces perpetrated violations that affected nine children
(four boys and five girls), including the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces (four
boys and three girls) and the National Security Service (two girls). SPLM/A -IO
perpetrated violations that affected eight children (five boys, two girls and one child
of unknown sex), the National Salvation Front (three girls), and violations against
three boys were unattributed, with two maimed by explosive remnants of war and one
abducted by an unknown group. An attack on a health-care facility was attributed to
SPLM/A-IO, while three incidents of denial of humanitarian access remain
unattributed.
66. The Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting supported the
establishment of six state-level technical committees in Central Equatoria, Jonglei,
Western Equatoria, Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, Lakes and Unity. Those committees
constitute the key state-level structures that oversee the implementation of the signed
Comprehensive Action Plan to end and prevent all grave violations against children
perpetrated by armed forces and groups.
Conflict-related sexual violence
67. UNMISS continued to observe concerning levels of sexual violence perpetrated
by the parties to the conflict, community-based militia or other armed elements
involved in localized and intercommunal violence. The Mission verified 12 incidents
of conflict-related sexual violence involving 15 survivors, including 9 girls. The victims,
whose ages ranged from 14 to 45 years, were subjected to rape (6), gang rape (5),
forced nudity (2) and attempted rape (2). Incidents were attributed to SPLM/A -IO (2),
the South Sudan National Police Service (2), the South Sudan People’s Defence
Forces (1), the National Security Service (2) forces under former SPLM/A-IO
Commander Major General Joseph Dongo (1) and self-defence groups (2), while
unidentified armed elements were responsible for 2 incidents.
68. UNMISS documented 14 additional incidents of conflict-related sexual violence
that took place before the reporting period, involving 41 survivors, including 4 girls.
Five incidents were attributed to self-defence groups, three to unidentified armed
elements, three to the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and one each to
SPLM/A-IO, the National Salvation Front and the National Security Service. It is
worth noting that self-defence groups in Jonglei were responsible for 63 per cent of
the incidents of conflict-related sexual violence.
69. On 18 September, the National Salvation Front issued a unilateral communiqué,
in which it committed itself to addressing conflict-related sexual violence and to
working in closer collaboration with the United Nations on the prevention of such
violence. On 20 and 21 October, the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces launched
a new standardized curriculum on conflict-related sexual violence during a training
of 25 Forces instructors, including three women, held in Juba with the technical
support of UNMISS. A committee composed of representatives of the Forces,
SPLM/A-IO, South Sudan Opposition Alliance and the Ministry of Defence met for
the first time on 27 October to discuss the consolidation of the Forces, as well as
SPLM/A-IO action plans for addressing conflict-related sexual violence. The unified
plan is expected to be launched before the end of 2020.

12/19

20-16135

S/2020/1180

C.

Creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
70. Continuing to support humanitarian partners, UNMISS conducted 66 long duration patrols and 1,163 short-duration patrols across the country to support the
delivery of assistance or the protection of humanitarian workers, including through
the establishment of temporary operating bases. The Mission provided force
protection to ]112 integrated missions, enabling access to high-risk areas. In addition,
it conducted 982 force protection patrols supporting convoys and humanitarian
partners, including non-governmental organizations.
71. The Mine Action Service responded to the requests of humanitarian
organizations to survey and remove explosive ordnance, such as the support provided
to clear a site to enable construction of a humanitarian hub in Kodok, Upper Nile. At
the request of the United Nations Children’s Fund, a primary school in Bentiu, Unity,
which had previously been a cantonment site, was assessed and in Gumuruk, Jonglei,
a drop zone was cleared to enable the World Food Programme to deliver food to
people in dire need owing to the flooding.
72. The Mine Action Service deployed 17 teams, which surveyed and released
513,190 square metres of land and destroyed 12,381 explosive items and 26,360
rounds of small arms ammunition.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and
the peace process
73. The Special Representative and his deputies continued to exercise their good
offices, engaging the parties and stakeholders to address critical outstanding issues
and maintain progress on the implementation of the Agreement. The Special
Representative engaged with Mr. Kiir, First Vice-President Machar and the four other
Vice-Presidents to promote the timely implementation of the Agreement. Through
active participation in the deliberations of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission and the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arra ngements
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism, the Special Representative urged the parties
to maintain momentum, while UNMISS also continued to provide logistical support
to the latter.
74. UNMISS continued its activities to expand civic and political sp ace and to
provide a foundation for the sustainable implementation of the peace agreement. As
a precursor to the commencement of the constitution-making process, on 13 and
14 October, UNMISS, UNDP, UN-Women and the International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance organized a workshop for women leaders on the
permanent constitution-making process. Women political leaders from the Gambia,
Kenya and Uganda shared insights on their respective national constitution -making
processes. The same partners convened a similar workshop for senior political leaders
on 18 and 19 November, at which the Minister of Defence, Angelina Teny, and the
Minister of Information, Communication Technology and Postal Services, Michael
Makuei Lueth, delivered keynote remarks.
75. On 28 and 29 October, UNMISS, the Ministry of Federal Affairs and the
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance organized a
consultative workshop to deliberate and finalize the development of a policy
framework on federalism.
76. In partnership with the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, UNMISS facilitated the work of the Strategic Defence and Security

20-16135

13/19

S/2020/1180

Review Board in a workshop held in Juba on 23 and 24 November to support the
presentation of the strategic security assessment called for in the Agreement, as well
as the development of related security sector documents.
77. UNMISS hosted seven radio programmes addressing critical issues, such as the
responsibilities of political parties in State-building, addressing economic crises,
strengthening the participation of civil society and reconstituting state governments,
among others. The programming contributed to opening the political space, soliciting
the views of diverse stakeholders on thematic issues, increasing engagement between
political leaders and the population and aiding in the dissemination of factual and
reliable information on the peace agreement and the peace process.

E.

Women and peace and security
78. Although UNMISS continued to engage with partners and stakeholders to
advocate implementation of the gender provisions of the Agreement, progress
remained limited owing to a lack of political will in meeting the 35 per cent quota for
women. The Mission advocated for the meaningful participatio n of women in all
UNMISS-supported forums and seminars. Skills and other capacity-building
workshops, such as those on advocacy and leadership, sought to enhance women’s
contributions to various peace processes.
79. The Mission, in collaboration with other United Nations partners, is providing
technical support to the National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission to conduct a gender needs assessment targeting former combatants and
collect data on former women combatants and programming r equirements. UNMISS
supported the training of police on gender equality, women and peace and security,
sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual violence and continues
to conduct community outreach to advocate gender-responsive prevention and
mitigation, in particular to address domestic violence in the context of COVID -19.
80. In partnership with UNDP and UN-Women, UNMISS contributed technical
advice and assistance to the launch in Juba, on 12 and 13 November, of the
Peacebuilding Fund project on gender mainstreaming in the security sector reform.
The project is aimed at supporting the reform process by facilitating the participation
of women and other marginalized groups in the design of security sector laws, policies
and practices. To advance the participation of women, as well as gender-responsive
security sector reform, the mission facilitated a session on lessons learned, covering
relevant strategies from Canada, Fiji and India, as well as from other peacekeeping
contexts.
81. The Mission held events to mark the twentieth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), focusing on the inclusion and participation of women in the
peace process.

VI. Mission staffing, the status of deployments and conduct
and discipline
82. As at 30 November, the number of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,662,
comprising 883 international staff members (245 women, or 27.7 per cent), 1,384
national staff members (198 women, or 14.3 per cent) and 395 United Nations
Volunteers (156 women, or 39.5 per cent).
83. Police strength stood at 1,627 of an authorized 2,101 personnel, comprising
522 individual police officers (166 women, or 31.8 per cent), 1,140 formed police

14/19

20-16135

S/2020/1180

unit personnel in six deployed formed police units (251 women, or 24.1 per cent) and
65 corrections officers (19 women, or 29.2 per cent).
84. Of the authorized 17,000 troops, UNMISS troop strength stood at 14,684 military
personnel: 233 military liaison officers (46 women, or 19.2 per cent), 422 military
staff officers (81 women, or 19.2 per cent) and 14,029 military contingent personnel
(677 women, or 4.8 per cent).
85. Briefings and training of trainers sessions on United Nations standards of
conduct, including on the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, were delivered
to 406 Mission and associated personnel. Refresher briefings on the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse were delivered to a further 383 Mis sion personnel.
Indirect training was provided on standards of conduct to 1,973 military contingent
personnel.
86. One risk management and outreach field visit was conducted to Yambio.
Notwithstanding COVID-19-related challenges, regular contact with field offices was
maintained. With the support of partners, risks of misconduct, in particular sexual
exploitation and abuse, remained under assessment, and remediation activities were
revised where required, to address identified risks.
87. In accordance with the applicable policy, all information on misconduct was
processed in a timely fashion. During the reporting period, 15 allegations were
recorded in the Misconduct Tracking System, including one allegation of sexual
exploitation and abuse. All identified victims of sexual exploitation and abuse
continued to receive support from the Mission’s Senior Victims’ Rights Officer.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and the security of
United Nations personnel
88. UNMISS recorded 79 violations of the Status of Forces Agreement between the
United Nations and the Government of the Republic of South Sudan concerning the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, compared with 36 in the previous reporting
period. Of those, 69 violations involved movement restrictions by the Government,
impeding the Mission’s ability to implement its mandate.
89. The Mission experienced an exponential increase in the number of access
denials of its patrols across the country. The increase wa s attributed to the Joint
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism of the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces
imposing a new condition: that all sharing of information and flight safety assurances
documents for the Mission’s ground and air patrols must be ack nowledged by its
headquarters in Juba. That additional stipulation resulted in delays, requiring the
Mission to either postpone or cancel a significant number of its planned patrols.
90. Notably, on three occasions, UNMISS patrols deployed from Juba to Lob onok
in Central Equatoria to set up a temporary operating base to deter violence and protect
civilians following clashes between the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and the
National Salvation Front were denied access by National Security Service person nel
outside Juba. In October, the Mission’s ground and air reconnaissance patrols were
repeatedly denied access to various parts of Western Equatoria because the Joint
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism headquarters in Juba had delayed or refused
to acknowledge the Mission’s sharing of information and flight safety assurances
documents. In addition, the local Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism in
Yambio refused to honour flight safety assurances for Mission flights for October

20-16135

15/19

S/2020/1180

even after they had been acknowledged by the Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism headquarters in Juba.
91. UNMISS engaged with senior Government officials and commanders of the
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and the Joint Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, highlighting that, under the Status of Forces Agreement, the Mission
shares information on patrols with the Government for coordination purposes and is
not required to obtain approvals for implementation of its mandated tasks. Nevertheless,
security personnel across the country continue to deny access to Mission patrols.
92. The whereabouts of two national staff members arrested in 2014 remain
unknown. The Government has neither granted UNMISS access to them nor provided
information on their condition, despite regular requests.
93. While some progress was noted in the approval of backlogged visas for
UNMISS personnel, recurring delays in visa approvals for individual uniformed
personal negatively affected Mission activities.
94. UNMISS continues to notify the Government of the violations through notes
verbales and regular engagement. A monthly matrix of the incidents prepared for the
Security Council is shared with the Government.

VIII. Performance evaluation of the uniformed components
95. Only a limited number of evaluations were conducted owing to COVID -19related prevention and mitigation measures. Evaluations of five units were submitted
to United Nations Headquarters, covering mandate comprehension and support,
command and control, training and discipline, sustainment and health. They included
four infantry battalions and one level 2 hospital, all rated as satisfactory overall.
Observed good practices for some of the units included COVID -19 prevention
measures, the inclusion of women officers in all operational tasks and, for one unit,
emphasis on regular casualty evacuation training. Each unit received specific
recommendations for improvement through performance improvement plans to
further enhance efficiencies.
96. Two formed police units were evaluated, with both units rated satisfactory.
During the inspections, the units showed outstanding command and control abilities,
as well as an elevated level of discipline and wide-ranging actions taken to address
COVID-19.

IX. Observations and recommendations
97. I acknowledge the incremental progress towards the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and take note of the agreement on the allocation of state- and county-level
government portfolios as a positive development. I commend the President, Salva
Kiir Mayardit, and the parties for reaching that important milestone. However, key
peace implementation benchmarks remain behind schedule. I urge the parties to
accelerate efforts towards expeditiously appointing officials to the agreed portfolios,
reconstituting the Transitional National Legislative Assembly, ensuring the
meaningful participation of women, reaching a settlement on the appointment of the
governor of Upper Nile and addressing other outstanding critical tasks.
98. I appreciate the vital role played by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to encourage the Revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity to make progress and renew my call for an expeditio us appointment of a
16/19

20-16135

S/2020/1180

permanent chair of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission. I
commend the Peace and Security Council of the African Union for its consistent
support for South Sudan and efforts to implement the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.
99. I welcome the commitment of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement to
abiding by the 35 per cent quota for women, although I remain concerned about the
non-adherence to the gender provisions of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan thus far, as is notable in the
appointment of state governors. I reiterate my call upon all parties to fully implement
the gender provisions, including in all appointments to state and local government
positions and in the reconstituted Transitional National Legislative Assembly.
100. I commend the parties for continuing to adhere to the ceasefire, but I remain
concerned about South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and SPLM/A-IO operations
against the South Sudan Opposition Movements Alliance and vice versa and the
prevailing insecurity that perpetuates dire consequences for the civilian population,
including displacement, human rights violations and conflict-related sexual violence.
I am encouraged by the process in Rome led by the Community of Sant’Egidio, in
concert with the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and efforts towards
integrating the South Sudan Opposition Movements Alliance into Ceasefire a nd
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism structures
as from 1 January 2021.
101. I remain worried about the implementation of the transitional security
arrangement, which has effectively stalled, while a series of defecti ons within the
parties has led to increased instability and undermining of trust. The nexus between
slow implementation of political benchmarks and delayed security provisions has
been one of the factors that have allowed intercommunal violence throughout South
Sudan to continue unchecked. The timely and substantive implementation of the
Agreement, including of the transitional security arrangement, is imperative to
sustaining momentum. I strongly urge the parties to demonstrate the political will
necessary to advance the implementation of the transitional security arrangement,
including by urgently committing resources to graduate the first group of necessary
unified forces and by articulating an overarching security sector policy.
102. I note with concern the significant increase in violations of the Status of Forces
Agreement experienced by UNMISS and stress that the Mission is not required to
obtain approvals to undertake patrols and other mandated tasks. I am, however,
encouraged that the Government has taken steps to remove bureaucratic impediments.
I underscore the imperative that the Government ensure unimpeded access to
UNMISS to conduct all its mandated tasks.
103. The level of violence committed against humanitarian partners and assets
remains high and is unacceptable. Killing aid workers, injuring others and destroying
property is abhorrent. The Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity
needs to take decisive steps towards securing humanitarian personnel, operations and
assets, as well as towards quickly and thoroughly investigating incidents and bringing
perpetrators to account.
104. In this difficult context, I commend humanitarian partners for scaling up their
response operations, express appreciation to donor partners for their life -saving
support and urge the international community to continue to contribute generously to
close the existing funding gap, which, as at 5 November, stood at $836 million secured
against the $1.9 billion requested in the humanitarian response plan.
105. Despite the above-mentioned challenges, improved political stability across
South Sudan has generated cautious optimism. With the ongoing redesignation of
20-16135

17/19

S/2020/1180

protection of civilians sites as camps for internally displaced persons, the
Government, with technical support from the Mission, has assumed ownership and
leadership of the sites. I commend UNMISS for leading a consultative process
towards a durable solution for internally displaced persons, including through close
coordination with humanitarian partners and engagement with government authorities
and internally displaced persons, and I count on the redesignation of the remaining
sites in an equally inclusive and transparent manner. In this regard, the Mission
expects an overall streamlining of police and military components resulting from the
protection of civilians sites’ redesignation process. Resources that had previously
been dedicated to the sites will become available to be redeployed to conflict hotspots
where the need for protecting civilians is the greatest. In addition, freed resources can
be repurposed to provide robust capacity-building and technical support to rule of law
and justice chain institutions to address impunity for serious human rights violations,
in particular against children and women. It will also allow for the civilian component
to better accompany the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity by
providing strategic support, including in security sector policy efforts and elections
preparation. Consequently, I endorse the progressive, innovative and forward-leaning
efforts of UNMISS towards continuing to adjust its posture in view of changes in the
operating context in support of the Government and the needs of the people of South
Sudan.
106. The outcome of the independent strategic review, established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2514 (2020) for the possible reconfiguration of the
UNMISS mandate and its civilian, police and military components to account f or
developments in the peace process, will be shared with the Council shortly.
107. I convey my appreciation to the uniformed and civilian personnel of UNMISS
and to my Special Representative, David Shearer, who, despite the challenges posed
by the pandemic, continue to implement the United Nations mandate for South Sudan
tirelessly. I also thank the troop- and police-contributing countries. I am grateful to
the United Nations country team and humanitarian partners for providing vital
assistance throughout the country, often in an insecure environment. Lastly, I
acknowledge the indispensable efforts of the Heads of State and Government of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development; the Chair of the African Union
Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat; the Executive Secretary of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, Workneh Gebeyehu; the Special Envoy of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, Ismail Wais; and the Community of
Sant’Egidio towards ensuring peace in South Sudan.

18/19

20-16135

S/2020/1180

20-16135

19/19
