S/PV.9159

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9159th meeting

Friday, 21 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Ravindran
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Letter dated 8 October 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/747)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (S/2022/761)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-64581 (E)
*2264581*

S/PV.9159

The question concerning Haiti

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): As co-penholders on resolution 2653 (2022),
the United States and Mexico would like to jointly
thank Security Council members for their thorough and
expedient review and consultations. By adopting this
resolution, we have taken an important step to help the
Haitian people. After robust and inclusive negotiations,
I feel this resolution is truly reflective of Council
consensus. Even operating under the accelerated time
frame, we were able to incorporate the views of all
members of the Council.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Letter dated 8 October 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/747)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(S/2022/761)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Haiti to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/765, which contains a draft resolution submitted
by Mexico and the United States of America.
I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2022/747, which contains the
text of a letter dated 8 October 2022 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council, and document S/2022/761, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2653 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
2/8

21/10/2022

This resolution is an initial answer to the calls for
help from the Haitian people. They want us to take
action against criminal actors, including gangs and
their financiers, who have been undermining stability
and expanding poverty in their vibrant society. In
response, the Council sanctioned one of the country’s
most notorious gang leaders — a gang leader whose
actions have directly contributed to the humanitarian
crisis that has caused so much pain and suffering to the
people of Haiti.
We are sending a clear message to the bad actors
that are holding Haiti hostage. The international
community will not stand idly by while they wreak
havoc on the Haitian people. Sanctions are at their
most effective when they are targeted specifically
towards bad actors and allow humanitarian aid to reach
civilian populations. The resolution we adopted today
accomplishes both those objectives. We also worked
to incorporate clear, measurable and well-defined
methods to periodically review the efficacy of these
sanctions, and I thank my colleagues for their strong
voices on this matter. We have laid a great foundation
for future action to stymie criminal actors and those
who finance and support them.
But I want to stress that today’s adoption of this
resolution is only the first step. We have much more
work to do. Now that the Council has taken deliberate
and decisive action to send a strong signal to the
gangs and those who fund them through new targeted
sanctions, we must build on those efforts to address
another immediate challenge — to help restore security
and alleviate the humanitarian crisis in Haiti.
As I said in the Council on Monday (see S/PV.9153),
the United States and Mexico are working on a draft
resolution that would authorize a non-United Nations
international security assistance mission in order to
help improve the security situation and enable the flow
22-64581

21/10/2022

The question concerning Haiti

of desperately needed humanitarian aid. That is not only
a response to a request from the Government of Haiti,
but also one of the options that the Secretary-General
recommended that the Security Council consider in the
light of the deteriorating security environment. While
today’s actions were important, we must keep doing
everything we can to help the Haitian people in their
time of need.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the
members of the Security Council for their participation
in the negotiations process and for their constructive
comments, which undoubtedly helped to strengthen
the recently adopted text of resolution 2653 (2022). We
welcome the unanimous nature of the adoption, as it
reflects the unity of the Council on a complex topic that
is not free of controversy. In the face of the crisis in
Haiti, the Security Council has given a clear signal that
the violence must stop and cannot remain unpunished.
Equally important is the establishment of an
embargo on any transfer of arms to non-State actors
who are terrorizing the civilian population and
destabilizing the country. As we have repeatedly
stated, arms trafficking is a scourge for many countries
and must be vigorously combated. This resolution is a
step in that direction and sends a clear signal that the
Security Council will not stand idly by and will take
action — not only against those who generate violence
in the streets but also those who support, sponsor and
finance them.
With this resolution, the United States and Mexico
seek to support Haiti in its struggle to establish
peaceful coexistence and democratic governance.
Mexico reiterates its full solidarity with our sister
nation of Haiti and urges the members of the Council
to continue to work on the required next steps to meet
that objective.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
On Monday, we discussed the situation in Haiti in
this Chamber (see S/PV.9153). The members of the
Security Council expressed their deep concern that
Haiti is deeply engulfed in multiple political, security
and humanitarian crises. They stressed the need for
a political solution to ease the people’s suffering and
unanimously called for robust action to crack down on
criminal gangs in the country.
Just now, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2653 (2022), imposing sanctions

S/PV.9159

on Haitian criminal gangs, with travel bans, assets
freezes and arms embargoes, translating the Council’s
consensus on curbing gang violence, protecting the
Haitian people and restoring security and social order
in Haiti into practical actions. China welcomes that.
China has always called for caution on the use or
threat of use of sanctions in international relations,
regardless of the circumstances. However, considering
the urgency of the current situation in Haiti and the call of
its people, China was the first in the Council to propose
targeted sanctions against Haitian criminal gangs. Our
proposal was quickly echoed by other Security Council
members and countries of the region. We commend
the United States and Mexico, as co-penholders, for
preparing the resolution and for seeking the views of
others in the process in order to continuously improve
the text. We also commend other Council members
for their serious and responsible manner during the
consultations and for working jointly to enable this
resolution to be adopted on the basis of consensus.
We hope that resolution 2653 (2022) will send a
clear signal to the criminal gangs in Haiti, urging them
to immediately cease their misdeeds, stop harming
the people and desist from chipping away at Haiti’s
economic, social and security foundations. We hope
that this resolution will send a clear signal to Haitian
political factions, requiring them to immediately stop
colluding with criminal actors, stop partisan fighting,
put the interests of the country and the people first and
reach a consensus on the nation’s political structure and
transitional arrangements as soon as possible. We also
hope that resolution 2653 (2022) will send a clear signal
to the Haitian people that the Security Council has been
paying attention to their suffering and will do its utmost
to help them eradicate the scourge of gang violence and
remove this crushing weight off their backs.
Haiti is on the brink of collapse and is in dire need
of the help of the international community. After the
adoption of this resolution, the Council will continue
to monitor developments in Haiti. We hope that in the
next stage of its deliberations on the Haiti issue the
Security Council will continue to uphold the spirit
of consultation and solidarity, adhere to the principle
of results-oriented and practical results, guided by
consideration of all views and prudent decision-making.
China is ready to play an active and constructive role
in that regard.

22-645813/8

S/PV.9159

The question concerning Haiti

Ms. Juul (Norway): Norway voted in favour of
resolution 2653 (2022). The alarming situation in
Haiti, as discussed in our recent Council meeting (see
S/PV.9153), requires action from the international
community. The Haitian people deserve our full
attention, assistance and dedication. And today, in
response, the Council is establishing its first sanctions
regime since 2017. This sanctions regime is an important
stepping stone for reducing the abilities of criminal
actors and gangs to continue their violence and illegal
activities, which paralyse Haiti.
Our considerations focused on creating a robust
and well-designed regime — one that will act as a
constraint and deterrence from sexual and genderbased violence, the recruitment of children to armed
groups and criminal networks and human rights abuses
that threaten the peace and security of Haiti and the
region. It is important that the sanctions regime also
includes a robust humanitarian carve-out.
Let me also highlight the significance of the
Council’s recognition of the need for fair and clear
procedures, and the Council’s intent to authorize the
Ombudsperson to remedy that issue. Observing due
process is instrumental to maintaining the efficiency
and legitimacy of any sanctions regime. Norway has
advocated for stronger safeguards of due process for
years, and it is significant that the Council has now
made so clear its intent to authorize the Ombudsperson
to ensure due process beyond the sanctions regime of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities.
It is important that the Council maintain its
intention and continue its engagement on due process.
We welcome that step in assisting the people of Haiti.
Norway stands ready to continue discussions on another
draft resolution, which the United States highlighted,
and which, we hope, will swiftly be shared with the
wider membership.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour
of resolution 2653 (2022), put forward by the United
States of America and Mexico, which establishes a
Security Council sanctions regime against criminal
gangs in Haiti.
Agreeing on an acceptable text did not come easily
to the Council. We note that the sponsors changed their
4/8

21/10/2022

initial approach, which was not very constructive,
and ultimately took into account the concerns of
other Council members over the excessive haste
around this issue and the related artificial deadlines.
The consensus on the resolution shows that, even in
the current circumstances, the Security Council can
achieve good results if we act responsibly, respect
each other’s positions and have a genuine interest in
finding a compromise in order to resolve challenging
problems together.
We hope that, in putting forward this sanctions
resolution, Washington and Mexico acted on the basis
of the shared view of regional actors, many of which,
frankly speaking, are under no lesser pressure from
organized crime than Haiti. In that regard, the United
States is by no means on the safe side.
Despite our support for the resolution, we are
not convinced that international restrictive measures
will provide an adequate response to the range of
problems that are plaguing Haiti. A lasting solution
must therefore lie in an inclusive political process,
socioeconomic development and the eradication of
poverty and inequality. State institutions in Haiti must
be strengthened and be free from external dictates,
which have permeated almost all the country’s
modern history.
We note that the problems of illegal arms flows and
organized crime in the Caribbean are not confined to
Port-au-Prince. Other actors, some of them quite highprofile, are also involved in the complex cross-border
networks, and they must not be overlooked by the
sanctions committee that is being established and its
panel of experts, which must act strictly within their
respective mandate.
In any case, restrictive measures must not lead to
Haiti’s exclusion or hinder its political process. Security
Council sanctions are not a punitive tool, but rather
one of the strongest means in the Security Council’s
toolkit to respond to emerging threats. International
restrictions should be regularly reviewed to assess their
appropriateness and be eased or completely lifted, as
required. We will continue to closely monitor that.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): In the light of the truly
desperate situation in Haiti and the responsibility of
the Security Council to respond with urgency, Ireland
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2653
(2022) to establish a new sanctions regime for Haiti.
22-64581

21/10/2022

The question concerning Haiti

Today, for the first time in five years, the Security
Council adopted a new sanctions regime — one that is
focused on the gangs strangling Haiti and its people.
Ireland expresses strong appreciation for the efforts
of the United States and Mexico, as the co-penholders,
in drafting the resolution, as well as for working with
fellow Council members on their perspectives on the
draft text. In that regard, we welcome the inclusion
of sexual and gender-based violence as a stand-alone
designation criterion.
Ireland also believes that it is essential that the
Council include the strengthening of fair procedures
and due process for delisting in this new regime. As
a member of the Group of Like-Minded States on
Targeted Sanctions, Ireland welcomes the specific
reference to the Ombudsperson in the nineteenth
preambular paragraph. We now look forward to concrete
progress on extending the mandate of the Office of the
Ombudsperson to Haiti and all other sanctions regimes.
Currently, the Ombudsperson is mandated to
review cases only from the ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
sanctions list. We have now added the Haiti sanctions
regime. That leaves 14 other sanctions committees for
which there is no independent system to review delisting
requests. We all have an interest in ensuring that United
Nations sanctions respect international due process
standards, and the time has now come for the Security
Council to substantively address those concerns.
While this resolution, and the sanctions regime that
it creates, cannot alone resolve the multifaceted crisis
engulfing Haiti, it is a significant action of the Security
Council in support of the Haitian people. The adoption
of the resolution demonstrates the seriousness with
which the Security Council is prepared to act against
criminal gangs and for the people of Haiti. Ireland
will continue to do its part to ensure that the Council
continues to assume that responsibility.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Kenya thanks Mexico
and the United States for their consultative efforts in
drafting resolution 2653 (2022), which we just adopted.
Kenya voted in favour of the resolution after making
every effort, as one of the three African members of the
Security Council (A3), to ensure that it had a review
mechanism and that it targeted those compromising
Haiti’s peace. We thank the co-penholders and other
members for welcoming the A3’s proposals.

S/PV.9159

This new resolution is one of the most tangible
measures that the Security Council has recently taken.
It represents the first real step upon which to build a
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Haitian crisis.
It is a strong signal of the Council’s determination to
stand with the people of Haiti against the gangs and
their sponsors.
Kenya welcomes the specific and measurable
benchmarks for the review of the sanctions. Such
benchmarks will enable the Security Council to assess
progress, with a view to progressively adjusting the
measures as the situation improves. We congratulate
the Council on taking that step, and we advocate for its
continuation in other files.
The implementation of the sanctions will rely heavily
on the cooperation and support of the international
community, particularly States of the region. It will
require information-sharing and coordination to ensure
that those responsible for the suffering of Haitians are
held accountable.
Further assistance to strengthen the capacity of
Haitian institutions remains critical. In that regard,
we welcome and support the recent initiatives by the
Caribbean Community and other friends of Haiti.
We reiterate our strong support for a Haitian-led
and Haitian-owned solution to the current political
crisis. We have every confidence that, despite their now
divergent views, the Haitian political leaders will find
the will and the capability to build consensus and chart
a viable way forward for Haiti.
As Kenya, we will continue to take a keen interest
in the safety, security and prosperity of Haiti and to
offer every support within our means, even after our
tenure in the Security Council ends in December. I
reaffirm Kenya’s solidarity with the people of Haiti and
our commitment to the protection of Haiti’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): By
voting in favour of resolution 2653 (2022), the United
Arab Emirates reiterates its support for the Security
Council’s efforts to directly address the difficult
security situation in Haiti through targeted sanctions
against armed gangs.
The violence and terror that armed gangs impose
on the people of Haiti remain completely unacceptable.
Establishing a sanctions regime against armed gangs
in Haiti through resolution 2653 (2022) is an important

22-645815/8

S/PV.9159

The question concerning Haiti

step in addressing such acts. In particular, the arms
embargo to prevent the supply of illicit weapons to
armed groups is very much needed.
The sobering briefings and reports we heard
about the dire humanitarian situation in Haiti,
including the widespread food and water insecurity,
the lack of electricity, fuel and medical support, and
now the resurgence of cholera, were nothing short of
devastating. We therefore welcome the fact that the
resolution incorporates the proposal made by the United
Arab Emirates and supported by Council members
for a humanitarian carve-out to minimize the impact
of sanctions measures on humanitarian assistance
to Haiti. We applaud the co-penholders’ constructive
approach to that critical issue, which is reflected in
the resolution’s unanimous adoption today — a muchneeded sign of the potential of Council unity.
In addition, we welcome the co-penholders’
inclusion of the proposals we made to give increased
recognition to the important roles played by the
countries of the region and regional organizations,
including the Caribbean Community, to support Haiti
on its path to establishing peace and stability.
We also welcome the inclusion in resolution
2653 (2022) of proposals for strengthened sanctions
designation criteria to address the horrifying reports of
sexual and gender-based violence by armed gangs. We
fully endorse the language included in the text. We look
forward to future discussions to establish clear, welldefined and achievable benchmarks for the eventual
lifting of sanctions when the time is right.
We recognize that resolution 2653 (2022) is not a
panacea that will put Haiti back on the path to peace.
We once again urgently call on all stakeholders in Haiti
to work towards an inter-Haitian political settlement.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): We remain deeply
concerned about the situation in Haiti. We truly hope
that resolution 2653 (2022), which we adopted today,
will have an effective impact on the ground. We believe
that prohibiting the transfer of small arms and light
weapons and ammunition to non-State actors in Haiti
and imposing appropriate measures on those engaging
in or supporting violence, including an assets freeze and
a travel ban, may help curb the escalation of violence in
the country.
The Charter of the United Nations provides the
Security Council with a set of instruments to maintain
6/8

21/10/2022

international peace and security, sanctions being
among them. Sanctions can be legitimate and effective
when they are multilaterally created, strategically
targeted and designed to have minimal impact on the
civilian population.
However, as with any coercive measure, they may
have unintended consequences. That is why, during
the negotiations, Brazil strived to include monitoring
mechanisms, listing criteria, humanitarian exemptions
and carve-outs and the conditions for lifting sanctions.
We consider all those parameters to be essential
for applying such measures in a responsible and
effective manner.
We welcome the fact that a humanitarian carve-out
was added to the text. Humanitarian actors must be able
to provide assistance to civilians in need. If they are
not able to perform humanitarian and impartial relief
actions due to over-compliance or the criminalization
of their activities, the most vulnerable will be the first
ones to endure the consequences. While recognizing
the specificity of each sanctions regime, we encourage
that the carve-out adopted today be replicated in other
situations in a horizontal manner.
The Security Council has come some way in
improving its sanctions regimes, with the transition
to targeted sanctions, the creation of humanitarian
exemptions and the establishment of monitoring
mechanisms through panels of experts. However, there
is an ongoing need to ensure minimum standards of due
process, in line with international human rights law
instruments. Due process challenges continue to affect
the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions. In that
regard, we regret the fact that the Council missed the
opportunity to address that challenge in this resolution.
The extension of the mandate of the Ombudsperson
to the current sanctions regime or the creation of an
equivalent review mechanism to independently examine
delisting requests could have strengthened due process
in United Nations sanctions. Ultimately, that step
would also have strengthened the effectiveness of the
Council by minimizing the risk of having its decisions
challenged in domestic or international tribunals by
listed entities and individuals.
We take note that the reference to the Office of
the Ombudsperson was incorporated as a preambular
paragraph. We look forward to further advancing the
important issue of due process, both in this sanctions
22-64581

21/10/2022

The question concerning Haiti

regime and in other United Nations sanctions regimes
in a horizontal manner.
Setting up a new sanctions regime in the Security
Council after five years is a huge responsibility and sets
the precedent for future action in the Council. That is
why we would have welcomed a more transparent and
interactive process of negotiations in order to fully
address all outstanding issues. Although we believe that
more could have been achieved if we had had more time
for an in-depth debate, we hope that resolution 2653
(2022) will encourage and foster positive developments.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that Brazil’s
commitment to Haiti is unwavering and that we are not
oblivious to the suffering of the Haitian people.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): Ghana welcomes the
unanimous adoption of the Haiti sanctions resolution
(resolution 2653 (2022)), which reflects the Security
Council’s collective determination to implement
targeted sanctions against persons who engage in or
support gang violence and criminal activities in Haiti.
Ghana voted in favour of the resolution, and we wish to
acknowledge the co-penholders, Mexico and the United
States, for their efforts to accommodate the input of the
various delegations and ultimately forge a consensus.
The people of Haiti are confronted with serious
challenges as gangs continue to perpetrate kidnappings,
murder and gender-based and sexual violence and to
destroy the lives and livelihoods of ordinary Haitians.
We hope that the measures we just adopted in the
resolution will help to resolve the challenges and signal
to the criminal actors perpetrating those heinous acts in
Haiti that they will be held to account.
Responding to the humanitarian and security crisis
in Haiti is what we owe as Council members to ordinary
Haitians, and this sanctions resolution targeting gangs
is only one such step. We therefore welcome the
strengthened benchmarks in the resolution that will
enable the Council to make an overall assessment of
the effectiveness and appropriateness of the measures
it contains.
We are particularly glad that the measures in the
resolution also aim to ensure that there are no adverse
humanitarian consequences for ordinary Haitians,
especially given the unfortunate experience of the
sanctions imposed on Haiti in past decades.
Haitians have suffered enough, and our actions
as a Council must not in any way worsen the plight

S/PV.9159

of the Haitian people. We recognize that the effective
implementation of resolution 2653 (2022) will require
the support and cooperation of all Member States,
particularly actors in the region. We therefore call
on neighbouring countries and others in the region
to support the Council in the implementation of
the resolution.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm our
unwavering commitment to Haiti and all Haitians.
We seek only the best interests of the people. While
we reiterate the call for Haitian-led and Haitian-owned
solutions to the current crisis, we will continue to do
our utmost to support the people of Haiti.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): The Council met on Monday to discuss the
situation in Haiti (see S/PV.9153). France is extremely
concerned about the situation on the ground, in
particular the suffering of the local population. France
stands with the Haitian people and will continue to
mobilize support for Haiti. That is why France welcomes
the unanimous adoption in resolution 2653 (2022), on a
new sanctions regime to put an end to the unacceptable
actions of the gangs in Haiti.
France welcomes the constructive spirit in which
the negotiations were conducted. We hope that the
Council will continue along that path and take the next
essential steps towards establishing peace and security
in Haiti.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.
Gabon voted in favour of resolution 2653 (2022)
and is pleased that it was adopted unanimously by
the members of the Security Council. We voted for it
because it is our responsibility to safeguard the Haitian
people from chaos and restore the hope that has been
swamped by insecurity and distress. We voted for it
because the text of the resolution aims to neutralize
the gangs sowing terror in Haiti, dry up their financing
and supplies, protect the civilian population, especially
women and children, and create the conditions
necessary to respond to a cholera outbreak. We hope
that the text that we just adopted will be immediately
implemented in both the letter and spirit, and above
all we believe that the Council has just sent a strong
message of solidarity to the Haitian people to say that
we stand with them. We reaffirm our commitment to
respecting Haiti’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.

22-645817/8

S/PV.9159

The question concerning Haiti

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Rodrigue (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the United States of
America and Mexico, the co-penholders of the Haiti
dossier in the Security Council, for drafting the text of
resolution 2653 (2022) and having successfully led the
negotiations that enabled its unanimous adoption. I also
want to express my gratitude to all delegations for their
constructive engagement in the negotiations, which
contributed to the final version of a text in which the
interests of all are taken into account. In that regard,
I would like to express the deep appreciation of the
Government and the people of Haiti to them.
The Haitian delegation welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2653 (2022), which establishes
a specific sanctions regime that targets the leaders of
armed gangs operating in Haiti and all who support
them by providing them with financing, arms and
ammunition and any other resources. The restrictive
measures consist of travel bans on such individuals,
freezes of their assets and an arms embargo on non-State
actors. The sanctions are based on well-defined criteria
outlined in resolution 2645 (2022) — engaging in
or supporting gang violence, engaging in criminal
activities, committing human rights violations,
obstructing the delivery of humanitarian aid or essential
commodities to the population and undertaking other
activities that undermine the peace, stability and
security of Haiti and the region.
There is no doubt that those measures will help curb
the violent and deadly activities of the armed groups
that are proliferating in the country and causing mass
casualties and displacement. They send a powerfully
deterrent political message that is likely to change the

8/8

21/10/2022

behaviour of actors operating on the ground. By taking
this step, the Council has shown its determination to
support the Haitian people in their return to a secure
environment and political stability. It demonstrates the
resolve of the international community to play its role
in resolving the serious multidimensional crisis facing
my country in order to show the Haitian people that
they are not alone and that their cries of distress have
been heard.
It is certainly a step in the right direction. However,
we must continue on this path to achieve a lasting
result. However effective they may be as a deterrent,
sanctions alone will not be able to eliminate the high
level of violence that is plaguing Haiti and causing
untold suffering to the population, particularly women
and children. The Haitian National Police — as we
have said time and again — lacks the capacity to deal
with the threat posed by armed groups. In his report of
13 October, the Secretary-General acknowledges that
“[i]mproving national policing capacities alone will
not be sufficient to bring about the transformative
change Haiti needs to sustainably address the
multifaceted security crisis” (S/2022/761, para.79).
In that regard, the Haitian Government’s request for
robust support in the form of a specialized force that
would assist the Haitian National Police deserves
careful consideration by Council members.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
that we are in a race against time, as we are dealing
with a country that is sinking deeper into an abyss
of violence and insecurity every day. The lives of
thousands of people are at stake. With every day that is
lost in providing an adequate response to the situation,
too many innocent victims are also lost.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

22-64581
