TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

29 SEPTEMBER

197 1

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . . . . . . . .. . ,. . , . . . . . . . . . . . ,.

1

. .. . .. . . . . . . . . , , . . .. , . , . . .. , . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Senegal:
Report
of the Special Mission of the Security Council established under
resolution 294 (1971) (S/10308 and Corr.1)
. . ,. . . . .. , , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint
by Guinea :
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea
. , . . .. . . , . . . . . . ..
established under resolution 295 (197 1) (S/l 0309)

8

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

Adoption

of the agenda

586)

SlPV.1586

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a Unjted Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiozzs and Decisions of the
Securify Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SIXTH
Held in New York on Wednesday, 29 Se@nber
President: Mr. Tom NAKAGAWA

(Japan).

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 586)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint by Senegal:
Report of the Special Mission of the Security Council
established under resolution 294 (1971) (S/10308 and
Corr.1).
3. Complaint by Guinea:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
Republic of Guinea established under resolution
295 (1971) (S/10309).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Senegal
Report of the Special Mission of the Security Council
established under resolution 294 (1971) (S/10308 and
corr. 1)1
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the agenda we
have just adopted the Security Council will first resume its
consideration of the complaint by Senegal with the report
of the Special Mission of the Security Council established
under resolution 294 (1971) which is before the Council in
document S/10308 and Corr.1.
2. In accordance with the decision taken by the Council at
its 1569th meeting on 12 July, when it began its consideration of this complaint by Senegal, I propose to invite the
representative of Senegal to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, as I have received information
that His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Senegal wishes to take part in the consideration of the
report of the Special Mission. There being no objection, I
1 Subsequently issued as Official Records of the Sect&y
Year,Special Supplement No. 3.

1911, at 3.30 pm,

invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Senegalto take a
seatat the Counciltable.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

TcVentY-sixth

MEETING

Council,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. N. Gaye
(Senegal)took a placeat the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT: The Chairmanof the SpecialMission
of the Security Council, His Excellency AmbassadorSevilIaSacasa of Nicaragua,will introduce to the Council the
report containedin documentS/10308 andCorr.1.
4. Mr. SEVILLA-SACASA (Nicaragua)(Chairmanof the
Special Mission) (interpretation porn Spanish): Mr. President, may I first present my compliments to you and
congratulate you on assuming the Presidency of the
Council. Your actions have won our gratitude and well
deserveour tribute, We all expected, in the light of your
abilities and your tremendousprestigein the international
community, that this would indeedbe so.
5. Mr. President,Membersof the Council, Mr. SecretaryGeneral, I have the honour to submit for the CounciI’s
consideration the report of the SpecialMissionestablished
under Secmity Council resolution 294 (1971) of 15 July
1971. The Missionwas requestedto carry out an inquiry
into the facts communicatedto the Security Councilby the
Government of Senegal,to examinethe situation alongthe
border between Guinea(Bissau)and Senegal,and to report
to the Security Council, making any recommendations
necessaryto guaranteepeaceand security in this region.
6. It was a great honour for me to presideover such an
important Mission and to carry out my duties in the
honourable company of the following distinguishedambassadorswhom I hold in the highestesteem:Mr. J. GBrardof
Belgium, Mr, F. Magengeof Burundi, Mr, R. Ishikawa of
Japan, Mr. E. Kul’agaof Poland and Mr. R. Jouejati of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
7. I welcome this opportunity to expressmy thanks to
them for their effective and perseveringco-operationin the
accomplishmentof the Mission’stasksduring the days we
spent in Senegal,both in Dakar, the capital of that country,
and in the Casamance
area alongthe frontier where we had
to conduct our inquiries.
8. It is possiblethat this Missionwill take its placeamong
the most important that the Security Council has ever
appointed becauseit was the first to which the Council
granted the power to formulate any recommendation
necessaryfor guaranteeingpeaceandsecurity in the region.

Council and to the Secretary-General for the confidence
they have placed in us.

9. We must again thank the distinguished military experts
whb accompanied us: Colonel C. De Wilde of Belgium,
Commander S. Sota of Burundi, Colonel S. Kazmierski of
Poland, Colonel Fayez Bayassi of the Syrian Arab Republic
and Colonel Julio Gutierrez of Nicaragua, who performed
their tasks with a true sense of responsibility.

17. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Nicaragua for introducing the report in such an excellent
manner, and I ahO wish to thank him for his kind words
addressed to me.

10. We are also grateful to the Secretariat staff who were
of constant assistance to us. I would like to thank them in
the presence of the Secretary-General and to mention the
names of Mr. Dantas de Brito, Principal Secretary;
Mr. Hubert Noel, Senior Political Affairs Officer; Mr. Macaire Pedanou, Political Affairs Officer; Mr. Hector Fep
nandez, ’ Information Officer; the interpreters, Miss N.
Chlepner , Miss S Porzio , Miss M. Santocchia, Mr. J . Fliom ,
Mr. J. Pearl and Mr. J. Perea, and the Verbatim Reporters,
Mr. M. Parsont, Mr. G. Temin and Mr. F. Montes.

18. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): The representa.
tive of Nicaragua, who is a great figure indeed h interaa.
tional circles, has just presented the report of the Mission
sent to investigate the frontier incidents in Senegal with
eloquence and conciseness. As a member of this Mission,
my delegation wishes to reiterate the great appreciation it
has for his excellent performance, and his skill in con.
ducting the work of such an important Mission. His
qualities were such that the members of the Mission wislled
to voice their appreciation in the body of the report,

11. As we left New York for Dakar we were well aware of
the special character of our mandate and the responsibility
we had assumed from the very moment we had agreed to
take part in the Mission. We knew full well that we would
have to carry out different types of activities and tasks in
different places-, interrogations in some places, on the spot
investigations, and exchanges of views with the members of
the Mission and their military advisers-to mention only a
few of the many tasks which we had to perform. We knew
that on our return we should have to have the time
necessary to prepare our report for it is not always easy to
combine differing viewpoints and criteria in such delicate
matters.

19. The substance of the matter must yet be discussed,
but at this stage my delegation feels bound to pay tribute
to the highly co-operative attitude of the Senegal Govern.
ment and people towards the Mission, whose work ~8s
facilitated in every way and enabled to proceed smoothly
and without hindrance. We are sincerely grateful to them.
We also wish to acknowledge the efforts of the Secretary.
General and the Ambassador of France, who was President
of the Council when the Mission was established, in setting
up the Mission and facilitating the performance of its task,
20. The report illustrates the repercussions of this abnorma1 situation on neighbouring independent African coun.
tries.

12. The Mission regrets that it did not receive an invitation
from the Government of Portugal to visit Guinea (Bissau) in
order to carry out the activities related to our task in that
sector.

21. Last, but not least, it is the responsibility of the
highest organ of the United Nations to deal with this
matter, and this is a task which puts it to a severe test. Let
us hope that the work of the Mission will not have beenin
vain.

13. We would like to stress the magnificent hospitality we
received in Senegal and the services and facilities of all
kinds placed at our disposal for the discharge of our
mandate.

22. Mr,

TERENCE
(Burundi)
(interpretation from
My delegation was a member of the Mission
which the Security Councildecidedto sendto the Republic
of Senegal,His Excellency AmbassadorKosciusko-Morizet
of France, President of the Security Council at the time,
Secretary-GeneralU Thant, the Chairmanof the Mission
and the President of the Republic of Senegal,all these
distinguishedfiguresdid everything in their powerto ensure
the success
of the Mission.

French):

14. The report which we have submitted and which is now
before you is made up of various parts, namely: Introduction, Tasks of the Special Mission, Conclusions and Recommendations. In addition, the Annexes contain Reports of
the military experts of the members of the Special Mission
and Documents submitted to the Special Mission by the
Government of Senegal.The recommendations are based on
what we heard, observed and deduced and also on the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council.

23. On behalf of my Government I shouldlike first of ali
to expressmy gratitude to the Presidentof the Republic
of
Senegal,His Excellency Mr. LBopold Sadat Senghor,who!
thanks to his enlightened humanitarianismand with the
assistanceof his Government did everything possible
to
facilitate the performanceof the Mission’stask, whichwil’
now submit its report. My delegationalsowishesto extend
its sincerecongratulationsto His Excellency Sevilla-Sacasa,
the Chairmanof the Mission.

15. We submit this report to you for your consideration
with the satisfaction that our duty is done and with the
knowledge that we discharged our mission in a constructive
spirit, inspired by the desire for peace whose maintenance is
the primary aim of our Organization governed as it is by
principles which we must uphold.
16. Our report is in your hands. We ask you to study it
with attention and care. We feel that any resolution which
the Council may decide to adopt must be based on the
principles of the Charter and on the lofty idealsof this
Organization. We repeatour thanks to the Presidentof the

24. We know that despitethe efforts of the Government
of Senegal,the conditions in which the Missionhadto do
its work were not alwaysthe easiestbut asthe FrenchsaYI
to the stout-heartednothing is impossible.Despitecertain
2

I

obstacles which may have arisen, the Mission was able to do
its job with brilliant success.

recommendations
are undoubtedly of great value to the
Security COLUIC~~ in its task of ensuringpeaceand security
in that region,

25. I should therefore like to express my delegation’s
gratitude to the President of the Mission and all its
members for the work they did so well.
26. The PRESIDENT:
Senegal.

I cdl

33. In he view of my delegationthe SpecialMission’s
report clarifiesa numberof importantpoints.

upon the representative of

27. Mr. GAYE (Senegal) (interpretation from French):
First of all I should like to thank YOU, Mr. President, for
having allowed me to participate in this meeting of the
Security Council. I should also like, on behalf of my
Government, to thank the Security Council itself for the
report of the SpecialMission on the situation affecting the
peopleof Senegalwho live on the border between Senegal
andGuinea (B&au).

34. First, it hasestablishedthat the territory and people
of Senegalhaveboth beenthe subjectof actsof aggression
by the Portuguese
authoritiesin Guinea(Bissau),actswhich
haveviolatedthe territorial integrity of Senegal.
3.5. Second, the Special Mission has shown that the
Governmentof Senegal,in its relationswith the neighbouring Territory of Guinea(Bissau),is acting correctly and in
completeconformity with its obligationsas a Memberof
the United Nations.Indeed, it has acted with restraintin
the face of muchprovocation,

28. The dispatchof the SpecialMissionfully reflected the
Security Council’sconcern to impIement the provisionsof
resolution 294 (1971) of 15 July 1971. It also meetsa
desirealready expressedby Senegal.The Head of State of
Senegal, in January 1970, approached the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations precisely to secure his
agreementto dispatch a specialmissionto conduct inquiries
and to determine once and for all, in the eyes of world
opinion, the truth about the daily infringements committed
by Portuguesetroops on Senegalese
territory.

36. Third, it hasbeen madeclear that liberation movements of Guinea (Bissau),such as the PAIGC,z are not
usingSenegalasa basefor launchingoperationsagainstthe
Portugueseauthorities, and that the aid which the SenegaleseGovernmentgives to these movementsis clearly
compatiblewith international law, particularly sincethe
struggleof the peopleof Guinea(Bissau)hasbeendeclared
a legitimateone by the United Nations. The violationsof
Senegalese
territory by Portugalare therefore completely
illegalandinexcusable.

29. For the SenegaleseGovernment the report that the
SpecialMission has just introduced constitutes testimony.
In July last I had an opportunity to state [1569th meetingJ
that it is becauseof our faith in the Mission of the United
Nationsthat my Government turns to the Security Council
which we all know, is responsiblefor the maintenanceof
international peace and security. It is also responsiblefor
preventing and, if necessary,repressingany acts of aggressionby any State againstany Member of our Organization.
I was,however, careful to make it clear that the purposewe
had in mind was not so much the repressionof acts of
aggression
againstour peoplebut rather the immediateand
final cessationof these acts. It is again this sameattitude
that my Government intendsto take now.

37. Last, and this bringsus to the heart of the matter, the
whole situation, asthe SpecialMissionhasindicatedin its
report, is a resultof Portugal’scontinued unwillingness
to
grant the African peoplesunder its rule their inalienable
right to self-determination
andindependence.
38. My delegationhas,in other contexts, often expressed
the view that the problemsof southernAfrica mustbe dealt
with as a whole; that the intransigentminority regimesof
that area which supporteachother must,together,be confronted with all the coercivepowers,short of the use of
foree, that areat the disposalof the Security Council.We
would completework towardsthat end.
39. Meanwhile,however, the specific southern African
problems,and that of Guinea(Bissau),have to be dealt
with. Today we have before usnot only the report of the
SpecialMissionon the situationwith regardto Senegal,
but
alsothe report of the SpecialMissionto the Republicof
Guinea. As far as the questionof Senegal’scomplaint iS
concernedmy delegationbelievesthat the Security Coun.cil
mustnow take positiveactionunderthe Charter.

30. My Government, which has carefully studied and
welcomesthe report of the SpecialMission, hopesthat its
recommendationswill be satisfactorily applied. It believes,
with the membersof the SpecialMission, that the problem
which confronts us in Guinea(Bissau)can be solvedonly if
the right to self-determination is restored to the peoplesof
that Territory.
31. Once again,on behalf of my Government, may I thank
the membersof the Security Council and yourself, Mr. President, who are associatedin the efforts to find suitable
measuresto ensure that we can safeguard, protect, and
provide security for personsand property.
32. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation wishes to
congratulate the Chairman and the membersof the Special
Mission on their conscientious and efficient work in
completing the inquiry into the situation along the border
between Guinea (Bissau) and Senegal. The findings and

40. Portugal’s refusal to act in accordancewith the
Declarationon the Granting of Independenceto ColOnid
Countriesand Peopleshasled to the colonial warsbeing
waged by that country against the peoples under its
domination.It hasbeenestimatedthat more than 150,000
Portuguesetroops are involved in these wars, which the
Security Councilcannot ignoreevenif it hasdoneSO in the
past.Portugal’sefforts to crusha just strugglefor liberation
from oppressiverule are the causeof the ever-widening
2 P&do Af$xno da Independtkcia da Guini e Cabo Verde.

3

circle of violence directed against the independent African
States ,which border the Territories under Portuguese rule.

dor Sevilla-Sacasa, thanks to his firmness, his tenacity, his
goodwill, his diplomatic skill, joint recommendations and
conclusions were successfully drafted. We offer him our
sincere thanks for all that he has done, and Mr. Gerard’s
thanks also to all the other members of the Mission.

41. My Government wonders how many acts of aggression
must be committed and how many hundreds of thousands
of people must be involved before a threat to international
peace and security can be said to exist. This is the third
rime that the Security Council has had to censure Portugal
and call upon that country to cease its violations of
Senegalese territory and its acts of aggression against the
Senegalese people. It is obvious that, unless the Government of Portugal is convinced that the Security Council will
take coercive action, another round of condemnations and
appeals will have no more effect than in the past.

4’7. The fact that the Mission was able to accomplish
successfully the task entrusted to it by the Council wasalso
due to the warm welcome it received in Dakar, above all
from His Excellency President Senghor, and from the
Government of Senegal, especially I-Iis Excellency the
Minister of Foreign Affairs, whom I have the honour and
privilege to welcome here.
48. Mr. KU$AGA (Poland) (interpretation from French):
Sir, I hope that you will allow me to make two comments
that I should like to offer in my capacity as a member of
the Special Mission, whose report has just been presented.
These comments do not deal with the substance of the
problem. I shall discuss that at a later stage of our
deliberations,

42. My delegation wishes to submit for consideration by
the Council a course of action which it believes will result
in bringing peace to that troubled area.
43. Looking through resolutions which this Council has
adopted over the years against Portugal because of its
aggression against various Member States of this Organization, I have failed to find a single reference to a
reaffirmation by the Council of the rights of the people of
Guinea (B&au), the people of Angola and the people of
Mozambique to self-determination and independence in
accordance with the Charter, the Universal Declaration of
Human
Rights and General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV), and I bdicve
that the least tbis Council can do
in this particular case, es~lcsciallysince it has been drawn to
our attenti.on that it is the question of Guinea (Bissau)
,wh.ich .i?, poisoning relations in West Africa, would be to
rcitft’irm some of the basic courses of action which the
Ger~‘~:il AsUl>ml>@has i~~Pl~IXovet1
by large ma.jorities.

49. My first comment is to convey my thanks to His
Excellency, Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa, the Chairman of the
Mission. Today, he has introduced the report of the Mission
with the verve which characterized his Chairmanship of the
Special Mission and. which made my participation in the
work of the Special Mission a rich experience and a great
pleasure.
50. I should also like, once again, to convey my thanks to
the Government of Senegal. I had the honour and the
pleasure of doing this personally at Dakar where I had the
opportunity of offering my thanks to His Excellency the
President, Mr. Senghor, His Excellency the President of the
Council of Ministers, His Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, the other members of the Government and
the regional and local authorities. I take the greatest
pleasure in repeating these thanks today.

44. My delegation would suggest, therefore, that this
Council, ii1 addition to reaffirming or affirming that the
people of Guinea (B&au) have the rights enunciated in
resolution 15 14 (XV), call for an. arms embargo against
Portugal so lony as these wars continue in Africa. It is
inconceivable that Member States of this Organization
should be engaged in arms traffic which is helping to
maintain colonial oppression in Africa at a time when
colonialism is no longer valid in. any context. An arms
ernbargo would help to save the lives of countless thousands
of Africans. It would also enable this Organization to regain
the measure of self-respect and dignity which it seems to
have fost since the adoption of the Charter.

51. I repeat that I reserve my right to speak later in the
course of the debate.
52. Mr. PRATT (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, my delegation adds its voice to yours and that of other delegations
which have preceded me in the discussion of this subject
and expresses its deep and sincere thanks to the President
of the Special Mission, His Excellency Guillermo SevillaSacasa of Nicaragua, and to the delegations of Belgium,
Burundi, Japan, Poland and the Syrian Arab Republic for
the detailed report they have submitted to the Council and
the conclusions and recommendations they have offered.
These delegations, together with their military experts, have
approached their task with astounding objectivity and
provided the Council with a report that will undoubtedly
command the respect of all.

45. The Security Council should call upon Portugal to
allow a special mission, to be appointed by itself or by the
General Assembly to go to the Territories to conduct for
itself an impartial investigation of conditions there in order
to ascertain exactly what the peoples of those areas want.
We can. no longer remain indifferent in the hope that
perhaps something will happen, when we know very well
that nothing will, unless we start a course of action.

53. In the debate on the question of Senegal’s complaint
against Portugal, which took place in July this year [156961
to 1572nd meetings] my delegation pointed out f1571sr
meetings] that the Republic of Senegal wasnot at war With
Portugal and never had been. It also stressed that that
Republic had the right to live in security within its defined
boundaries. We have not departed from that position. The

46. Mr. LONC;ERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpretation from
fi@~ch):
My delegation was a member of the Special
Mission whose report we ha.ve received today, I know from
our
representative on the Mission, Mr. GBrard, that an
excellent spirit prevailed, Decisions were sometimes diffcult to t&e, but thanks to the Chairmanship of Ambassa4

report before us has more than adequately substantiated
the fact that Portugal, operating from Guinea (Bissau), has
been molesting the inhabitants of the Casamance region and
impinging on the sovereignty of their State. It has gone far
to convince us, without attempting to do so, that members
of the Portuguese army have been conducting raids and
attacks on Senegal; that they have been shelling Senegalese
villages from Guinea (Bissau); that on numerous occasions
Portuguese aircraft have violated with impunity the air
space of Senegal, and that, as a recent development in the
ever-expanding process, the Portuguese are laying antipersonnel and anti-tank mines within Senegal, which, as we
have said before, cause death, devastation, loss of life and
property and untold misery.
54. The psychological fear resulting from these attacks is
of such magnitude that thousands of civilians live in
constant dread of death or mutilation while additional
thousands have left the region to settle in the quieter areas
of the country. But a people cannot endure such a situation
indefinitely, Meanwhile, approximately 70,000 refugees
from Portuguese terrorism have fled into Senegal where
they contribute to the burden of that country. It has been
estimated that the cost of aiding these refugees to settle,
the inclusion of their children in the schooling system and
the procurement of medical treatment amounts to $4 million every year.

58. We learnt from the report that no less a person than
President Senghor himself assured the Special Mission that
these liberation movements do not maintain military camps
in his country. They are under strict injunction not to
launch any attack from his country, nor are the combatants
allowed to enter his territory with arms. The great and
renowned President said that the type of stations he
permitted them to have and maintain were surgical depots
where their wounded could be treated,
59. From this it can clearly be seen that the recent
mine-laying activities on the part of Portugal are intended
not only to compel Senegal to close its frontiers and
thereby hinder movements of the nationalists, but also to
deprive the sick and wounded of the opportunity of
healthy recuperation.
60. The Special Mission saw much evidence of hostilities
during its visit to the frontiers. At Ziguinchor they were
shown weapons of various typzs ranging from explosives
and hand guns to a rocket launcher which had fallen from a
raiding Portuguese aircraft.
61. We are impressed with the considerable amount of
investigating work done by the Mission and its military
experts. Whether the inquiries took place at Santiaba
Mandjack, where a civilian minibus was blown up by mines,
or at Sare N’Diaye, where two land rover-type vehicles met
with a similar fate, or at the Balo Kounda bridge, where
bags of TNT with set charges were discovered in time, to
mention only a few, the seriousness of purpose with which
the Mission carried out its task is laudable.

55. Senegal does not mind having to make such sacrifices
to aid African brothers oppressed by the colonialist
Government of Portugal. As a serious member of the
Organization of African Unity and one which is convinced
that Africa will be united in the future, Senegal is
committed to provide support for the liberation movements
recognized by that Organization. These liberation movements represent nationalist manifestations among a longsubjected people, a people who see no future under the
present system and government. Would anyone in his right
senses, therefore, blame loyal African Governments for
lending support to such movements?

62. The conclusions of the Mission’s report leave no
doubts in our minds that units of the Portuguese armed
forces stationed in Guinea (Bissau) frequently cross over
the frontier into Senegal to raid, pillage and burn property,
and take life in the Senegalese villages. Even after the
passage of resolution 294 (1971) there was evidence that
Portuguese troops were still carrying out outrages on
Senegalese soil in defiance of this organ. Where then lie the
obligations of a Member State of the Organization when it
flouts with impunity the decisions embodied in the
Council’s resolutions? This is exactly what Portugal has
been doing.

56. The Government of Senegal has entered into talks
with Portugal for the simple reason that it wishes to bring
about a dialogue between that country and the nationalists
who spearhead the liberation movements in Bissau. Senegalese authorities have made it abundantly clear that Portugal
should change its narrow colonial policy, a policy which
was discarded by the imperialist Powers of the West,ern
world long ago, a policy which has been driving the peoples
in Territories under Portuguese domination to open warfare
against Portuguese rule. Had hopes been given to these men
that they would share in the decision-making processesof
their own land, my Government has no doubt that the
approach of these desperate men would have been different ,

63. In paragraph 126 of the report in question, the
military experts, after their inquiry at the village of
Kandjenou, arrived at the following conclusions:
“(i) The evidence examined at Kandjenou proves that
the village was attacked and that the attack was
particularly devastating;
(ii) The attackers used individual military weapons;
(iii) Judging from the results of the operation and from
the weapons used, it is possible that this attack
could have been made only by a properly trained
force equipped with suitable weapons and provided with a safe refuge near at hand .”

57. Since Portugal has not listened to reason, Senegal, in
common with other African States, had no choice but to
give the support required by the OAU to the freedomfighters. In this regard, it accords some amount of
recognition to the PAIGC, under Mr. Amilcar Cabral, which
is in control of a huge part of Guinea (Bissau), and to
FLING,J another nationalist movement.
3 Frente da Luta pela Independihcia da Chink dita Portuguesa.

64. On the basis of circumstantial evidence provided, the
military experts have reached the following further conclusions:
“(b) Several persons testified that a group of soldiers
crossed the border into Senegalese territory and made an
5

72. I wish to join the other speakers in expressing our
heartfelt thanks to Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa for his
leadership. I also wish to express our deep gratitude to the
Government of Senegal, which is represented here by His
Excellency, Mr. Amadou Karim Gaye, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Senegal, for the great hospitality,
co-operation and assistance extended to the Special Mission
with a view to facilitating its work.

armed attack against Bagame in daylight on 30 July 197 1.
One person testified that he had seen a Portuguese
(white) in uniform and bearing a weapon who had
violated the Senegalese frontier.
“(c) The statements made established that the shelling
by heavy artillery of Senegalese territory on 25 July
1971, came from Guinea (Bissau). It was pointed out to
the Special Mission that only Portuguese armed forces
possessed heavy artillery in this area.

73, Mr. SEVILLA-SACASA

(Nicaragua)

(interpretation

from Spanish): May I in my first words of this further

“(d) In other cases it was found that mines had been
laid in Senegalese territory causing the death of individuals and material destruction. The Special Mission
examined the sites of the explosions and took note of the
damage caused.”

statement offer a very cordial greeting to His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Senegal.
I should like to tell him that his presence, which is so
agreeable to us, recalls the meeting we had with him in
Senegal, his great country where we were given the utmost
assistance-as indeed we had expected-in carrying out the
task entrusted to us in all serenity.

65. The list of incidents initiated by Portuguese forces are
indeed numerous. In 1969, a total of 37 incidents of a
bellicose nature was recorded. In 1970, it had increased to
62. Between January and July of this year, we note that the
catalogue has expanded to include the dastardly action of
mine-laying. In all, so far, 68 distinct incidents have been
recorded.

74. I wish to offer my very sincere and warm thanks to
the Ambassadors of the Syrian Arab Republic, Burundi,
Belgium, Poland and to the President, the Ambassador of
Japan, who presides over our discussions with such dignity,
for their kind words about the rkport which I have just
introduced on behalf of the Special Mission of the Security
Council which went to Senegal to discharge its mandate
from the Council. They ail know that for me it was a great
honour to share such a special international responsibility
with distinguished colleagues who command my esteem and
affection, a mission marked with the pressing responsibility
of safeguarding peace and security in the region of Africa
where we carried out our task.

66. Since Portugal cannot be made to comply with
resolution 15 14 (XV) of the General Assembly and all the
declarations of this Organization, my delegation would have
no difficulty in co-sponsoring, without condition, a resolution incorporating the recommendations of the Special
Mission.
67. We would have asked the Council to invoke Chapter
VII of the Charter but have refrained from embarrassing
Portugal’s NATO allies, some of whom are seated around
this horseshoe table today.

75. I wish to offer my thanks also to the Ambassador of
Sierra Leone for the very kind reference that he just made
to me.

68. The least the Council can do is to adopt a resolution
along the lines of the Mission’s recommendations. We
should not allow friendship, personal considerations or
sectarian interests to numb our feelings for fair play, our
understanding of justice and our concept of the brotherhood of man.

76. In addition to the satisfaction that I have derived from
completing this task, there is also the honour that I feel this
afternoon in hearing the tributes paid to me by very dear
friends and colleagues who have spoken in this forum of
international peace and security.
77. Members of the Security Council, as I said in my first
statement, our report is in your hands.

69. The PRESIDENT: I should like to make a statement
not as President of the Security Council but as the
representative of JAPAN.

78. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): I should like to congratulate the
Special Mission of the Security Council and its Chairman,
,the distinguished Ambassador of Nicaragua, on the brilliant
fulfilment of the task entrusted to the Special Mission by
the President of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral under the terms of the Security Council’s decision.

70. Japan had the pleasure of serving as a member of the
Security Council’s Special Mission to Senegal in the person
of Ambassador Ishikawa. We are very happy at this fact,
because we attach much importance to the problem with
which the Special Mission was asked to deal. The work of
the Special Mission was not easy, but the Mission succeeded
in fulfilling its task, thanks to the most able leadership of
its Chairman, His Excellency Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa and
also to the spirit of harmony and co-operation displayed by
its members.

79. We have listened with great satisfaction to the statement of the Chairman of the Special Mission, and we shall
study in detail the written report of the Special Mission,
but at this stage my delegation would like particularly to
note the fact that the Security Council has reinstated the
practice of sending out missions of this kind composed of
members of the Council, and is thus gradually returning to
a practice envisaged by the United Nations Charter and the
rules of procedure of the Security Council.

71. My delegation believes that the report submitted by
the Special Mission wilI certainly be useful in helping the
Security Council in its deliberations on this question and in
helping it to arrive at a decision.
6

80. As the United Nations organ bearing primary responsibility for the maintenance and strengthening of international peace and security, the Security Council is fully
empowered by the relevant Articles and provisions of the
Charter to take independently any action it deems necessaryfor the careful, detailed investigation and study of acts
of aggression and to adopt appropriate measures to do away
with such acts, including recourse to the relevant provisions
ofthe Charter, in both Chapter VI and Chapter VII.
81. Unfortunately, in past years, during the coldest phases
of the cold war, serious departures were permitted from the
Charter and from the rules of procedure. Procedures and
decisions were imposed which were contrary to and in
violation of the Charter. This previous practice was very
much to the liking of some, and there is a certain desire to
continue it, by treating it as a device that has established
itself over a considerable length of time, although everyone
knows that this device is not in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter, that it is contrary to the Charter.
82. Consequently, we note with great satisfaction that
there has recently been a revival of the practice of forming
Security Council missions to carry out the direct and
immediate tasks relating to the maintenance and strengthening of international peace entrusted to them by the
Security Council. I remember that, at first, there was, I
should say, a very heated dispute in the Security Council,
whenour distinguished colleague, the Ambassador of Syria,
wasPresident of the Council. Some expressed great doubts
when it became necessary for the Security Council to
consider the item concerning PortugaI’s aggression against
the Republic of Guinea. Certain members of the Security
Council brought up the question of the Secretary-General’s
selecting individual persons at his discretion to be sent to
the scene of the crime, to the place where the aggression
had occurred. However, under the wise guidance of the
then President, Ambassador Tomeh, and with the active
support and participation of many other members of the
Security Council, a view prevailed which wasin accordance
with the Charter. It was decided that the President, in
consultation with the Secretary-General, should constitute,
form and determine the composition of, a special mission
to be sent to Guinea, consisting of five members of the
Security Council. That was done, and it was a good
beginning.

to halt aggression-and will for such purposes have to send
to the scene a mission consisting of members of the
Security Council and not one formed in any other way.
85. We are deeply convinced that a kind of renaissance is
taking place in the practice of the Security Council. The
revival of the Charter’s provisions and the adoption of a
policy of strict compliance with the Charter will help to
enhance not only the role of the Security Council but also
the effectiveness of the United Nations as a whole in
strengthening international peace and security, curbing
aggressorsand stopping aggression.
86. That is why the Soviet delegation thought it desirable,
at this stage of the Council’s discussion of the report of the
Security Council’s Special Mission to Senegal, to make this
official statement and to express its deep conviction that
this practice will also help us to find ways to solving the
problem of so-called peace-keeping operations. The position
of the Soviet Union on the matter is well known: we
believe that the United Nations and the Security Council, as
the organ primarily responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, should be strictly guided
by the provisions of the Charter and that the Security
Council should be the main organizer and executor of all
measures planned and applied by the Organization in acting
to strengthen peace, in carrying out what is known as
“peace-keeping operations”.
87. Mr. KOSCIUSKO.MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
from French): I should merely like to say a few words
since, as President of the Security Council when the Mission
was appointed, I shared with the Secretary-General the
formidable responsibility of deciding on its composition, its
task and its dispatch in accordance with the resolution that
had been adopted and, of course, after consultations with
the members of the Council. I am all the more at ease,
therefore, in saying that I am very pleased that the mission
was sent and I am very pleased with the report it has
submitted. I should like to associate myself with those who
have already done so in conveying our warm congratulations to the members of this mission, starting with its
Chairman, Ambassador SevillaSacasa. As the Ambassador
of the Soviet Union, I consider this is an extremely useful
practice which may have very beneficial results for the
United Nations and the prestige of the Security Council.
Undoubtedly, in such matters one cannot say that there are
precedents or more precisely that a decision taken in one
particular case is necessarily the obligatory decision in
another instance. In fact each case is sui generis, which
means that the membership and balance of missions may
differ in each particular case.There is nothing which says in
advance that a mission shouId be composed of three, five or
six members. That is a question which should be determined In the light of circumstances and which should be
weighed by the President of the Security Council after
consultations with the Secretary-General and, of course,
with the consent of the Council. In my judgement, what is
absolutely essential in a Mission of this kind is that it
should act on behalf of the international community and, if
I may use the term, that it should be really depoliticized. It
has in its charge the interests of the international community; it speaks on behalf of the Security Council; its
constituent members are no longer the representatives of

83. Subsequently, that precedent was reaffirmed by the
dispatch of a second mission to Guinea consisting of
members of the Security Council, and finally, we have a
third instance of the dispatch of a special mission consisting
of members of the Security Council, this time to Senegal,
to conduct an on-the-spot investigation of aggressiveacts by
Portugal
against Senegal
84. Thus, the Council has adopted a correct policy, that of
sending missions to the scenes of aggression, not missions
made up of anybody chosen at the whim of this or that
group of members of the Security Council, or of individual
Personalities, but highly authoritative official missions
backed by the Security Council and its decisions. I believe
that in future, if the need arises, the Security Council will
have to use this procedure, this practice-if appropriate, if
the need arises for an on-the-spot investigation or for action
7

take his seat at the Council table in order to continue his
participation in our discussion without the right to vote,

their various countries, but the representatives of the
United Nations as a whole, and they act objectively and
conscientiously. In the case in point I believe that the
Mission which went to Senegal has discharged its functions
in this spirit and that is why we are happy to offer it our
warm congratulations today.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. Abdoulaye Tour4
(Guinea)took a placeat the Council table,

93. The PRESIDENT: Ambassador George Tomeh of
Syrian Arab Republic, one of the two members of our
Special Mission, is going to present to the Council the
report contained in document S/10309. I give the floor to
Mr. Tomeh.

88. Mr. SEVILLA-SACASA (Nicaragua) (interpretation
from Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me
to express my gratitude to my distinguished friend the
representative of France, who presided over the Security
Council during the month of July, not for the country but
for the honour he conveyed, not on his friend, the
Ambassador who is now addressing the Council, but on my
country, Nicaragua, in appointing me a member of the
Special Mission of the Security Council that was to visit
Senegal charged with a mandate of overriding importance.
Of course I shall always be grateful to the representative of
France for this honour and to our esteemed SecretaryGeneral, but I am much more grateful for the privilege they
so kindly accorded me in appointing me to preside over
that Mission, in which, as my colleagues will recall, we all
acted as chairmen, because this proved to be the best way
of discharging our task.

94. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): On behalf of
Mr. Julio C. Carasales, representative of Argentina, and
myself I have the honour to present the report of the
Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea
established under Council resolution 295 (1971) as published in document S/10309, dated 15 September 1971,
[The speakerread out the contents of the report.]

95. I wish to draw attention to the composition of the
Special Mission following the complaint submitted to the
Security Council by the Permanent Representative of
Guinea (S/IO280]
and the unanimous adoption on
3 August of resolution 295 (1971). This is set out in the
Introduction to the report, paragraph 7 of which states:

89. I would remind my colleague from France that one
afternoon in July when I was saying goodbye to him I said
“Thank you, Mr. President. I assure you that we will
discharge our duty with a deep conscientiousness and with
a high sense of responsibility”. And now, as we return and
submit our report I can tell the Ambassador of France, the
former distinguished President tif the Security Council who
appointed us in July as members of this Mission, that we
fulfilled our duty with a deep conscientiousness and with a
genuine sense of responsibility.

“At the 1576th meeting of the Security Council held
on 26 August 197 1, the President of the Council stated
that as a result of the consultations held, he had been
authorized to make a statement expressing the consensus
of the Council as follows:
‘It is the consensus of the Security Council that the
Special Mission called for in resolution 295 (1971)
should be composed of two members of the Council
instead of three. The Special Mission will proceed to
Conakry to consult the Government of the Republic of
Guinea on its complaint and will report back to the
Council as soon as possible .’ ”

90. Once again, I thank my good friend and colleague the
ambassador of France.
91. The PRESIDENT: Since there are no further speakers
I take it that members of the Council would wish to take
time to study the report and the statements which have just
been made, and thereafter engage in consultations before
fixing a date for the further consideration of this question.
Accordingly, I would propose that the Council now passto
the next item on its agenda, it being understood that
consideration of the complaint of Senegal would be
reviewed at the appropriate time.

Paragraph 8 continues:
“The consensus was approved by the Security Council
without objection. On the same day, the President of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General issued a note
(S/10229) stating that in view of the consensusadopted
by the Council, it had been decided that the Special
Mission to the Republic of Guinea would be composed of
Argentina and Syria and that the Mission would be
accompanied by the necessarystaff from the Secretariat.”

It was so decided.
Complaint by Guinea

96. As to the tefms of reference and procedure, they are
defined in paragraphs 10 and 11, They read:

Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
Republic
of Guinea established under resolution
295 (1971) (S/10309)“

“The terms of reference for the Special Mission wereset
out in paragraph 2 of Security Council resoiution
295 (1971) as follows: ‘To consult with the authorities
and to report on the situation immediately’. In the
consensusstatement approved by the Security Council at
its 1576th meeting on 26 August, it wasprovided that the
Special Mission would consult the Government of the
Republic of Guinea on its complaint and would report
back to the Security Council as soon as possible.

92. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council at the 1573rd meeting on 3 August,
when it began its consideration of this complaint by
Guinea, I propose to invite the representative of Guinea to
4 SubsequentlyissuedasOfficial Records of the Security Council,

llventy-sixth

Year, Special Supplement No. 4 #(S/l 0309/Rev.l).

8

“The procedures adopted by the Special Mission, within
its terms of reference, included consultations with the
Government of the Republic of Guinea on its complaint
of 3 August 1971 and the receipt of documents and other
relevant material provided by the Government .”

107. The delegation of the Republic of Guinea brought an
important fact to the attention of the Council: the constant
and daily threat to its security.
108. On 22 November 1970 the Council took up our
request, considered our complaint [S/9987/, and-as a
distinguished representative in this council said a moment
ago-decided, in consultation with the Secretary-General, to
send a mission to the sceneto see, examine, and investigate,
if necessary, the motives, the complaints concerning more
specifically the substance of the problem that the African
countries-in this case, the Republic of Guinea-had
occasion to bring before you. This Mission, the second
received by the Government and people of Guinea, and
whose report is before you today, was a consultative
Mission which was to carry out an on-the-spot investigation
of the facts we brought to the attention of the Council.

97. In submitting this report, we wish to express our
thanks and deep appreciation to His Excellency, the
president of Guinea, Ahmed Sdkou Toure, and to the
Government of Guinea for their co-operation with the
SPeciai Mission,
g8. During our meeting with His Excellency, President
&tied Sdkou Tour6 and the members of the Guinean
Government in Conakry we had very frank consultations, as
shown in Part V of the report which contain the verbatim
moords of the meetings of the Special Mission.

109. The report is in itself a very faithful account of
findings that point to the continuing threat that Portugal
poses to the security of a small African country which
wants nothing but peace and security in which to pursue its
development. The Republic of Guinea, an underdeveloped
country held back by colonialism, has never at any time in
its existence attacked Portugal or declared a state of war
with Portugal, which is several thousand kilometres away
from it.

g9. We wish also to thank the then President of the
Security Council, the distinguished Ambassador of Italy,
Ambassador Vinci, and the Secretary-General for having
done the honour both to myself and to the representative
ef Argentina in choosing us for the Special Mission.
100. We also wish to commend highly the Secretariat staff
that accompanied us on this Mission for their efforts in
expediting the issuance of this report, which appeared on
the 15th of this month.

110. Our request to the Security Council, introduced by
the Guinean Head of State, President Sdkou Tour6 and the
Government of Guinea, was aimed exclusively at ensuring
for the Republic of Guinea the security it needs to pursue
its development. Since 22 November 1970, the date on
which Portugal reached a peak in the chronoIogy of
escalating aggression by invading the national territory of
Guinea, the threat of another such adventure has hung over
the security of our small country cE Guinea, a member of
the Council, of the General Assembly, of the international
family, a threat under which our villages have lived for 10
years since Portugal started waging war against the African
populations.

101. We also hope that the report in its entirety will
receive the very careful consideration of the members of
the Security Council.
102. I reserve the right of my delegation to comment on
this report and on the complaint of Guinea against Portugal
and its continued threat to Guinea when the Council
resumesits discussion of the Guinean complaint.
103 . Mr. CARASALES (Argentina) (interpretation from
There is nothing that I need add to the excellent
presentation just made by Ambassador Tomeh of Syria
concerning the report of the Mission, in which I had the
honour to participate, together with him. However, I do
think it necessary to say two things.
Spa&k):

111. My delegation has only one request, namely, that the
Council, which is responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, should ensure to the
Republic of Guinea the security which it needs in order to
pursue its development. We believe that in order to do so
the Council must study in practical terms the ways and
means whereby Portugal, a Member State of our Organization, systematically refuses to apply General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV), the resolution that guarantees the
right of self-determination and independence to all peoples
and particularly to the peoples of Africa.

104. Firstly, I should like to reiterate my thanks to the
Government and people of Guinea through their Permanent
Representative to the United Nations who is present here
today, for the cordial welcome and the facilities they
extended to the Special Mission of the Security Council.
Secondly, I would like to note the deep satisfaction I
derived from my collaboration in this task with Ambassador Tomeh, whose ability, judgement and tact the
members of the Security Council know better than anyone.
105. The PRESIDENT:
Guinea.

I j,
I
“! ,; ” a’

112. Having this great confidence in the Security Council,
we express the earnest hope that the Council will consider
this report and draw the necessary conclusions in order to
guarantee the security of the Republic of Guinea, and that
it will address itself to the necessity of applying the
necessary sanctions to Portugal so that it complies with the
relevant resolutions already adopted by the Council, the list
of which is too long to quote here.

I call upon the representative of

106. Mr. TOURE (Guinea) (interpretation front French):
Mr. President, I should like, through you, to thank the
Security Council for authorizing my delegation to participate in this stage of its consideration of the report
concerning the Mission that the Council, in consultation
$tll the Secretary-General, sent to Guinea.

113. Once again, on behalf of the delegation of the
Republic of Guinea, we thank the Security Council for
9

:,
j/ !:
) i

appointing two of its distinguished members to go to
Guinea in consultation with the Government, and who have
today placed before you their report in which Guinea
places all its hopes and all its confidence in the Security
Council.

119. Unlike the report of the Special Mission which went
to Senegal, the Guinea report is a factual one and contains
neither an assessment of the facts or charges raised nor
recommendations. We are expected to provide these ourselves. When we study the report, the chief characteristic
that stands out clearly is the manner in which the
representatives of the Guinean Government coaperated
with the Special Mission and the frankness with which they
answeredthe many questions put to them,

114. Mr. MAGENGE (Burundi) (interpretation J~WZ
&ench): My delegation would like to congratulate His
Excellency the Ambassador of Syria and the Ambassador of
Argentina on the satisfactory way in which they have
fulfilled the task entrusted to them by the Security
Council, My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to convey our sympathy to the Guinean
delegation.

120. In assessingthe facts and the evidence adduced, it is
important, in the view of my delegation, to bear in mind
the developments which led up to the events of November
1970. For months before the invasion of Guinea it wasthe
Guinean authorities which reported to the United Nations
the probability of such an attack against the integrity and
sovereignty of their country. Guinea’s fears were confirmed
and its intelligence reports proved correct.

1 IS. This is certainly Portugal’s day. I say it is Portugal’s
day, but it is certainly not an honour for that country.
After a complaint by Senegal there has always been or at
least there has often been a complaint from another African
country, a neighbour of the Territories under the Portuguese yoke. As I wassaying, after Senegal, very often it was
Guinea that had to complain, if it was not the United
Republic of Tanzania or the Republic of Zambia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo or the People’s Republic
of the Congo. Unless we want such acts to be the sole
subject matter of consultations of our Council, we should
put an end to Portuguese provocation.

121. Ever since that incident, a war-psychosis, as the
representative of Burundi has expressed it, has prevailed In
the area. There are elements in the area which are escalating
tensions, instigating provocative acts and at times condueting murderous operations across the frontier into Guinea.
The complaint of Guinea is most clearly set forth in the
statement made to the Special Mission by Mr. Ismail TourB,
Minister for Financial Affairs, reproduced on pages 28 and
29 of the report:

116. On behalf of my delegation, I reserve the right to
revert to each of the items on our agenda for today. It
seems only fair to my delegation, and even essential, that
the Council should, already at this stage, consider waysand
means, as the representative of Guinea has just suggested, of
safeguarding peace in Africa; to spare the independent
countries of Africa-from Portugal’s demands. Guinea
(Bissau), Mozambique and Angola are not the only victims
of Portuguese colonialism; there are also the countries that
have already been liberated and not without difficulty,
from colonialism, and which are now facing problems of
development that should be their sole concern. PortugaI, by
its acts of provocation, wished to maintain the countries
under its domination and the neighbouring countries, in a
permanent state of war-psychosis.

“ . . . we cannot complain to the United Nations about
any basic ideological conflicts between ourselves and
many other nations. We can only report irrefutable facts,
contrary to the purposes and principIes of the United
Nations, namely, the attack on our territorial integrity
and the use of a territory under control of another State
by aggressiveforces against our own country. Sowe have
to make a clear distinction between general ideological
differences and contradictions, between systems on the
one hand, and the violation of the fundamental rights of
States, on the other. And it is Portugal which has been
violating these rights”.
122. As to the kind of action expected of this Council, he
said in pages 30 and 3 1 of the report that

117. What does the Security Council intend to do in order
to eliminate these seedbeds of tension which have been
created, and which continue to be fed by the Portuguese
Army? That is the question that my delegation intends to
ask in due course when we make our statement on the
substance of the problems which have been raised today
and which are a matter of vital concern to the African
continent in the face of Portuguese colonialism.

“ . . . Guinea has no interest in distorting the facts of the
matter by expecting the Security Council to issue any
formal warnings to all countries which are against Guinea
calling upon them to respect Guinea’s territorial integrity
and political independence. We are concerned, for the
time being, with having the Council issue such an appeal
to one State alone which has violated the territorial
integrity and political independence of Guinea-and that
State is Portugal, What we want for the future is that
concrete measures should be taken to prevent Portugal
from further violating the Charter by violating the
territorial integrity and political independence of Guinea
by participating in a complex operation hostile to Guinea,
using military means, for open aggression against Guinea
from territory under Portuguese control”

118. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation has read with
considerable interest the report of the Special Mission,
contained in Security Council document S/10309. It
provides this Council with the information it requires to
enable it to consider further the complaint of Guinea which
was raised at our meeting of 3 August 197 1. Ambassador
George Tome11 and Minister Julio Carasales are to be
congratulated on the success of their Mission, the excellence of their report and the speed with which the whole
operation was completed.

I‘ . . . So, if we want paragraph 1 of the resolution to be
truly operative, it must envisage concrete measuressuch
as an on-the-spot inquiry in Guinea (Bissau) and every
10

means of pressure on Portugal to force it not to let
territory under its control be used for any new aggression
against Guinea, as it did on 22 November”.

hamper the progress of this young nation, Such attempts
culminated in the abortive armed intervention of 22
November 1970, when the nation was put to a severe test.

123. When we were discussing, briefly, the report submitted to us by the Special Mission which went to Senegal,my
delegation pointed out that unless the United Nations
resolved to do something about the colonial territories of
Portugal in Africa, the peace and security of certain parts of
Africa would always be under threat,

13 1. The welfare of the Republic of Guinea is of great
concern to us, more particularly so to Sierra Leone, as it is
our neighbour.

124. This report, the evidence and the very important
information which it contains bears out this contention and
my delegation would wish to reserve its right to speak again
on this matter and to come forward with proposals as to
how, in its view, the Security Council could best proceed in
order to bring peace and security to the area surrounding
Guinea (Bissau) and the areas of Angola and Mozambique.
125. The PRESIDENT: I wish to extend my thanks to
Ambassador George Tomeh for having introduced the
report of the Security Council’s Mission to Guinea in such
an excellent manner. As the President of this Council as
well as the representative of JAPAN, I wish to thank
Ambassador Tome11 and Minister Julio Carasales for their
splendid work in fulfilling the task of this difficult mission.
126. Mr. SEVILLA-SACASA
(Nicaragua) (interpretation
frol?z Spa~~islz): The report just submitted to us by the
Ambassador of Syria is in our opinion important in itself
and we congratulate him and his distinguished colleagues of
the Mission for what he has done. It brings us to refer to
what was said recently by Ambassador Malik, when he
emphasized the importance of these special missions of
inquiry, investigation and information, which may be and I
say should be appointed by the Security Council whenever
it considers it necessary in order to safeguard peace and
security in any particular part of the world.

132. We have studied the report, and we should like in
particular to bring again to the attention of the Council the
fact that Portuguese armed intervention against Guinea has
been occurring since 1961. There is an English saying that,
“Once bitten, twice shy”; and the need for this Special
Mission can be found in that saying.
133. I would draw members’ attention to page 15 of the
report, where it is stated-and I quote from the intervention
of President Ahmed SBkou Tomb:
“What has happened to us could not happen to any
other regime and leave it intact. Seventeen out of 24
Ministers, nine tenths of our senior officers, and from
1969 to date, the commanders of nearly all the garrisons
were involved, together with the Minister of Defence, the
Minister of the Interior, the head of the gendarmerie, the
Minister of Security, the Minister of Industry-all the key
sectors had been suborned for the purpose of changing
the regime in Guinea. Today everything is being done to
prevent world public opinion from learning of the NATO
Powers’ opposition to Guinea. Everything is being done
to spread the story that this is merely a struggle between
Guineans .”
134. It is absolutely necessary for us to realize that there
are many ways of changing a government, but that the
world has developed towards the stage where there are
accepted democratic ways-accepted
ways of working
democratically through the people-not of using money and
mercenaries in order to suborn those who are the leaders.

127. In expressing the view that I too consider these
missions important-and
that I shall, of course, carefully
analyse the report submitted to us by our colleague the
Ambassador of Syria-I should like to thank my friend
Ambassador Malik for his very cordial reference to me in
his recent comments on the report, that I had the honour
to present, on the work of the Special Mission which visited
Senegal to carry out a mandate of overriding importance
entrusted to it by the Security Council.

135. The report contains ample evidence that there were
certain elements outside Guinea-notably Portugal-which
wanted to effect a change in the regime, and all they did
was to make use of fifth columnists, to make use of
corruption, and to make use of mercenaries.
136. Now, had that been all, there would have been no
cause for alarm. Nevertheless, it is clear from the report
that there was a planned invasion of Guinea; that is
supported by documentary evidence.

128. Mr. PRATT (Sierra Leone): My delegation is indeed
happy to thank the Special Mission to the Republic of
Guinea for the report contained in document S/10309 of
15 September 197 1, which has just been tabled by
Ambassador George Tomeh of the Syrian Arab Republic.

137. The documentary evidence fell into the hands of the
Guinean authorities even before the plan was launched on
22 November 1970. We read that that documentary
evidence was sent to a particular Head of State, which State
was allegedly involved, and that it was repudiated; and
President Ahmed SBkou Tour& tells us that he accepted the
repudiation. Nevertheless, the first ‘invasion took place.
Nothing was made public about that first document-not
even to the Security Council.

129. We would like to convey our deep thanks and
appreciation to the representatives of Syria and Argentina,
impressed by the considerable efforts they put into making
their mission a success, which it undoubtedly must be.
130. The Republic of Guinea, headed by a true son of
Africa, President Ahmed SBkou Tourd, has been the major
target of Portuguese aggression. Hardly a year passes by
without some attempts, covert or overt, being made to

138. When, then, a second document was intercepted
-when the plan for a second attack came to the knowledge
of the Guinean authorities, as is clearly shown on page 16
13

of the report-it wasessential for the Guinean authorities to
act quickly. The plan actually came to their notice:
telegrams were monitored, and there is incontrovertible
proof that a second act of aggression was to be launched
against Guinea.
139. What would have happened if that second attempt
had been successful? The report gives ample evidence of
our fears. Fortunately, the Government of the Republic of
Guinea acted quickly, and it is clear that only its swift
action in apprising the Security Council of the plans
prevented the second aggressionfrom taking place.
140. It is clear that the second aggression was actually
planned, and I quote the words of Mr. Camara, who said as
reported on page 26 of the report that the attack was
imminent :
6‘. . . That can be explained by the fact that at the same
time aswe informed the Security Council we also ordered
the general mobilization of the people and we sent
messagesto alert all defence positions on the border and
inside the country, so the aggressor knew that we were
ready for lurn and [that he] would have to change the
date planned for the attack. He also knew that the case
had been brought before the Security Council”.
141, Now that the caseis before the Security Council, it is
essential that we try once and for all to eradicate the
root-cause of this disease, and it is clear to us that the
root-cause lies in the Intransigence of Portugal-in Portugal’s belief that it can continue to be an imperialistic
nation. My Government had hoped that the change of
government in Portugal would bring forward liberal views
on this subject. Wehave been disappointed.

been discussing two reports by two different missions to
two African countries, both missions composed of members
of the Security Council and established by decision of the
Security Council giving the President and the SecretaryGeneral power to appoint them after consultation between
them.
147. I wish also to express my thanks to the representatives of Guinea, Burundi and Somalia. The Ambassador of
Somalia, Mr. Farah, has rightly said that our report does
not contain conclusions, assessmentsor recommendations,
Indeed, when Mr. Carasales and I were thinking over that
aspect of the report, we scrutinized and analysed our terms
of reference very carefully and we decided that our mission
was a mission of consultation that should report on
whatever we were able to obtain in the way of information
and documentary evidence from the Government of
Guinea.
148. I wish also to thank the representative of Nicaragua,
Mr. Sevilla-Sacasa, whose eloquence and courtesy cannot be
equalled by anyone like myself. I should certainly also like
to thank the Foreign Minister of Sierra Leone for his
analysis of the report, the importance of the problem that
it presents and the dangers to peace upon which the
Security Council is called to deliberate.
149. I thank you, Mr. President, and, like the representative of Nicaragua, place the report in your hands.
150. The PRESIDENT: I thank Mr. Tomeh for the very
kind words addressed to me personally and also to the
country I represent.
151. Mr. CARASALES (Argentina) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr.President, just a few words to convey my
thanks to you, to the Foreign Minister of Sierra Leone and
to the representatives of Burundi, Somalia and Nicaragua
and also to my colleague and friend, Mr. Tomeh, for the
kind words they have spoken about me. Those words,
although not really warranted, nevertheless deserve my
thanks.

142 I Not only Guinea but Sierra Leone and other progressive African nations face these samerisks and are subject to
these same threats, We therefore trust that something will
be done to save us from the throes of Portuguese
imperialism.
143. My delegation reserves the right to speak on this
important question at a later date.

152. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): I should like on behalf of the

Soviet delegation to express my appreciation to the Special
Mission of the Security Council, which consisted of two
members of the Council, the representatives of the Syrian
Arab Republic and Argentina.

144. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr, President,
may I, first of all, with all due respect to the presidency and
to you, address my most sincere thanks to you for your
very kind words of appreciation for the report which we
have presented, and which is the work of both myself and
my colleague from Argentina, Mr. Julio Carasales.

153. We shall carefully study the report submitted by the
Special Mission and we shall express our views on the
substancein the course of further discussion. For my part, I
should just like to say that I would call not this day alone
but these recent days in the Security Council the days of
Africa. It is not the day of Portugal-and I should like to
make a small correction to what the representative of
Burundi said-but, rather, Africa’s days.

145. There is no need for me to say, Sir, how proud I am
as an Asian that you, who represent one of the great
countries of Asia-a country which has undoubtedly made
spectacular leaps in its economic progress-should be
presiding over our deliberations.
146. I wish also to express my deepest gratitude to
Mr. Carasales, who was my companion, friend and close
colleague on the mission to Guinea, This mission, with the
previous mission to Senegal, represents,, as very rightly
pointed out by the representative of the Soviet Union,
Mr. Malik, a landmark in the history of the Security
Council and the progress of its work; for today we have

154. We have heard a splendid report from the Chairman
of the Special Mission of the Organization of African Unity
[1583rd meeting], which was given the authority and the
high duty by the AssembIy of Heads of State and
Government of African countries of submitting the problem of Namibia to the Security Council, As it happened,
12

the hearing of this case and the statement by the
outstanding African leader Mr. Ould Daddah, President of
Mauritania, made in his special plenipotentiary capacity as
Chairman of the Special Mission of the Organization of
African Unity, coincided with the submission of two
reports to the Security Council by two special missions of
the Council-reports which unmask the activities of Portuguese colonialism aided and abetted by some other
countries.

1%. As far as that goes, the Soviet delegation regards the
consideration of these three questions-Namibia, the Portuguese aggression against Senegal, and the Portuguese aggression against Guinea-as a major event in all the activity of
the Council. With a full sense of the responsibility
entrusted to it and the duty incumbent on it under the
United Nations Charter, the Security Council must carefully consider those questions and take appropriate decisions worthy of the great role it has been given.

15.5. In my delegation’s view, this is an important event in
the work of the Security Council relating to its primary
task of strengthening international peace and security and
in the matter of acquiring a better understanding of what is
going on in Africa. Therefore, I think that members of the
Security Council should pay due attention to these two
special reports and to the statement by the President of
Mauritania as head of the Special Mission of the Organization of African Unity, and the Security Council should
seriously ponder what practical measures it should take to
securepeace and security in Africa from the encroachments
of those who do not want to abandon their dreams of the
colonial past and who are trying any and all methods to
prolong and maintain their rule, if not over the whole of
Africa, then over various parts of it.

157. The PRESIDENT: There being no further speakers
on my list, I intend to adjourn this meeting. It is my
understanding that members of the Council wish to have
time to reflect on the report and the statements made at
this meeting before proceeding with this discussion. In
accordancewith the suggestion put forward at our meeting
yesterday, I therefore propose that the Security Council
resume tomorrow afternoon its discussion of the item
concerning Namrbia. It is understood that further consideration of the complaint by Guinea will be scheduled by
my successor in office after consultation with other
members of the Council. There being no objection it is so
decided.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

13

1:

HOW

T O OBTAlN

UNITED

United
Naiions
publications
the world.
Conrult
your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

be

PUBLICATIONS
obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
der
ddporitnirer
du monde
Notions
Unier,
Section

HAK

IlOJYVHTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Lot publicocioner
en todas porter
Ventor,

Litho

in United

Nations,

Nuevo

New York

LES PUBLICATIONS

OPI-AHM3AUMH

PUBLICACIONES
de

York

UNIES

Nations
Unier
sent en vente
danr
les libroirier
et ler agencer
entier.
Informer-vows
aoprCs
da votre librairie
ov adresser-vow
d:
des venles,
New York ou Get&e.

HSflAHklfl

del

DES NATIONS

06bE&lHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

les Nacioner
Unidos
est6n
mundo.
Conrulte
a LU librero

HAUilA

UNIDAS

en yenta en librerior
y ~~16~s distribuidoros
o dirijose
a: Nociones
Unidcrr,
Seccidn

de

o Ginebra.

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82106August

19734,050
