United Nations

S/PV.6722

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6722nd meeting
Thursday, 23 February 2012, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ohin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Togo)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Karev
Mr. Mashabane
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2012/33)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-23931 (E)

*1223931*

S/PV.6722

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.

Ms. Wallström: On the morning of 30 September
2009, two dramatically different events took place.
One — which Council members are all familiar with —
was the adoption of resolution 1888 (2009) creating the
mandate of a United Nations Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The other was a
demonstration just outside the United Nations
complex, condemning mass rape by security forces in
the small West African nation of Guinea.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2012/33)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Armenia, Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Canada, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Indonesia,
Ireland, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kenya, Luxembourg, Mexico, Nepal, Peru, the Republic
of Korea, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and Viet
Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Margot
Wallström, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Amina
Megheirbi, representative of the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/33, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence.
I now give the floor to Ms. Wallström.

2

As the Council reached consensus on new
measures to combat sexual violence, beyond the
Chamber protesters decried yet more premeditated
mass rape. As world public opinion applauded the
commitments of this body, international headlines told
of soldiers raping in broad daylight. Some Council
members noted the connection between resolution 1888
(2009) and the use of rape to suppress a peaceful rally
in Guinea-Conakry. They noted that when rape is part
of the repertoire of conflict or political coercion, it is a
form of collective violence that can threaten collective
peace and security.
I would like to congratulate the Council on its
groundbreaking consideration of that issue over the
past three years, and to thank the presidency of Togo
for convening today’s debate. It is a chance to take
stock of a fundamental question, namely, whether the
gap between what is said in the Chamber and what
happens in the world beyond has narrowed.
Last November, I went to Guinea to meet with the
survivors. A young woman, who had been gang-raped
and left for dead after joining the demonstration,
recalled the chilling words of one soldier: “You wanted
power — this is what you will get”. What was striking
to me was not how many women had been scarred by
that atrocity, but how many have stood back up,
organized and dared to tell their stories. Their demands
for recognition, justice and the removal of perpetrators
from positions of power are now reflected in a joint
communiqué that the Government has signed with the
United Nations.
Earlier this month, a Guinean panel of judges
charged Lieutenant Colonel Moussa Tiegboro Camara
for his alleged role in the atrocities. That is progress. It
signals to the survivors that, while justice may have
been delayed, it cannot be denied. In that respect, the
report before the Council today (S/2012/33) is already
partly out of date. It calls upon the Guinean authorities
to take action against Camara. In the time between

12-23931

S/PV.6722

issuing the report and today’s debate, they have done
so.
However, of course, conflict-related sexual
violence is not specific to one country or continent. It
is a global risk. The terror of unarmed women facing
armed men is age-old and universal. The Security
Council has led the way in recognizing that rape can
acquire a strategic twist as a tactic of war. Today, there
is broad recognition that the more brutal and shocking
the crime, the more effectively it terrorizes
communities into submission and lends notoriety to
groups vying for power.
The terms of the debate have shifted from
reacting to sexual violence, like any other tragedy, to
preventing it, like any other threat. Instead of talking
about women’s wartime suffering year after year after
year, protection mechanisms have been established.
Instead of seeing the same few women in meeting after
meeting, we are building a broad coalition.
The circle of stakeholders now extends to
peacekeepers, peacemakers, war crimes prosecutors
and the full range of protection actors. After all, it is at
the moment of negotiating a peace deal, signing a
ceasefire, training troops and sending peacekeepers on
patrol that such resolutions have a real-world impact.
In short, the Council has ushered in an ideological
shift. When it takes notice, others do as well.
A decade ago, my mandate to be present in the
Chamber, addressing this subject, would have seemed
improbable. Yet the Council has kept pace with the
changing dynamics of conflict. In contemporary wars,
it has become more dangerous to be a woman fetching
water or collecting firewood than to be a fighter on the
front line. Wars have entered the marketplaces where
women trade; they follow children en route to school;
and haunt the prison cells where political activists are
detained. Accordingly, the Council has embraced a
view of security that includes the physical integrity and
perspectives of women. During my visits to countries
of concern, I have promised to bridge the voices of
those women to the work of this body. At the political
level, such visits can initiate a dialogue for civilian
protection commitments.
My aim is to remain relevant to the Security
Council and to ensure that the mandate adds value to
its work. Resolution 1888 (2009) also created the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which is currently supporting initiatives of

12-23931

the Governments of Guinea, Liberia, South Sudan and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to combat
impunity. It is clear that, now more than ever, we have
the tools to succeed.
One such tool is the report being debated today. It
provides striking examples of sexual violence as a
threat to security and an impediment to peacebuilding.
No one can read that report and remain unmoved. But,
as many participants have asked me, what does it mean
to appear in the Secretary-General’s report? I would
like to address that head-on by highlighting three key
implications.
First, the report, based on United Nations-verified
information, is an instrument in the hands of political
leaders to help them track and address sexual violence
that is linked with insecurity. It cites illustrative
incidents that point to larger patterns. As the new
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
mature, they will yield a deeper evidence base for
action.
Secondly, it does not highlight only horror
stories. Such reports are a place to feature the stories of
actions that have made a difference, such as enforcing
command responsibility and vetting perpetrators from
the security forces. It is in the interests of every
Government to ensure that the national uniform
symbolizes professionalism, discipline and service, not
rape, pillage and terror.
The third point is that it provides a baseline for
systematic engagement with parties to armed conflict,
with the consent and partnership of Governments. Such
reports are vehicles for putting names to some of
history’s complex horrors. The acts of sexual torture
and terror recorded here are not inevitable by-products
of war, but crimes committed by combatants and their
commanders. The fog of war does not absolve them of
their responsibilities.
The report is also a historical record. This is
critical, as the history of rape has been a history of
denial. What explains the suppression of these stories?
Perhaps the fact that it is the victim, not the attacker,
who is often shamed and stigmatized, that society is
more likely to pass judgement than to deliver justice.
Perhaps it is because rape has been treated as a lesser
evil in a context of lethal violence, or traded away by
negotiating parties as the price of peace. Whatever the
explanation, every speaker who adds his or her voice to

3

S/PV.6722

this debate is helping to end centuries of silence that
have made rape an effective secret weapon.
From the Congo to Cambodia, from Bosnia to
Liberia, these crimes have been neglected at the peace
table and stricken from the public record. In Bosnia, I
met with women who had survived the hell of rape
camps in the early 1990s. Sixteen years later, I
expected to talk about memorials and remembrance. I
expected to talk about women’s political power and
economic recovery. But what we talked about was the
rapes that these women are living and reliving every
day, as if it were yesterday. The lack of redress and
justice is staggering. An estimated 50,000 rapes have
led to just 30 prosecutions. When Bosnia was on the
Security Council, it recognized this painful reality and
actively championed resolution 1960 (2010).
In Cambodia last year, women organized an
informal hearing to spotlight sexual violence during the
Khmer Rouge era, which has been left unaddressed by
formal mechanisms. Collectively, they broke over
thirty years of silence. I have urged the Governments
of both Bosnia and Cambodia to deliver justice for
these victims. In Rwanda, children born of rape are
coming of age and trying to find their place in society.
So rape is not over when it is over. The point is to
better understand conflict-related sexual violence and
its consequences, to give rape a history in order to
deny it a future.
At its heart, resolution 1960 (2010) is about
prevention. It creates, for the first time, a workable
system of deterrence and accountability in response to
conflict-related sexual violence. This compliance
regime includes a listing option as leverage.
In relation to other protection issues, such as
ending the recruitment of child soldiers, the practice of
listing has yielded tangible results. Expanding the
naming and shaming list on children to those credibly
suspected of patterns of sexual violence against adult
women and men has made the approach comprehensive
and the message to armed groups clear. The point is to
cease all acts of rape, whether the victim is 8, 18 or 80.
I will never forget the story of an elderly woman
I met in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
who told me that she had felt secure in the belief that
she was too old to be raped, that she could be the
soldier’s grandmother. But that did not protect her.

4

While not a panacea, the list is an important tool.
It reminds those who commit, command or condone
sexual violence that they can no longer sleep easily at
night under the cover of impunity and anonymity. The
practice of listing shows that this is not just a war of
words. Yes, preventive diplomacy is important. And
yes, zero-tolerance policies matter. But ultimately, rape
must carry consequences. Some have said this exercise
is too optimistic, too ambitious. But surely we must
bring all measures to bear in addressing this scourge.
The vision is to create conditions in which armed
groups see sexual violence as a liability that will invite
national and international scrutiny and censure unless
concrete measures are taken. These measures are
outlined in resolution 1960 (2010) as a basis for
delisting. They include the issuance of orders through
chains of command and the prohibition of sexual
violence in codes of conduct, as well as timely
investigation of alleged abuses to hold perpetrators
accountable. A command structure with the capacity to
sustain military operations and to punish deserters has
the capacity to rein in acts of rape.
Those who tolerate sexual terror should be on
notice that they do so in defiance of the Security
Council, with its power to enact enforcement measures.
In the case of Côte d’Ivoire, for example, this means
the militiamen who threatened to burn women alive if
they resisted rape. They know why they appear in this
list. The Council has signalled its intention to consider
sexual violence when establishing or renewing
sanctions regimes. Exemplary action has already been
taken by the Sanctions Committee for the Democratic
Republic of Congo with regard to Mai-Mai leader
Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka. This sends a powerful message
to others.
As a frame of reference, the term “conflictrelated sexual violence” has been critical in
channelling relevant information from the country
level to the Security Council. This framing mirrors the
resolutions by focusing on violence that has a nexus
with peace and security, rather than on isolated
incidents.
Isolated acts of rape occur in all societies, in
times of war and of peace. These crimes need to be
addressed by the national law-and-order machinery.
However, when sexual violence is driven by the
dynamics of conflict, is widespread or systematic,
constitutes a grave breach of international

12-23931

S/PV.6722

humanitarian law, or is used for military or political
gain, it also warrants consideration by this body, in line
with its competence under the Charter of the United
Nations.
As a process of intimidation, targeted rape is
often a precursor to conflict, as well as the last weapon
to be relinquished in its wake. It is important not to
exclude from consideration sexual violence that
continues after the guns fall silent. Sexual violence that
is normalized, owing to impunity, or committed by
recently demobilized combatants is also a security
issue that requires a security response.
Such violence subverts efforts to cement the
peace. We know that a ceasefire does not mean peace
for women if the shooting ceases but the rapes continue
unchecked. Such violence should be included in the
definition of a ceasefire and in the monitoring
provisions. Monitoring teams must be gender balanced,
not gender blind. But to date, just three ceasefire
agreements have included sexual violence. The new
guidance for mediators on addressing conflict-related
sexual violence, developed by Department of Political
Affairs, will fill an analytical and practical gap.
Modern history attests that post-war rarely means
post-rape. In Liberia, I have seen how sexual violence
during the civil war left a profound imprint on society.
Addressing that legacy is not just a moral, but an
operational, imperative. It is a credibility test for the
nascent military and police forces. To echo what has
been said so often within these walls, impunity fuels
the vicious cycle of violence. Peace is not only the
absence of conflict, but the presence of justice.
Nor can we overlook the use or threat of sexual
violence as a tool of political repression and civil
strife. That would negate the promise of prevention.
Politically motivated rape is a disturbing trend
witnessed in the wake of contested elections in places
such as Kenya, Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire. It has also
been part of political violence in Libya, Syria and
Egypt.
In relation to Syria, the Secretary-General has
expressed concern about the sexual abuse of men in
detention as a method of extracting intelligence. In
Libya, United Nations information indicates a pattern
of women being abducted from their homes, cars and
streets and subjected to repeated rape during the
conflict. Yet survivors are coming forward only in
cases of urgent medical need. In the words of one

12-23931

Libyan victim, “If the bleeding had stopped, I would
never have reported it.”
This underscores that we cannot wait for hard
data to surface before taking action. The relationship
between incidents and reports of wartime rape is like
the relationship between the tip of an iceberg and its
mass. Only the extremity is visible. I trust that the
Council’s forthcoming resolution on Libya will
explicitly mention the need to address sexual violence.
A critical test of the National Transitional Council will
be its willingness to investigate violations by both
sides in the conflict and to ensure comprehensive
services for survivors.
Due to the blame, shame and stigma, most
survivors still have more to lose than to gain from
reporting rape. Improved data collection is therefore
inextricably linked to improved assistance. Our
primary focus must always be needs, rather than
numbers. Data is not an end in itself, but an evidence
base for action.
And we must deliver as one. I am proud to Chair
the inter-agency network United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict. United Nations
Action has provided strategic support at the country
level and catalyzed joint initiatives in close partnership
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
UN-Women, such as scenario-based training for
peacekeepers.
But in terms of response, for too long we have
been too late. The United Nations system is working to
become better attuned to the red flags and early
warning signs. Rape is not a fact of human history, like
disease or drought; it is often planned and therefore
predictable. United Nations Action has scanned past
conflicts to compile the United Nations Matrix of
Early-Warning Indicators of Conflict-Related Sexual
Violence to equip monitors to identify and prevent
spikes.
This analysis also sheds light on the roots of
wartime rape. For instance, the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons enable these atrocities. As
many women have told me: "That man had the gun and
he had the power". Sexual violence is often perpetuated
by incomplete disarmament and the absence of vetting,
training and security sector reform. For example, in
Somalia, a practice has recently been detected of
national security forces renting out their uniforms to
civilians by night, which facilitates rape. Such patterns

5

S/PV.6722

must be met with disciplinary measures. We also know
that militarized mining can fuel human rights
violations by enriching armed groups, for instance in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Council has understood that there can be no
security without women’s security. The aim is not only
to protect women from violence; it is to protect them to
participate in public and economic life. Rape has a
chilling effect on women’s political participation,
casting a long shadow of trauma and terror. It can
inhibit their access to polling booths and public
squares. We must send a message that women’s lives,
votes and voices count and will be counted.
Certainly, the women I have met cannot be
caricatured as passive victims. They have fought daily
wars — not for medals and monuments, but battles for
bread, to feed their children and to make their presence
felt. I am particularly concerned, at this historical
juncture, that unless women can shape their own
political and personal destiny, the Arab Spring will turn
into a winter for Arab women.
While sexual violence disproportionately affects
women and girls, men and boys also number among the
direct and indirect victims. We need to ensure that our
interventions are gender-responsive and communitybased.
In the wake of war, the aim is not just to build
back, but to build back better. That means addressing
pre-existing injustice and inequality. What we have
already achieved gives us hope. The action of this
Council tells survivors that their lives matter. It also
tells perpetrators — and potential perpetrators — that
war does not give license to rape. The world is
watching.
I would like to conclude by taking a step back
from the technical and operational details that often
consume us, to simply recall that the Council has
changed the way we think about rape. From the 1907
Hague Convention, which gave wartime rape a
glancing reference as a crime against family honour,
sexual violence is now seen as a self-standing threat to
security. This has validated the experience of survivors.
And in the end, that kind of transformation is what this
work is all about.
I thank members for listening, and I look forward
to the debate.

6

The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Wallström for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Government of Togo for
convening this important debate today. It provides me
with an opportunity to inform members of the Security
Council of our joint efforts and the challenges that we
encounter as we implement this extremely significant
mandate.
The mandate related to sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict is one of the most
demanding in peacekeeping. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Department
of Field Support (DFS) remain deeply concerned that,
despite universal and repeated condemnation, sexual
violence continues to be used as a tactic of war, in
particular against women and children.
We greatly appreciate the political advocacy and
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Wallström, in heading the United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict. During the past
year, collaboration between my Department, Special
Representative Wallström, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
United Nations Action has been strengthened. Thanks
to these partnerships, we are continuing to produce
concrete results.
Since last year’s debate, we have worked with the
Office of Ms. Wallström and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner of Human Rights to
develop terms of reference for women’s protection
advisers. A tripartite approach has been adopted in the
context of the advisers by placing them in gender and
human rights organizations and in the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
relevant peacekeeping operations to facilitate
cooperation. This approach maximizes existing
capacities in the field and avoids fragmentation and
duplication of responsibilities.
Several peacekeeping operations were selected
and invited to identify women’s protection advisers
within the limits of existing resources. However, in
cases of conflict-related sexual violence on a major
scale, additional resources should be made available to
deal with the high volume of work. Our efforts to

12-23931

S/PV.6722

identify and deploy advisers are currently focused on
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
In 2011, the Office of Special Representative
Wallström and United Nations Action developed
guidelines on the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements. The human rights structures in our
peacekeeping operations direct monitoring and
verification, in close collaboration with other mission
components and the members of the United Nations
country team.
While the arrangements are not an end in
themselves, they should contribute towards a better
prevention and programming policy response. There
remain challenges that we are trying to address:
mobilizing capacities to implement the arrangements;
ensuring the presence of uniformed women in affected
areas to reach out to women and girls; and addressing
inadequate infrastructure and communications to gain
access to important regions to monitor and verify
incidents. Ultimately, impunity, scarce services in rural
areas and insecurity deter survivors from reporting the
sexual violence to which they have been subjected.
The DPKO and the Department of Field Support
stand ready to provide the necessary support to
encourage Governments to institutionalize the
prohibition and prevention of and accountability for
conflict-related
sexual
violence
through
the
development of policies and national security sector
training. We must recognize the close links between
time-bound commitments and security sector
development. Meticulous and systematic assessments
of armed groups must be part of any integration policy
in national forces.
We are proud to be an active member of the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict established pursuant to
Security
Council
resolution
1888
(2009).
Accountability for sexual violence must be established
to combat sexual discrimination and inequality. The
reform of existing legislation, access to a functional
justice system and witness protection programmes are
fundamental.
Political will is also essential to ensure that
perpetrators of international human rights and
humanitarian law violations, including sexual violence,

12-23931

are tried and held accountable. The rule of law as a
whole must prevail, by means of security and judicial
sectors, including correctional systems.
In that regard, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has worked
with civil society and women in particular to ensure
that the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur included
provisions for the Government of the Sudan to take the
steps necessary to deliver effective and timely justice
for serious human rights violations, including sexual
violence, and to prevent amnesty in cases of crimes of
sexual violence.
(spoke in English)
Progress has also been made in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where MONUSCO supports
civilian and military prosecutors in investigating
allegations of conflict-related sexual violence. In 2010
and 2011, MONUSCO undertook more than 30 joint
investigation team missions with magistrates and
police officers to investigate cases of sexual violence.
MONUSCO also supported the holding of trials, so as
to strengthen the military justice system, including
through mobile court proceedings in remote areas. As a
result, 217 judgments on sexual violence were
delivered in 2011. MONUSCO and partners also
support 39 legal centres, which provide free legal
assistance to survivors of sexual violence and to their
families. In 2011 more than 2,200 survivors received
assistance.
May I add that when I was in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo a month ago I visited an
incredible place in Goma named Heal Africa. It is a
hospital primarily devoted to treating victims of rape,
physically and psychologically, as well as to teaching
them trades for them to live on after they leave the
facility. It is through just that type of clinic that we can
have a positive impact on the lives of unfortunate
victims. We should encourage such projects.
Capacity-building is an important element of the
sexual violence mandate, which we are carrying out in
support of host Governments and within our missions.
For example, in Timor-Leste, Liberia, Haiti and Darfur,
United Nations police work in support of the national
police to develop dedicated spaces to receive survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence. For example,
three such spaces are being launched this month in atrisk camps in Haiti. To that end, the Police Division is
working with police-contributing countries to develop

7

S/PV.6722

training and trainer modules to standardize the
prevention and investigation of sexual and genderbased violence in post-conflict environments, for
United Nations police and national police forces. In the
course of last year, 103 police trainers were certified
through five regional training courses.
To capacitate our military components, we have
developed training modules, in consultation with
Member States, to accompany the military gender
guidelines. We are piloting them regionally. We have
also introduced a module on conflict-related sexual
violence, developed under the auspices of UN Action
into the DPKO/DFS protection of civilians training
modules for military, police and civilian components.
Those modules were recently finalized and
disseminated to our missions and key peacekeeping
training partners.
Ultimately, protection from sexual violence is a
key element of the protection of civilians mandate of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Given the
diverse environments in which peacekeeping missions
operate, different protection arrangements have
emerged. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
instance, joint protection teams and community liaison
assistants have become essential elements of
MONUSCO’s efforts to address the protection of
civilians. Community alert networks established
through the use of cellular phones and high-frequency
radio networks are currently being piloted.
Another example is Darfur, where UNAMID and
the United Nations country team regularly conduct
joint assessment field missions in selected camps for
internally displaced persons, to identify security and
humanitarian concerns, such as access to basic
services, the human rights situation, patterns of
population movement and communities’ coping
mechanisms. The missions verify reported cases of
sexual violence, and therefore they also address the
problem of conflicting information.
In order to capture good practices and lessons
learned, we are conducting an inventory of our
structures and practices, which can be replicated in
other contexts. Furthermore, the United Nations Action
early warning indicators matrix on conflict-related
sexual violence, to which the Special Representative
referred, will be adapted to the operational
environments of two peacekeeping operations and

8

piloted and introduced into the protection arrangements
of other peacekeeping operations later this year.
It is important to underscore that the host
Government is ultimately responsible for the protection
of its civilian population. Missions cannot act as a
surrogate for State authority. Where mandated,
therefore, we must strengthen frail State institutions, to
facilitate their protection response. In that regard, we
welcome the recent adoption of the Secretary-General’s
human rights due diligence policy on United Nations
support to non-United Nations security forces, which
ultimately strengthens the protection abilities of the
host Government’s forces.
MONUSCO is implementing that policy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which makes the
Mission’s support to the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and the
Police nationale civile (PNC) conditional on their
respect of international humanitarian law, human rights
law and refugee law. The policy seeks to improve
FARDC behaviour through screening the chain of
command of its units for past humanitarian law and
human rights violations, including acts of sexual
violence, before support is provided by the Mission.
Indeed, in the course of last year, MONUSCO screened
more than 2,000 FARDC and PNC personnel. Support
was suspended to two FARDC battalions based on
evidence of human rights violations. I am pleased to
highlight that collaboration and progress has been
achieved with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Last month I also had another
meeting with a senior general commanding FARDC
forces in North Kivu, who acknowledged that our due
diligence policy had now been fully understood and
taken on by himself and his troops: they respect and
take full account of our requirements in the matter.
In conclusion, I would like to draw attention to a
few key points. In countries where conflict-related
sexual violence is taking place, we call on Member
States to fund women advisers in order to strengthen
the implementation of the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements and the sexual violence mandate
from a peace and security perspective. Time-bound
commitments are part of security sector reform and a
strong tool for preventing sexual violence from taking
place. Our missions stand ready to support host
Governments to address those commitments, to work
with the security sector to address the integration of
armed groups in national security forces and to work in

12-23931

S/PV.6722

close support of national military and civilian justice
systems to ensure accountability for incidents of sexual
violence. DPKO and DFS also look forward to close
collaboration with host Governments to implement the
Secretary-General’s human rights due diligence policy.
Uniformed women in peacekeeping are key to
addressing conflict-related sexual violence. DPKO and
DFS call on troop- and police-contributing countries to
commit to that issue and to increase the number of
women represented in national security forces. We
have set the objective of 20 per cent women in the
United Nations police forces by 2014, but we must go
further.
Finally, I would like to underline that political,
social and economic empowerment of women in fragile
States is fundamental to eradicating discrimination,
inequality and sexual and gender-based violence.
Women’s exclusion from the sectors responsible for
their disempowerment must be addressed through
adopting the principles of resolution 1325 (2000) and
mobilizing strong political will. Political will is what it
is really about.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his presentation, which sheds light on
this tragic reality that we must eliminate at all cost.
I now give the floor to Ms. Megheirbi.
Ms. Megheirbi (NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security): I am speaking on behalf
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security, a civil society coalition that advocates for the
equal and full participation of women in all efforts to
create and maintain peace and security. That work
includes the promotion of women’s human rights and
combating sexual violence. I am also here in my
capacity as president of the Attawasul Association, a
Libyan non-governmental organization in Benghazi
working on women’s empowerment. I have lived
through the violence imposed on the Libyan people by
a brutal dictator for 42 years. That includes the
intensified aggression after the 17 February revolution,
in which sexual violence was used as a weapon of war.
We appreciate the ongoing work of numerous
actors to combat violence against women. That
includes the efforts of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We welcome the analysis and
recommendations contained in the latest Secretary-

12-23931

General’s Report (S/2012/33) on conflict-related sexual
violence. As the report makes clear, sexual violence is
often used as a weapon to torture, terrorize and
threaten peace. It is important to remember that each
paragraph of the report represents human beings —
women, men, children and communities affected by
that threat to peace and security. That includes
individuals from my community who, like most
victims, have not received and likely will not receive
proper services, protection, acknowledgement, justice
or accountability. This represents a collective failure of
the international community to effectively respond to
the threat.
Addressing conflict-related sexual violence
requires powerful and urgent leadership at the
international, regional and local levels. That leadership
is essential across the United Nations system and from
every Member State. Today, I will address three key
areas in which leadership is essential: prioritizing
prevention, ensuring a survivor-centric approach, and
strengthening justice and accountability.
First and foremost, the prevention of conflictrelated sexual violence is paramount and must be the
Council’s priority on this issue. The Security Council
itself has underlined the importance of prevention.
After the mass rapes in Walikale, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in 2010, the Council stated that all
possible steps should be taken to prevent such outrages
in the future. Given the political, technical and
financial resources required, can we say that all
possible steps have been taken to prevent conflictrelated sexual violence? Can we say that to women,
girls and their communities in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, or to the survivors in my
country, Libya? Can we say that to the rest of the
world? Have Member States and the United Nations
invested all available political, technical and financial
resources to prevent further atrocities? If not, why not?
We urge all actors to address the root causes of
sexual violence. Those root causes include gender
inequality, political exclusion, social and cultural
stigma, militarization and the proliferation of arms.
Women’s human rights and full participation cannot be
ignored. In fact, women’s full and equal participation is
fundamental to addressing those root causes, and
therefore to preventing sexual violence in conflicts.
Secondly, when prevention efforts fail, survivors
must be the priority of all service provision and

9

S/PV.6722

protection. The survivor-centric approach must
encompass the provision of medical, psychological,
legal and other services to survivors, as well as
effective avenues for reparations and redress. We
support the recommendations in the SecretaryGeneral’s report in that regard, and we strongly call on
all actors to make that a reality. Service and protection
strategies must be designed in full consultation with
women and affected communities. Particular attention
must be paid to the rights and concerns of women and
girls, who are often at increased risk in displacement
settings, as the current report notes in many cases,
including Somalia, Darfur in the Sudan, and Sri Lanka.
Thirdly, survivors demand nothing less than
justice and an end to impunity. Accountability for
crimes of sexual violence must be included at every
stage, from ceasefire agreements to all aspects of
post-conflict reconstruction. That is central both to
preventing future crimes of sexual violence against
women and to the healing of societies. At both the
national and international levels, security sectors and
judicial systems must address the culture of impunity
for these crimes. Measures must include improved
vetting of reintegrated soldiers and bringing suspected
perpetrators to justice, in domestic courts where
possible or through referral of situations to the
International Criminal Court and other international
courts for prosecution. Where those systems are failing
survivors,
comprehensive
reforms
should
be
mandatory. Maintaining the full dignity of survivors
must be at the core of all of these processes.
As a Libyan, I want to emphasize the need to
hold accountable all parties involved in any act of
sexual violence, and to prosecute them accordingly.
That includes politicians and military commanders who
order or permit such acts as a weapon of war, as well
as those who commit the crime.
I would like to state our concern regarding all
situations where women’s rights continue to be violated.
On conflict-related sexual violence specifically, we note
that the Secretary-General’s current report does not
reference a number of relevant situations where sexual
violence has been perpetrated. Those include
Afghanistan, Iraq, Israel, the occupied Palestinian
territories and Haiti, among others. We urge the
Secretary-General to take all measures to ensure that
all relevant countries are included in future reports.
Furthermore, we condemn the perpetration of sexual

10

exploitation and abuse, which are all too often
committed with impunity.
In civil society, we are often at the forefront of
combating sexual violence from the grassroots to the
international level. We encourage all actors to support
civil society at all levels in all areas of that work.
Furthermore, in their own work in the Security Council
or in the United Nations, members should ensure that
they are working to fulfil the obligations of resolutions
1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009)
and 1960 (2010). That includes ensuring that all
country reports and mandate renewals are truly
responsive to the protection and promotion of women’s
human rights.
In conclusion, on behalf of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security and on my own
behalf as a Libyan woman, I would like to ask you,
Mr. President, your colleagues on the Security Council
and all other members of the international community
to take the urgent action on conflict-related sexual
violence that we have outlined here today, namely,
prioritizing prevention, ensuring a survivor-centric
approach and strengthening justice and accountability
efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Megheirbi for her heartfelt statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
presence here today and for organizing this open
debate. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Wallström and Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous for their comprehensive briefings. Of
course, I would like to thank Ms. Megheirbi for her
remarks this morning and for all of her and the
Working Group’s efforts to advance the women, peace
and security agenda.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/33) on
conflict-related sexual violence demonstrates the
importance of having a Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. In just the past year, she
was able, together with the Team of Experts, to
assemble the evidence available in the report, and to
begin to address some of the horrors it describes. From
the beginning, the United States has supported the
Special Representative and the Team of Experts, both

12-23931

S/PV.6722

in advocating their mandates and financing their work.
It is time and money well spent.

forthright in carrying it out. She deserves our strong
support.

The Special Representative has, first of all,
gathered facts. We now know how rape was used to
humiliate and punish during the post-election crisis in
Côte d’Ivoire. We know now that 625 cases of sexual
violence by warring parties were recorded by the
United Nations from December 2010 to November
2011 in the North Kivu, South Kivu and Orientale
provinces of the Democratic Republic of Congo. We
have before us figures, dates, names of perpetrators
and perpetrating forces in those countries, as well as in
Burma, Somalia, the Sudan and South Sudan. We also
now have information, sometimes very extensive
information, about sexual violence perpetrated in
post-conflict situations and situations of civil unrest, in
the Central African Republic, Syria, Guinea, Nepal and
elsewhere.

The problem, unfortunately, remains vast. We
have only begun. Impunity is still alarmingly common.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sheka Ntabo
Ntaberi ran as a candidate for office even as a warrant
was out for his arrest for sexual violence. In Guinea, as
detailed in the Secretary-General’s report, two men
connected to the violence of September 2009, which
included sexual violence, have since been given high
Government positions. Such impunity should not be
tolerated.

The Special Representative and the Team of
Experts have demonstrated the extent of the problem.
Their work is also increasing awareness of the issue
and encouraging best practices. In the reporting period,
more than 150 people in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, from various types of security forces, were
sentenced after trial to punishment for crimes of sexual
violence. A total of 9,534 Congolese survivors of
sexual violence in North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri
provinces, including at least 1,700 children, received
medical and psychosocial support. Congolese officers
in two conflict-affected provinces are now receiving
training from the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), to train their own soldiers on
how to prevent sexual violence and deal properly with
witnesses and victims. Those training modules will
become the national standard for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
In Côte d’Ivoire, the Special Representative
received a commitment from the President of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission that reparations for
victims of sexual violence would be part of the
Commission’s mandate. In Liberia and South Sudan,
the Team of Experts has worked with national justice
sectors on sentencing guidelines, the training of police,
constitution-drafting and a host of other initiatives.
That is what the Office of the Special
Representative is for. The Security Council’s mandate
is clear and the Special Representative has been

12-23931

Apart from keeping a sharp focus on ending
impunity, we need to build our institutional capacity
for early warning. We applaud the efforts of the Special
Representative, of United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and of UN-Women to
develop an early warning framework.
As Council members, we need to make
combating sexual violence part of our discussions with
briefers so that it becomes an integral part of our
practice. We have recognized for some time that
conflict-related sexual violence is a security issue, but
the Secretary-General’s report places that matter
beyond dispute. As is shown quite clearly, it is a
security matter that impacts entire countries, as well as
individual communities, families and individuals.
It is also one that very much affects men and
boys, as well as women and girls. The report shows
that in many places, men are forced to watch as their
wives and daughters are being abused. There are
numerous cases of men and boys being sexually
attacked by other men as a deliberate tactic of conflict.
This is a security issue, not a women’s issue. We must
treat it as such and develop the same strategies of early
warning and prevention that we use for other security
threats.
The United States welcomes and supports the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report,
particularly with regard to the need for all parties to
conflict to make specific and time-bound commitments
to cease acts of sexual violence and bring perpetrators
to justice. We particularly endorse the recommendation
to address conflict-related sexual violence in the
context of security-sector reform initiatives, including
personnel-training and civilian oversight mechanisms.
The Council should continue to consider conflictrelated sexual violence in authorizing and renewing the

11

S/PV.6722

mandates of peacekeeping missions, including with
regard to monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements.
The United States will stay engaged with this
issue. As part of our new, National Action Plan on
Women, Peace and Security, the United States is
working to strengthen our efforts to prevent and
combat conflict-related sexual violence as we advance
women’s participation in preventing conflict and
keeping peace. Our ultimate objective is to incorporate
women and girls into our diplomatic, security,
humanitarian and development efforts in conflictaffected countries, not simply as beneficiaries but as
agents of peace, reconciliation, development, growth
and stability.
For example, the United States believes that it is
crucial to increase women’s participation in security
forces involved in preventing conflict and building
peace as one way to reduce conflict-related sexual
violence. The United States funds and implements the
Global Peace Operations Initiative, which has
facilitated the training of 2,451 female peacekeepers
worldwide. The Initiative supports instruction on the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse. Beginning
last year, we have supported the predeployment
training of Peruvian women peacekeepers focused on
women, peace and security issues, in support of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. In
Afghanistan, United States and Afghan officers provide
instruction and mentoring to female soldiers in the
Afghan National Army. In 2014, 10 per cent of the
Afghan Military Academy’s class will be women.
There are already more than 1,200 women serving in
the Afghan National Police, many of whom serve in
leadership positions.
Preventing and combating conflict-related sexual
violence is central to building lasting peace and
brighter futures for countries undergoing and emerging
from conflict. I cannot stress enough what a critical
concern this is for my Government. Sexual violence
must cease to be used as a tactic of war and
intimidation. For the sake of the vulnerable and for the
honour of nations, we, as the Council, must continue to
support efforts to end this scourge.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Margot Wallström, for her
comprehensive and valuable briefing and for the report

12

of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2012/33). We welcome the efforts of the
Special Representative and share the principles and
objectives she outlined. I would also like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Ladsous, and the representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
Ms. Megheirbi. We think the deliberations today will
promote our common interest in the subject.
India has been actively participating in the
Council’s debates on the agenda item on women and
peace and security. It is a cross-cutting issue with a
multisectoral dimension and requires the active
participation of all Member States. I would therefore
like to thank you, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Togo for organizing this open debate, which affords
Member States an opportunity to discuss the progress
made in the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010)
and contributes to our ongoing consideration of the
subject.
It is estimated that today close to 90 per cent of
current casualties in wars and situations of armed
conflict are civilians, the majority of whom are women
and
children.
Obviously,
women
bear
a
disproportionately large share of the burden of conflict,
but they have only a marginal say in matters of war and
peace. That is perhaps a function of the gender
imbalance in our societies, which is reflected in
positions of power and influence.
Despite that, women should not be viewed solely
as victims of war. They also have to assume the key
role of ensuring family livelihoods in the midst of
chaos and destruction. They are particularly active in
peace movements at the grass-roots level and in
cultivating peace within their communities. Therefore,
the absence of women at the peace-negotiating table is
unconscionable. Some of the aspects highlighted by the
landmark Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) —
in particular the greater participation of women in
areas of conflict prevention, peace negotiation and
post-conflict reconstruction — are central to the issue.
Some solutions need to emerge from the conflictaffected societies themselves. Others are more long-term
and structural, involving, inter alia, the encouragement
of democratic ideals and practices, effective
improvements in economic and social conditions and

12-23931

S/PV.6722

expansion of opportunities
productive employment.

for

education

and

Situations of conflict vary. Each has its own
causes and consequences. Clearly, there can be no
off-the-shelf remedies or panaceas. We need to take
practical and effective steps to mitigate the impact of
conflict on women and to enhance their ability to
restore and preserve peace.
It is a matter of deep regret that the international
community must repeatedly debate the issue of sexual
and other forms of violence against women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. That abhorrent behaviour,
whether perpetrated by the parties to the armed conflict
or by others, must be unequivocally, unambiguously
and resolutely condemned. There should be no
tolerance for gender-based violence. All such cases
must be investigated and the perpetrators prosecuted.
Some argue that human rights law and
international humanitarian law do not offer enough
protection to women and children. Such postulation is
a bit extreme. Women’s rights and needs have received
the attention they deserve in the codification of
international law. The challenge is the effective
implementation of the laws and the availability of
adequate resources for capacity-building wherever
required. That alone will ensure the real impact of our
efforts on the ground.
By definition, it is States that are parties to the
treaty-based system of international law. By and large,
they respect them, and when they do not, penalties
arise under provisions of the relevant treaties.
However, the most egregious crimes against women in
times of conflict have been and are being committed by
non-State actors, often warring against Governments.
They obey no laws and, as experience has shown
throughout the past decade, are immune to coercive or
punitive measures. The Council therefore needs to
consider, in practical terms, how non-State actors, who
are responsible for the bulk of the crimes that continue
to be committed against women, can be effectively
tackled.
On the part of the United Nations, there has been
modest progress in areas such as gender mainstreaming
in peacekeeping operations and training of peacekeeping
personnel on gender perspectives. In that context, we
commend Special Representative Wallström for having
brought a new synergy in addressing the issue of
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict.

12-23931

My country has taken a lead in that process,
while conscious of the need to incorporate essential
elements of the gender-mainstreaming policy in the
predeployment training of its peacekeepers. India’s
formed police unit (FPU) of 100 personnel in Liberia
was the first of its kind among United Nations
peacekeeping operations. As the largest troopcontributing country in United Nations history, we are
very proud of the exemplary record of our
peacekeepers. I might add that we are willing to
increase our contribution of female FPUs.
The Secretary-General, in his report, referred to
efforts to establish a framework of early warning
indicators specific to conflict-related sexual violence.
The United Nations has also developed a set of
indicators as global markers of progress in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We have
taken note of those efforts. The development of such
indicators, benchmarks and guidelines should involve a
process of broad intergovernmental scrutiny and
approval before their eventual adoption. In that
connection, one must be cognizant of the difficulty in
obtaining credible and verifiable data from conflict
situations.
India will continue to contribute positively to
United Nations efforts in protecting vulnerable sectors
of the population, particularly women and children, in
conflict and post-conflict societies. I would also like to
emphasize that the international community needs to
enhance cooperation by providing new and additional
financial resources, sharing experiences and building
capacity in the areas of justice and the rule of law.
The women and children in our lives ensure our
future. They must live in security. While there is much
talk of the need to safeguard the interests of women
and children, there is less talk of cooperative efforts to
ensure sustained economic growth, which alone can
eradicate the poverty and deprivation that cause their
exclusion.
Several studies point out that most of the global
poor are women. Globalization has affected both men
and women, but women bear the double burden of
inequality and marginalization. Empowering them is
therefore both crucial and urgent. In considering the
role of women in peace and security, the Council, I am
certain, will bear in mind the wider perspective of
women’s empowerment, development and peace.

13

S/PV.6722

Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset, on behalf of the Moroccan
delegation, to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
the debate.

comprehensive strategies to counter sexual violence by
strengthening preventive measures, improving medical
and psychological support services, and ensuring
access to justice for victims.

My delegation welcomes the report (S/2012/33)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010)
on conflict-related sexual violence. I also take the
opportunity to thank Ms. Margot Wallström, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her constructive and
substantive briefing and to pay tribute to her efforts to
promote the protection of women against violence in
conflict situations. Our thanks also go to Mr. Hervé
Ladsous and to Ms. Amina Megheirbi on behalf of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security. I
wish to congratulate the NGO Working Group in
particular for its commendable work in raising
awareness with respect to members of the Council.

My delegation would also like to commend the
efforts made by the Council to combat sexual violence,
in particular with respect to the preparation of the
terms of reference for women’s protection advisers, in
cooperation with the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.

Our debate today gives us the opportunity to take
stock of the implementation of the commitments made
under resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960
(2010), as well as the progress achieved in the
implementation of the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements established in line with
resolution 1960 (2010).
The convening of this debate also allows us to
undertake a more in-depth reflection on the
psychological impact and the consequences of conflictrelated sexual violence against women, girls and
children, as well as on the need to identify with greater
determination ways and means of ensuring optimal
protection for the victims of such violence.
The suffering endured by women during conflict
and the various forms of exclusion and social injustice
that they suffer from within their communities and
families require more resolute joint action and a
stronger commitment to ensure that they benefit from
the maximum level of protection.
The adoption of resolution 1960 (2010) in
December 2010 was one element of a series of
initiatives aimed at bolstering the existing legal toolkit
for tackling conflict-related sexual violence. We
believe that the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements established under that resolution should
allow for the collection of objective, reliable and
credible data on acts of sexual violence. We would also
like to see these arrangements serve as a basis for

14

The report of the Secretary-General also takes
stock of situations of sexual violence in several regions
of the world and of the measures taken by the parties in
conflict to put an end to those acts by identifying those
responsible, combating impunity of the perpetrators
and masterminds, and making available medical,
psychological and social assistance for victims and
their families.
While it is the responsibility of the parties to a
conflict to put an end to the grave consequences of
sexual violence during conflict for women and girls,
coordinated and sustained action by the United
Nations, through its various organs, agencies and
specialized and programmes, is crucial to progress in
existing initiatives.
The Kingdom of Morocco is convinced that the
effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions on conflict-related sexual violence also
requires improved coordination among the various
national and international actors involved in the
combat against sexual violence, as well as a more
resolute and sustained commitment on the part of the
United Nations in the area of technical assistance and
capacity-building.
The international community must stand shoulder
to shoulder and act in a spirit of solidarity in
guaranteeing women who have fallen victim to sexual
violence the right to make their voices heard and to
express their suffering, bearing in mind our obligation
to listen to them, protect them and to ensure that such
crimes never again go unpunished.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened today’s meeting. We are grateful also

12-23931

S/PV.6722

to Ms. Wallström, Mr. Ladsous and Ms. Megheirbi for
the useful information they presented today.
The very nature of violence during armed conflict
requires that due attention be paid to all of its
manifestations. The issue of women, peace and security
should be addressed through a comprehensive
approach, as set out in resolution 1325 (2000). Sexual
violence is a particular manifestation of violence that
clearly requires firm condemnation and severe
punishment. The careful investigation of all incidents
and the punishment of perpetrators is a guarantee of
success in combating this egregious crime.
Of particular concern are situations where sexual
violence is widespread. However, sexual violence is far
from being a root cause of an outbreak of conflict; it is,
rather, a symptom of the impunity that prevails during
armed conflict. Some of those situations, as we know,
pose a threat to international peace and security, and it
follows that they require the intervention of the
Security Council. But attempts to artificially impose on
the Security Council the duty to address the issue of
sexual violence in all of its aspects will lead not only to
imbalances in system-wide coherence but to an erosion
of the legitimacy and importance of Council decisions
on grave, complex and urgent issues.
Let us not forget that the issue of countering
sexual violence is, in the framework of existing
mandates, taken up not only by the Council but also by
other United Nations bodies, in particular the General
Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the
Commission on the Status of Women.
We would like to recall once again that sexual
violence is but one of the crimes committed in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. We are convinced
that focusing our efforts on combating sexual violence
means that we must also pay due attention to other
crimes committed in time of conflict. Civilians
continue to be the victims of crimes such as
premeditated attacks, including terrorist attacks, as
well as the indiscriminate or disproportionate use of
force. In our view, the Council must evaluate such
cases in an impartial and principled manner and ensure
that the perpetrators do not go unpunished.
We have carefully studied the report (S/2012/33)
of the Secretary-General. We note that the document is
rich in factual data, which reflects the credible and
comprehensive work being done to combat sexual
violence in armed conflict. Much of what has been

12-23931

done is welcome. We can see clearly that progress has
been made as a result of the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. However, the
reliability of some of the accounts contained in the
report is questionable. We believe that taking an
unbiased approach to this delicate issue on the basis of
objective and reliable information is the key to
promoting confidence in the activities undertaken in
this respect.
We disagree with the broad manner in which the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict has interpreted her
mandate. We would draw attention in particular to the
fact that the issue under consideration today is conflictrelated sexual violence. Unilateral changes in the scope
of an issue dealt with by a special United Nations
mechanism established as a result of intergovernmental
processes and enshrined in Security Council
resolutions are inadmissible and could have an adverse
impact on our ability to resolve the issue of sexual
violence.
Accordingly,
we
call
on
the
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, in carrying
out her activities, to strictly comply with her mandate,
according priority to those situations on the agenda of
the Security Council, where sexual violence is one of
the basic issues in the framework of the protection of
civilians. With respect to the need to comply with the
mandate of the Team of Experts, established by
resolution 1888 (2009), we see similar requirements.
The Team provides assistance to host countries on
strengthening the rule of law in situations of particular
concern. In that vein, we are puzzled by the fact that
the Secretary-General’s report contains an arbitrary
interpretation of the mandate that sets out the basic
task of the Team of Experts as monitoring situations of
sexual violence in conflict worldwide, as well as
developing country dossiers on the basis of information
received. I wish to underscore that what I have just
said in no way detracts from the success and efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Team of Experts in the framework of their
mandates.
We are not convinced of the advisability of
establishing a special mechanism to monitor respect by
parties to a conflict for their responsibilities to combat
sexual violence. It would seem that strategic leadership
should be harmonized and that the effectiveness of
existing systems and mechanisms should be enhanced

15

S/PV.6722

by improving coordination among them. Indeed, that
would be in line with founding Council resolutions and
is at the core of the activities of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
We continue to believe that the Security Council
must address those issues that fall within its purview.
The issue of the sexual violence should be considered
by the Council exclusively under the agenda item
“Women and peace and security” and insofar as it is
linked to the maintenance of peace and security.
In conclusion, we express the hope that the
observations and proposals put forward by Council
members today will serve to further improve the
activities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and other United Nations structures
and bodies concerned with combating sexual violence
in armed conflict within the framework of their
mandates.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I join
others in thanking Margot Wallström and Hervé
Ladsous for their briefings, and Amina Megheirbi for
her moving words on behalf of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security. The United
Kingdom welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2012/33). We
wholeheartedly support the work and the mandate of
Margot Wallström.
I would like to make three points. First, I would
like to commend Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Wallström for the good work that
she has done to raise the profile of this issue, including
fighting against impunity. We welcome her concerted
efforts in tackling this issue, leading to a more
coordinated response from the United Nations system,
as she set out this morning. United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict has played an
important part in implementing the monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements. Ms. Wallström
has also worked tirelessly to ensure that the voices of
non-governmental and civil society organizations are
heard.
Secondly, we welcome the efforts towards greater
accountability and an end to impunity. The United
Nations monitoring and reporting mechanisms provide
reliable, objective and evidence-based information on
conflict-related sexual violence against women, men,
girls and boys. Under resolution 1960 (2010), the

16

Security Council can now hold to account parties
credibly suspected of committing acts of rape or other
forms of sexual violence. We note that these parties are
listed for the first time, and support appropriate action
being taken against those responsible for these terrible
acts.
It is important that the Council take into account
information on conflict-related sexual violence when
considering post-conflict situations and other situations
of concern. However, conflict-related sexual violence
is not confined to countries on the Security Council’s
agenda, as we see incidents or patterns occur in other
settings. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral must be able to address conflict-related sexual
violence wherever a pattern or trend exists as an early
warning sign of conflict. These crimes must be
reported, addressed and punished, and the survivors
must be treated with dignity throughout the reporting
process.
We recognize the good work of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law. It supports Member States
in strengthening the rule of law and institutional
safeguards against impunity by working with them to
improve rule of law processes and ensuring that those
who commit sexual violence are brought to justice. It is
not until impunity has been combated and the
perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence are
brought to account that justice will have been done. All
parties to conflict must learn that it is the perpetrator,
and not the survivor, who will pay the price.
Finally, we welcome the development of a
framework of early warning signs specific to conflictrelated sexual violence, as well as the ambition to
integrate this analysis into existing and emerging early
warning and prevention systems. Early warning and
prevention systems are vital tools in both preventing
and in tackling conflict-related sexual violence.
Rape is increasingly used as a tactic of war, and
the Security Council should be united in condemnation
of it and steadfast in support of the crucial work of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The adoption of resolution 1960 (2010), the
appointment of Ms. Wallström, the establishment of
her good offices alongside the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, and the
work of women protection advisors all contribute to
preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual

12-23931

S/PV.6722

violence, and thereby to international peace and
stability.
We firmly believe that the Council needs to
sustain and build on this work. For that reason, the
United Kingdom is disappointed that the Council has
not yet been able to agree a presidential statement
condemning conflict-related sexual violence. It sends a
depressing message to the world at large, and in
particular to victims and survivors, that on the occasion
of this debate the Council has not yet been able to
agree a public statement on impunity, on prevention
and early warning, on follow-up to resolution 1960
(2010) over the past year, and, crucially, on the
excellent work of Ms. Wallström.
We trust that intensive and urgent efforts will
continue among Council members to agree a public
position on these important issues, and that all
delegations
will
demonstrate
the
necessary
commitment, sensitivity and vision to make such a
statement possible. The United Kingdom will certainly
be active in such efforts.
Finally, we have noticed a disturbing trend
recently of certain members of the Security Council
arguing that they do not feel bound by resolutions
adopted when they were not on the Council. Security
Council resolutions are, of course, legally binding on
all States Members of the United Nations, and no
Member State can distance itself from resolutions or
undermine their implementation, whether or not they
were present on the Council when those resolutions
were adopted.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Togolese presidency for
convening this important open debate on women and
peace and security. We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Margot Wallström; the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Hervé Ladsous; and Ms. Amina Megheirbi for their
statements.
Civilians are entitled in all circumstances to
respect for their persons, their honour, their family
rights, their religious convictions and practices, and
their manners and customs. They are to be at all times
humanely treated and protected, especially against all
acts of violence or threats thereof.

12-23931

The reality, however, is different. Indeed, a
defining feature of most, if not all, conflicts is still the
failure of parties to respect and ensure respect for their
obligations to protect civilians. Civilians continue to
suffer from inadequate protection in situations of
armed conflict, including discriminatory treatment,
torture, sexual violence, extrajudicial executions, mass
population displacements and ethnic cleansing. In
many situations of armed conflict, sexual violence has
been used as a weapon of war to strike terror and to
force civilians to leave their native lands.
Azerbaijan strongly condemns all acts of violence
committed against women and girls in situations of
armed conflict. It is imperative that all parties to armed
conflict strictly abide by their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law.
Azerbaijan’s interest in the issue under
consideration is obvious and stems from its efforts to
contribute to achieving sustainable peace and
development and its practical experience of addressing
the impact of armed conflict on civilians, including
women and children.
In three days, we will commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of atrocious crimes committed against the
Azerbaijani civilians of the town of Khojaly, where
during one night hundreds of civilians were killed only
because they were Azerbaijanis. Not even women and
children were spared by the invading troops. In its
resolutions adopted in 1993 in response to the
occupation of Azerbaijani territories, the Security
Council referred specifically to violations of
international humanitarian law and attacks on civilians.
We are confident that consistent measures being taken
at the national level, as well as the existing
international legal framework, will serve to bring to
justice those responsible for crimes in Khojaly and
other grave offences committed during the occupation
of Azerbaijan’s territories. It is incontrovertible today
that no official or political status cloaks the person
concerned with immunity for the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community.
The adoption by the Security Council of the
landmark resolution 1325 (2001) was an important
milestone that took up the issue of women and peace
and security as a separate thematic issue and brought
international visibility to the plight of women and girls
in situations of armed conflict. The subsequent Council
resolutions, presidential statements and other relevant

17

S/PV.6722

documents have contributed to developing a solid
framework and raising awareness of the impact that
sexual violence has on victims’ families and societies.

international law, as reflected in the 1998 Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court and in the 1949
Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocols.

The heightened vulnerability of civilians in
wartime — in particular forcibly displaced persons,
refugees, women and children — brings an element of
urgency, dedication and strong commitment to our
protection efforts, which must be free of selectivity and
politically motivated approaches and preferences.
Azerbaijan notes the role that the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict must play in that regard.

The Security Council has recognized the threat of
conflict-related sexual violence to peace and security.
Resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010)
have been historic responses to a heinous reality.
However, the disturbing situation on the ground,
reflected in the recent report (S/2011/33) of the
Secretary-General and in today’s briefings, underlines
the strong imperative to keep up the fight.

Among the pressing issues requiring urgent
action and attention is that of women taken hostage and
reported missing in connection with armed conflict. We
are continuing our efforts to address that disturbing
phenomenon, including through the relevant biennial
resolution of the General Assembly and the
Commission on the Status of Women, of which
Azerbaijan is a main sponsor. In that regard, I would
like to recall that, inter alia, at its fifty-fourth session,
the Commission called for the immediate release of
women and children taken hostage in armed conflicts,
including by strengthening international cooperation to
that end.
More resolute and targeted measures are required
to end impunity for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community, including those
committed against women in situations of armed
conflict. Combating impunity is important not only for
the purposes of prosecuting such crimes and bringing
those responsible to justice, but also for ensuring
sustainable peace, truth and reconciliation.
Mr. Berger (Germany): I would like to thank
Togo, as the holder of the presidency of the Security
Council, for organizing today’s open debate on this
important issue. My thanks also go to the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative Margot Wallström,
Ms. Amina Megheirbi and Under-Secretary-General
Hervé Ladsous for their insightful briefings and
statements.
The issue on our agenda today is one of the most
abhorrent, yet still all too often concealed and
underreported, of crimes. In a number of armed
conflicts sexual violence is used as a weapon of war,
thus not only destroying its victims but traumatizing
societies at large. Widespread and systematic sexual
violence ranks among the grave breaches of

18

Germany very much welcomes the setting up of
the new monitoring and reporting mechanism and
commends Special Representative Wallström and all
United Nations and civil society organizations working
on this issue, for their indispensable work. We hope
that the women protection advisers will be deployed
shortly. Prevention is an important aspect of the
Special Representative’s mandate. The Security
Council needs to be properly informed about all
possible threats to peace and security.
What more can the Security Council, United
Nations organizations and Member States do? First,
our key goal should be prevention, and not mere
reaction. To facilitate such an approach, exact and
reliable data and early warning mechanisms — as
mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report — are
crucial. Awareness-raising and training, especially for
peacekeepers and police officers, should also be high
on our agenda. Whenever a peacekeeping mandate is
renewed, the Council needs to make sure that it also
contains provisions to monitor sexual violence.
Small arms are another aspect that is often
overlooked when discussing the prevention of
violence, but one that was mentioned today by the
Special Representative. There is some evidence that,
especially after an armed conflict, the ready
availability of small arms increases the threat of their
use, especially against women and children.
Secondly, we must accelerate our fight against
impunity. Perpetrators have to be brought to justice.
Bearing in mind the main responsibility of States to
investigate and prosecute, the Security Council also
has a role to play. We therefore welcome the inclusion
in the Secretary-General’s report, for the first time, of
an annex listing parties that are credibly suspected of
patterns of rape and other forms of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict on the Council’s agenda.

12-23931

S/PV.6722

Naming and shaming is not an end in itself, but should
serve as a basis for targeted measures leading to the
end of those terrible crimes. The International Criminal
Court and international monitoring mechanisms have
also done important work in that regard, and should be
further strengthened.
Thirdly, we need greater resolve on ensuring the
participation of women at all stages of peace processes.
As an example, the issue of sexual violence has not yet
figured in most ceasefire or peace agreements. The
Department for Political Affairs has developed an
interesting new tool to start closing that gap, namely,
new mediation guidelines that take into account the
issue of sexual violence. The guidelines, which of
course cover other aspects as well, will be presented on
9 March at the German Mission. It is my pleasure to
invite everyone to attend that event.
Fourthly, reparation schemes and funding
frameworks should be guided by a survivor-focused
approach. Both physical and mental scars have to be
treated in order to allow survivors to once again
actively participate in their societies. We commend the
valuable work done by United Nations organizations,
especially the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of
Actions to Eliminate Violence against Women, which
Germany actively supports, as well as the newly
created team of experts that advises Member States,
upon their request, to combat sexual violence in or
after conflict.
Let me conclude by stressing that we cannot
separate the challenge of sexual violence from the
broader security issues on the agenda of the Council.
We need the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to continue her important work. Germany will
actively support her in her endeavour.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank you very much,
Mr. President, for having convened this debate. The
very large number of delegations that have expressed a
desire to speak today clearly shows that this issue is at
the heart of our concerns. I should also like very much
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Mr. Ladsous for their briefings, as well as
Ms. Amina Megheirbi for her very moving statement.
(spoke in English)
Let me start by commending Ms. Margo
Wallström for her excellent work over the past two

12-23931

years and her efforts to spread a clear message that
sexual violence is simply not tolerable and that there is
no real security without women’s security.
The report (S/2012/33) before us today gives a
clear and comprehensive idea of the intensive work
that has been carried out worldwide by the Special
Representative in her advocacy for the fight against
conflict-related sexual violence, in field visits, in
engaging with national and non-governmental bodies
and authorities and in coordinating within the United
Nations system. It provides us with important
information on the implementation of the resolutions
passed by this Council regarding monitoring and
reporting arrangements aimed at collecting more
consistent information on conflict-related sexual
violence, but also regarding the establishment of a
team of experts on the rule of law to assist national
authorities to reinforce traditional systems weakened
by conflict.
Moreover, the report provides us with very useful
information on specific situations, in accordance with
resolution 1888 (2009) — information about incidents,
but also about challenges and best practices adopted at
the national level. It also contains very concrete
recommendations, which we welcome.
We must recognize that much has been achieved,
and we are confident that the Special Representative
will continue to carry out her mandate in the same
committed and professional manner.
The Security Council has recognized that the
protection of women is a critical priority for peace and
security. Resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010)
have clearly established the fight against sexual
violence in the agenda of this Council. The Council has
created the necessary tools for obtaining reliable and
accurate information on sexual violence. A common
definition of sexual violence and common
methodologies for data collection through monitoring
and recording activities are now used throughout the
system.
The Council has been quite successful in
discharging its responsibilities, but it still needs to
reinforce its effectiveness. For instance, we need to
make full use of existing tools, mainly ensuring
deployment of women’s protection advisers in relevant
peacekeeping operations, which will strengthen the
prevention of and the response to sexual violence. We
hope that the challenges that have delayed the

19

S/PV.6722

deployment of these advisers will be overcome, since
their deployment in specific missions has already been
requested by this Council.
Another promising tool at the disposal of
Member States is the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We welcome the
technical cooperation that was provided at the request
of national authorities of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, South Sudan, the Republic of Guinea,
Sierra Leone and Côte d’Ivoire.
All information contained in the report is relevant
for the Security Council in terms of the Charter’s
mandate for the maintenance of national peace and
security. The information that is already collected by
the reporting mechanism will improve the Council’s
access to timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information on sexual violence in conflict. The
Secretary-General or the Special Representative will be
able to brief the Council with reliable information on
specific situations that deserve the Council’s attention.
That reliable information will consequently enable the
Council to act, collectively and in an appropriate mode,
well before major incidents of widespread sexual
violence reinforce threats to peace and security.
Indeed, a Council that is better informed is also in
a better position to take effective action. With
sufficient information, the Council will be able to take
preventive steps in a timely manner. But the Council
now will also need to take action with regard to those
parties listed in the annex of the Secretary-General’s
report, which are, and I quote, “credibly suspected of
committing or being responsible for patterns of rape
and other forms of sexual violence” (S/2012/33,
para. 118).
The Council has already passed a clear message
to assure the perpetuators of sexual violence that the
Council adopts sanctions against perpetrators who have
been identified or who are credibly suspected of
committing sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict on its agenda. The Council should be
consistent and reinforce that message concerning other
individuals in similar circumstances. Impunity is
simply not acceptable.
The work carried out by the Special
Representative and, ultimately, by this Council during
the past few years is making a real difference in many
parts of the world, especially for women and girls, but
also for men and boys. As we have heard, Governments

20

have recently prosecuted senior officers of their armed
forces for crimes of sexual violence, and leaders of
parties in armed conflict have been arrested and
transferred to the International Criminal Court. These
actions send a powerful signal to the victims of sexual
violence that no military or political leader is above the
law. This political message needs to be constantly
underlined by the United Nations, and by this Council
in particular.
Before concluding, let me mention that we regret
that we have not yet been able to agree on the
presidential statement on this important debate. But we
trust that, with the cooperation of all, we will be able to
achieve this shortly.
I conclude with a word for the victims and the
survivors of sexual violence. They are at the centre of
our debates. Let us not forget them and the fact that
beyond bringing perpetrators to justice, the
international community also needs to afford care and
reparation to the victims.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate. I welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Wallström;
the
Under-Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Ladsous; and Ms. Megheirbi of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for their statements.
France associates itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union.
I should like to reiterate our full support for the
work of the Special Representative and to commend
the quality of her annual report. We also welcome the
work done by the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The effective implementation of Security Council
resolutions on women, peace and security is a priority
for France, which worked actively for their adoption. It
also worked to strengthen attention to this issue within
the European Union. At the national level, at the end of
2010 France adopted an action plan for the
implementation of the resolutions on women, peace
and security.
We welcome the progress described in the report
of the Special Representative regarding the
establishment of institutional mechanisms to implement
resolutions adopted by the Security Council. I point

12-23931

S/PV.6722

particularly to the progressive implementation of
monitoring, analysis and communication arrangements,
which will make it possible to gather information on
sexual violence. This is essential for the Council to be
properly informed.

We also welcome the establishment of a list of
parties, annexed to the report of the Special
Representative, pursuant to resolution 1960 (2010).
This list should make it possible to improve
communication of information on troubling situations.

However, as Ms. Wallström emphasized, the
important issue is that of the gap between our
initiatives — the mechanisms we establish — and the
reality on the ground. Here, the account given by the
Secretariat is alarming. Sexual violence remains
intolerably high.

It is indeed a decisive step forward in combating
impunity for the perpetrators of sexual violence,
another imperative in our combat against this scourge.
The perpetrators of such violence must be brought to
justice and sentenced with all due severity. The
Council has a crucial role to play in that regard, both
by adopting targeted measures against perpetrators of
gender-based violence in the context of the relevant
sanctions committees and through its ability to refer
situations to the International Criminal Court.

In many conflicts today, sexual violence is a
weapon used to crush individuals and communities.
Therefore, these acts of violence are a destabilizing
factor and a threat to peace and security with, as
Ms. Wallström emphasized, lasting consequences. By
way of example, hundreds of Somali women refugees
have been raped, sometimes in front of their husbands.
Conflicts, droughts and massive displacements increase
the risk of sexual violence against women and girls. In
Darfur, the Government of the Sudan has shut down all
clinics for the victims of rape. During the past year,
more than 625 cases of sexual violence were registered
by the United Nations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Sexual violence does not occur only when there is
an armed conflict, as the Special Representative
pointed out in her report. Situations in which there is
political instability, including a climate of violence
before and after elections, are particularly favourable
for the commission of those crimes. Thus in Syria, the
Syrian armed forces and security forces have resorted
to sexual torture of prisoners, including children and
adolescents.
Sexual violence is not inevitable.
Given the magnitude of the challenges facing the
United Nations, France fully supports the mandate of
the Special Representative. Resolution 1960 (2010),
adopted in December 2010, marked a political
commitment to use all the means available to the
Security Council to ensure that sexual violence is
prevented. It is up to us today to do our utmost to
ensure that that resolution is implemented. The UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
mentioned that what is important today here is the
swift deployment of women’s protection officers in
United Nations missions.

12-23931

Lastly, it is essential to pursue our efforts to
implement a zero-tolerance policy in peacekeeping
operations. The United Nations system and Member
States must bear their responsibilities in that regard.
We should set an example.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Spawned by misanthropism,
sexual or gender-based violence in any form and in any
society is reprehensible. Such crimes assume a more
sinister dimension when employed as tactics of war
and tools of humiliation during armed conflicts. All
parties to a conflict have the moral and legal
responsibility to ensure due protection of all vulnerable
groups, including women, children, the elderly and the
disabled.
Pakistan welcomes this opportunity to have an
open and frank discussion on the important topic of
sexual violence in armed conflict. We have listened
carefully to the remarks made by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wallström. We
are also grateful to Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
and to Ms. Megheirbi.
Pakistan’s commitment to the United Nations
agenda of peace and security needs no elaboration. For
more than half a century, Pakistanis have served in
United Nations peacekeeping operations in challenging
circumstances. We have noted the Security Council’s
enhanced emphasis on addressing violations of the
human rights of children and women through new
mechanisms, such as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Employed
properly and in cooperation with concerned States and

21

S/PV.6722

other relevant actors, such tools have the potential for
good.
We are supportive of the work that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is doing, and
would like to encourage her to continue to focus on the
core of her mandate, that is, situations of armed
conflict or occupation. Having carefully read the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2012/33), we have some
questions and comments on its specifics.
Ideas such as the inclusion of elections, political
strife or civil unrest under “other situations” go beyond
the mandate of the Security Council. They run counter
to paragraph 8 of resolution 1960 (2010), which clearly
confines the whole debate to the implementation of
resolution 1888 (2009), that is, situations of armed
conflict. That is what the report should focus on, not
situations that are neither armed conflict nor
post-conflict or that threaten international peace and
security. It is a matter of concern that some members of
the Council, while arguing for a binding nature of
Security Council resolutions, paradoxically condone
deviations from mandates authorized by those very
resolutions. The report should also not deviate from the
established notion of sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict
As paragraphs 1 and 3 of resolution 1960 (2010)
affirm, the mandate of taking action against specific
parties is restricted to those situations that are on the
agenda of the Security Council. However, in
paragraph 116 of the report, the Secretary-General
recommends that the Security Council take specific
actions, including the use of targeted measures by
sanctions committees, against all parties named in the
report, instead of those mentioned in the annex. We
would appreciate clarification of that anomaly.
The report also mentions the development of a
framework for early warning indicators specific to
conflict-related sexual violence, with the aim of
integrating the analyses yielded by the framework into
existing and emerging early warning and prevention
systems to facilitate a rapid response. It should be
ensured that such a mechanism works strictly within
the mandate and under the guidance of the Security
Council to obviate politicization.
Let me conclude by saying that, our questions
notwithstanding, Pakistan attaches the highest
importance to and supports this important mandate. We
would like to stress the need to strengthen the rule of

22

law through a focus on national judicial systems, better
training for peacekeeping troops and local police
forces, and the increased participation of women in all
peacemaking,
peacebuilding
and
peacekeeping
processes to help end sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict. We are also supportive of the
recommendations made by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on the need to take steps for
the legal, medical and psychological rehabilitation of
the victims of sexual violence, as well as efforts to
strengthen institutional safeguards against impunity for
perpetrators.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by expressing my thanks for the
important briefings and presentations to the Council by
Ms. Margot Wallström, Mr. Hervé Ladsous and
Ms. Amina Megheirbi. I wish, in particular, to express
Colombia’s appreciation for the dedication and work of
Ms. Wallström and for the progress in implementing
the provisions of resolution 1960 (2010), which seek to
ensure prompt, precise, reliable and objective data
collection on sexual violence in conflicts.
With regard to the body of the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
that we are considering today (S/2012/33), I would like
to draw attention to the definition of the task used
throughout it. On the one hand, throughout the report,
the expression “conflict-related sexual violence” is
used. That is different from that used by the Council in
all its previous resolutions and statements, namely,
“sexual violence in armed conflict”. On the other hand,
in resolution 1960 (2010), when the Council requested
the Secretary-General to deal with conflict-related
situations, such as post-conflict situations or other
situations relevant to the implementation of resolution
1888 (2009), it did so solely and exclusively to enable
data collection by means of the monitoring and
reporting arrangements.
The report therefore reflects the fact that not only
is the precise concept of sexual violence in armed
conflict being abandoned, but it would also seem that
the arrangement can now be applied to the broader
concept of incidents or standards of behaviour
occurring in other situations that are cause for concern.
In our view, that is not covered by resolution 1960
(2010).
Regarding the recommendations contained in the
report, Colombia understands that by urging the

12-23931

S/PV.6722

Council to increase pressure on perpetrators of
conflict-related sexual violence, including the
individuals and parties named in the report, the
Secretary-General is referring to those named in the
report’s annex, that is to say, the situations being
considered by the Council and the sanctions
committees set up with regard to such situations, which
have adopted clear and precise criteria and procedures.
We must not lose sight of the fact that each situation is
specific, as are the elements of each mandate issued by
the Council.
My delegation reiterates its position with regard
to the possible establishment of dialogue with parties
to conflict for commitments to prevent sexual violence
and hold perpetrators accountable in that the
establishment of such dialogue must observe national
laws and policies. If a State, as in the case of
Colombia, has a policy whereby any dialogue between
the United Nations and illegal armed groups operating
in the country must take place with the prior explicit
authorization of the Government, that decision must be
respected.
Colombia attaches the greatest importance to the
prevention, investigation and prosecution of sexual
violence in armed conflicts. As a result, we are
resolutely determined to address this complex series of
problems. Our national authorities as a whole are
taking action to foster a culture of zero tolerance for
violations of human rights, zero tolerance for violence
against women and, in particular, zero tolerance for
sexual violence. Colombia has legislation ensuring
women a life free of any sort of violence in both the
public and private spheres and an institutional structure
capable of implementing such measures.
Colombia’s Law No. 1448 of 2011, on care,
assistance and full reparation to the victims of internal
armed conflict — as highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral in his report — sets out different measures and
guarantees of non-recurrence for women and girls who
are victims of sexual violence. This is a decisive step
forward by the State to deal with these problems in a
coordinated and consistent fashion.
With regard to the defence sector, many
administrative provisions have been adopted aimed at
preventing and punishing abuse, such as Ministry of
Defence Directive No. 11 of 2010, which is aimed at
reasserting compliance by armed forces with regard to
their obligation to prevent all forms of violence against

12-23931

women and children, specifically violent sexual acts, as
well as Directive No. 7 of March 2011, on combating
impunity.
In order to strengthen the measures adopted in
those instruments, coordinated work is being done with
the United Nations, the High Adviser for Women’s
Equality and other State bodies in order to define
additional measures of prevention in accordance with
experience gained on the ground and international
standards.
The establishment of monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements for conflict-related sexual
violence must ensure that on the basis of accurate,
objective and verifiable information, measures may be
adopted to prevent conflict-related sexual violence and
provide effective responses to help its victims.
Similarly, recognizing the primary responsibility of the
State to protect its people, the information obtained
must contribute to the adoption of broad national
policies and strategies against sexual violence,
including prevention and care and recognition of
victims.
In that regard, it is imperative to help States with
the development and implementation of early-warning
mechanisms and procedures that facilitate the
reporting, registering and verification of information.
To the same end, the various United Nations bodies
must continue to strengthen coordination, reducing the
duplication of effort and ensuring a consistent
approach in the field in order to help the Council in its
consideration of all appropriate measures.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Togo for convening this open debate. I
welcome the presence of His Excellency the Foreign
Minister of Togo to preside over this meeting. I would
also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Wallström, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations Ladsous and Ms. Amina
Megheirbi for their briefings and statements.
China condemns all violence against women in
armed conflicts, including sexual violence. We urge all
parties to conflict or intervening parties to abide by
international humanitarian law and other relevant
international law. In that regard, I would like to
emphasize the following five points.
First, to avoid and lessen the harm suffered by
women in armed conflicts, we should first of all

23

S/PV.6722

prevent wars and reduce the number of conflicts. The
Security Council bears the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. To
safeguard the rights and interests of women, the
Council should actively engage in preventive
diplomacy and promote the settlement of disputes by
peaceful means, including dialogue and consultations.
The mandates of the Council’s resolutions should be
comprehensively and strictly implemented. They must
not be abused and, even less so, exceeded. Actions to
provide protection for civilians should pay particular
attention to avoiding further casualties among women
and children.
Secondly,
Governments
bear
the
main
responsibility for protecting women and combating
sexual violence, as well as for implementing
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and
the relevant presidential statements. While the
international community can provide constructive
assistance, external support must comply with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and fully respect the sovereignty of the
countries concerned.
Thirdly, it is necessary to strengthen the
participation of women in all stages of the peace
process, pay attention to their status and roles, and
further tap their potential. China supports women in
playing a greater role in preventing and settling
conflicts and in rehabilitation and reconstruction.
China supports the United Nations in appointing more
female senior officials, special representatives of the
Secretary-General and special envoys, and especially
in increasing female representation from the
developing countries.
Fourthly, the issue of women is that of
development. In order to fundamentally solve various
problems, including sexual violence, attention should
be paid to promoting economic and social
development, eradicating the root causes of conflicts
and achieving the comprehensive development of
women. The United Nations should actively promote
the implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals, increase support and assistance to developing
countries and, in particular, pay greater attention to the
reconstruction and development of post-conflict
countries.
Fifthly, in addressing questions related to women,
peace and security, including sexual violence, there

24

should be a division of labour among the relevant
United Nations organs, which should collaborate with
each other. In accordance with its Charter mandate, the
Security Council should concern itself with situations
that constitute a threat to international peace and
security. At the same time, full play should be given to
the role of other United Nations organs and bodies,
such as the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the Human Rights Council and
UN-Women, which should endeavour to generate
synergy.
We hope that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General will work strictly in accordance with
the mandate of the Security Council and play a
constructive role in appropriately addressing the
problem of sexual violence in armed conflicts.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful to the Togolese presidency for convening
this open debate on sexual violence in armed conflict,
as well as to Ms. Margot Wallström, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Armed Conflict, for her presentation of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/33), which informs
us in a more detailed manner regarding the situation on
the ground on this subject. We are also grateful for the
interventions by Mr. Hervé Ladsous and Ms. Amina
Megheirbi.
We recognize that the mandate to combat sexual
violence in situations of conflict is a very complex one.
When such crimes are perpetrated against women and
girls in a massive and systematic way by armed groups,
they have the aim, among other aspects, of punishing,
humiliating and destroying the fabric of society.
Moreover, such crimes often include deeply rooted
discriminatory practices, sheltered by a culture of
impunity. Among many other aspects, they constitute
grotesque violations of human rights, with grave
consequences for individuals, families and societies.
Over the past three years the Security Council has
been working to strengthen collective measures to
combat sexual violence in armed conflicts. The
adoption of resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and
1960 (2010) underscored the Council’s commitment to
fight the utterly unacceptable violence and terror that
women suffer because of sexual violence during armed
conflicts. The work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General has been crucial to this effort.

12-23931

S/PV.6722

We applaud some of the conceptual advances
contained in the Secretary-General’s report in proposing
a more detailed characterization of the scope of
conflict-related sexual violence, based on analysis of
cases and trends of some twenty situations on the
ground. That offers better elements for preventive
measures and the eventual use of early warning systems
and for improving access to services for victims — or, to
use the term of the report, survivors — of this scourge.
We are aware of the diverse consequences of
armed conflicts, which increase the likelihood of
sexual violence. It cannot be denied that factors such as
the fear of reprisals, insecurity, social stigma and the
lack of prompt services for victims often prevent such
crimes from being reported. Moreover, we must fight
the perception that it is futile to report them. We must
work to strengthen the administration of justice, both
civilian and military, so that the perpetrators and those
responsible are brought to justice. It is imperative to
obtain firm commitments to prohibit sexual violence
on the part of the high-ranking commanders of armed
forces, and the armed groups, and to adopt codes of
conduct that prohibit sexual violence.
We
strongly
agree
with
the
specific
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report. We
must increase the pressure against those responsible for
acts of sexual violence in conflicts. In that regard, we
commend the list of parties and even of individuals that
are credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for systematic rape and other forms of
sexual violence during armed conflicts and in
post-conflict situations.
We also believe that the Council should
systematically consider sexual violence in armed
conflicts when authorizing or renewing mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping missions. Moreover, we
should guarantee the participation of women in the
solution and prevention of conflicts. Rehabilitation and
reconstruction are important parts of the efforts for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Guatemala
supports the idea that women should play a greater role
in the good offices work and in mediating
controversies. We encourage the Secretary-General to
appoint
more
qualified
women
as
special
representatives and special envoys.
We are concerned by the delay in the deployment
of women’s protection advisers in peacekeeping
operations. Such advisers were approved in resolution

12-23931

1888 (2009). We hope that in future their deployment
can be expedited so as to effectively comply with the
mandate of that resolution.
Finally, we reiterate our support for the United
Nations campaign against sexual violence in conflicts
and for the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy
with regard to personnel of peacekeeping missions. We
also encourage Ms. Wallström to continue her visits to
the field, and we commend her five recent visits and
the agreements reached with the Governments. We
trust that in this task she will engage with regional
bodies to coordinate actions at the highest possible
level.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I would like to
express our sincere gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Margot
Wallström and to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, for their
briefings this morning. Our delegation welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/33) and the
comments made on behalf of the non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), specifically the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and security.
South Africa attaches great significance to the
subject matter under consideration, and we wish to
express our sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General,
the Special Representative and the entire United
Nations team that continues to work hard to ensure that
this scourge is completely eradicated. We would like to
commend the excellent job done by the United Nations
and the Special Representative to highlight the
challenges of sexual violence in conflict-affected areas.
Africa continues to bear the brunt of this evil, given its
high share of the number of conflict areas. This
scourge has to be completely eradicated sooner than
later.
South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
continuing trends of sexual violence in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations, in particular the deliberate
targeting of civilians, especially children. It is a fact
that women and girls are disproportionately affected by
the scourge of violence. Over the centuries, women
have formed the core of civilization and human
advancement. On our continent and in South Africa,
women have participated in the gallant struggles
against colonialism and oppression as equals, shoulder
to shoulder with men, in the struggle for justice,
emancipation and equality.

25

S/PV.6722

It is therefore a travesty that women are still
today subjected to the most degrading and
dehumanizing acts, in spite of their violent role in
history. We should therefore spare no effort to
comprehensively resolve all the outstanding conflicts
across the globe in general and on our continent in
particular. Those conflicts continue to be a fertile
ground for sexual violence, and rape in particular,
which is used as a weapon of war.

We welcome and fully support the establishment
by the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) of prosecution support cells to boost the
capacity of the Congolese justice system in the
investigation of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and sexual violence. We hope that all those initiatives
will help to bring all the perpetrators to justice and end
the culture of impunity.

We have taken note of the fact that the SecretaryGeneral’s report for the past year was prepared and
compiled after a broad and extensive consultation with
the 13-entity network — a fact greatly appreciated by
my delegation, given that it has enriched the report by
making it one informed by the conditions and
experiences on the ground. No doubt it is one of the
most comprehensive reports ever prepared on this
matter, and it represents to a large extent the great deal
of progress in dealing with this scourge. We are
particularly pleased that United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions, as well as country teams, were
primary sources of information for the report. For
South Africa that is crucial, because the report is
informed by the experiences of people who are at the
cold phase.

We welcome the commitments that were made by
the Governments of countries of concern during the
visit of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in relation to addressing impunity for sexual
crimes and the training of security personnel. We
appreciate the work done by the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
especially its great work in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Liberia and South Sudan.

The Council has done an outstanding job over the
past few years to comprehensively address the
challenge of conflict-related sexual violence by
adopting landmark resolutions aimed at eradicating it.
South Africa welcomes the progress that has been
made so far in the preparations of the terms of
reference for women protection advisers, and we look
forward to their early deployment. We are mindful of
the limitations that continue to pose a challenge to the
reporting of incidents of sexual violence in conflictstricken areas.
It is our hope that the countries mentioned in the
report will do everything in their power to address all
the challenges identified, including bringing the
perpetrators to justice and reparations for the victims.
South Africa is concerned that African countries
continue to constitute the majority of countries where
there is an increasing prevalence of conflict-related
sexual violence. We are appalled that the incidents of
rape and gang rape increased in the recent conflict that
struck Côte d’Ivoire. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, rape, mass rapes and other sexual violence
continue unabated in North and South Kivu. That is a
matter of great concern to South Africa.

26

In the same vein, and equally important, are the
predeployment training modules that UN-Women and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations have
developed. We welcome the modules that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has developed
on the protection of civilians and sexual violence with
the African Union partners, under the auspices of the
Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training
Centre. We are of the view that the streamlining of
conflict-related sexual violence across all peacekeeping
training will go a long way in the efforts to
comprehensively address and eradicate that evil. We
would like to encourage all United Nations agencies
and departments to continue to work together in an
integrated and coordinated manner to effectively
implement such training. We hope that we will soon
see the fruits of those concerted efforts.
We are pleased with the development of a
framework of early warning signs specific to conflictrelated sexual violence by UN-Women, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
broader United Nations system. That will assist a great
deal towards preventing those heinous crimes. We
equally appreciate the work of the Department of
Political Affairs in producing the United Nations
guidelines for mediators on addressing conflict-related
sexual violence in ceasefire and peace agreements.
South Africa supports the inclusion of provisions
dealing with conflict-related sexual violence in
ceasefire and peace agreements, which must have a

12-23931

S/PV.6722

direct linkage with the increasing role of women in
conflict resolution and management.
South Africa is mindful of the fact that, if all
those efforts and initiatives are to succeed, a great deal
of resources and funds are required. The international
community and the United Nations must do all they
can to ensure that resources do not stand in the way of
the implementation of all the strategies, initiatives and
efforts for the complete eradication of conflict-related
sexual violence. We support the call contained in the
2010 report on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466) for the allocation of at least 15 per cent
of United Nations-managed funds for post-conflict
peacebuilding projects to advance gender equality, to
empower women and to address women’s specific
needs in peacebuilding contexts, which includes the
prevention of and response to sexual violence.
South Africa supports the recommendations of
the Secretary-General that the Security Council
increase pressure on the perpetrators of conflict-related
sexual violence, that it utilize all means at its disposal,
and that, in this matter, it fully support the use of
referrals to the International Criminal Court. For us,
there is no gainsaying the fact that the International
Criminal Court has strengthened the fight against
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern against women and girls. We continue to stand
ready to work with other members of the Council and
the United Nations in general to enhance efforts
against impunity and to ensure that perpetrators are
held accountable. The perpetrators of these evil acts
should no longer be allowed to remain in uniform,
roam the streets, sit at negotiating tables, continue to
occupy positions of authority or command armed
forces.
We fully concur with the recommendation that
the Security Council should systematically reflect
conflict-related sexual violence in the authorization
and renewal of peacekeeping mandates and the renewal
of special political missions. In that respect, South
Africa has always supported the call for the
deployment of women protection advisers to
peacekeeping and political missions in order to
coordinate the implementation of conflict-related
sexual violence.
For our part, South Africa continues to increase
the number of women deployed in United Nations
peacekeeping missions. About 45 per cent of the troops

12-23931

we contribute to the United Nations are women, and
10 per cent of them have played leadership and
commanding roles. We will continue to do our part and
to contribute to international efforts to address the
scourge of conflict-related sexual violence.
In conclusion, we support the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in line with
the mandate, and we want to assure her of our
continued support.
The President (spoke in French): I will now
address the Council in my capacity as the
representative of Togo.
I would like first to join previous speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2012/33) on conflict-related sexual violence. I
would also like to thank Ms. Margot Wallström for her
praiseworthy work on the issue and Mr. Hervé Ladsous
for the useful efforts that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) continues to make in
this sphere. I would further like to thank to the
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security for her organization’s cutting-edge
work to combat violence against women and girls.
United Nations efforts to eradicate sexual
violence in armed conflict deserve recognition, as they
make an important contribution to restoring peace and
security in countries in conflict and to the essential
process of reconciliation. Indeed, the suffering inflicted
on women and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict
situations remains a source of serious concern insofar
as it undermines the process of reconciliation. Sexual
violence is manifested in rape, sexual slavery,
prostitution, pregnancy, forced sterilization and any
other form of sexual violence of comparable
seriousness. Such acts, committed in conflict or
post-conflict situations or in other crisis situations,
constitute serious violations of human rights and are all
the more deplorable for their impact on people who are
already vulnerable.
My country welcomed the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), which defines the role of women in
conflict prevention, conflict management and
peacebuilding. The national action plans that Member
States are called upon to draw up pursuant to that
resolution seem to be the most effective means for
attaining the goals of the resolution.

27

S/PV.6722

In that spirit, Togo has drafted an action plan to
combat all forms of violence against women. My
country has established nationwide support centres for
women victims of violence. For 10 years now, my
country has also participated in 16 days of campaigning
organized from 25 November to 10 December every
year. As a troop-contributing country to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Togo has also created a
predeployment centre where military and police
personnel in training are made aware of the strict
prohibition of all forms of sexual violence.
In addition to those measures, which are aimed at
preventing violence against women in conflict, my
country reiterates the urgent need to put an end to
impunity if we are to ensure that every society in the
thrall of conflict, wherever it may be, draws lessons
from the atrocities committed against civilians and
prevents such atrocities from being repeated. In that
regard, Togo welcomes the steps taken by the
Secretary-General to ensure that the zero-tolerance
policy regarding exploitation and sexual violence in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, in conformity
with paragraph 7 of resolution 1820 (2008), does not
remain an empty term.
My country also supports the main initiatives
launched by the United Nations to combat sexual
violence in times of conflict, as set out in the report.
These efforts include scenario-based predeployment
training modules on preventing and addressing
conflict-related sexual violence; analysis of early
warning signs of sexual violence in times of conflict,
with the aim of integrating that analysis into existing
and emerging early warning and prevention systems to
facilitate a rapid response; and addressing conflictrelated sexual violence in ceasefire and peace
agreements.
To combat and especially to deter the perpetration
of such acts, Togo believes that the countries
concerned must build an arsenal of justice, such as
national or hybrid criminal courts and tribunals,
turning, if necessary to the International Criminal
Court, with scrupulous respect for the principle of
complementarity, which maintains the primacy of
national jurisdictions.
My country also believes that the affected
countries could resort to extrajudicial mechanisms and
methods of reconciliation, that is, to truth, justice and
reconciliation commissions and roundtables. These

28

mechanisms can help not only to solidify the principle
of the individual responsibility of perpetrators of
serious crimes, but also to promote peace, truth,
reconciliation and the rights of victims.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Togo’s support
for the presidential statement to be adopted at the
conclusion of this debate. My country wishes to renew
its thanks to the United States delegation for its work
in that regard.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I remind speakers that they are asked to limit
their statements to a maximum of four minutes so that
the Council may complete its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts and to deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Didier
Reynders, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Foreign Trade and European Affairs of
Belgium.
Mr. Reynders (Belgium) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking the Secretary-General for the
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2012/33).
I also wish to thank Ms. Margot Wallström, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and her team of experts. It is
impossible to remain indifferent in reading the report,
for sexual violence in many societies is still a common
practice, often invisible and too rarely prosecuted.
Belgium has always been a strong defender of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.
It formally promises to remain so.
Belgium associates itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union.
I would like to address three subjects.
First is the mandate of the Special
Representative, which for Belgium is very clear. It
allows the Security Council to focus on sexual violence
not only in classic conflict situations but also in
post-conflict situations or other serious situations, such
as political unrest. The Council already regularly takes
up such issues in various types of situations. I welcome
the reference in the report to instances of sexual
violence in situations of unrest and instability,
particularly in Egypt and Syria. To reduce the mandate

12-23931

S/PV.6722

solely to cases of sexual violence in conflict situations
would be tantamount to restricting the role of the
United Nations in defending individuals and societies
that suffer from this terrible scourge. We cannot retreat
from the detailed mandate set out in resolution 1960
(2010).
Furthermore, while sexual violence mainly
affects women and girls, the Secretary-General’s report
makes very clear that the situation of men, especially
those in custody, as well as children born as a result of
rape, deserves greater attention from us. Rather than
seeking to lock the mandate into too limited an area of
action, we should develop a comprehensive approach
to protecting civilians.
My second comment concerns some particular
recommendations in the report, first, that concerning
initiatives and modalities relating to security sector
reform, It is indeed our duty to ensure that those who
perpetrate, command or condone sexual violence are
excluded from all branches of government, including
the armed forces and police. In addition, United
Nations mediators and officials also must ensure that
sexual violence is included in the definition of conduct
prohibited by ceasefire and peace agreements. Indeed,
Belgium calls particularly for an increase in the
number of women serving as mediators and special
envoys.
Finally, the third recommendation that I wish to
underline concerns prevention, which is often more
effective than reparation. That is why Belgium
supports any initiative aimed at adopting early warning
systems that could detect risks of imminent sexual
violence in regions affected by conflict.
My third and final comment relates to situations
in
some
particular
countries.
The
Special
Representative has visited the Democratic Republic of
the Congo several times to discuss with top
Government officials the issue of sexual violence,
often committed by military personnel. Belgium was
among the first to provide financial support for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s national strategy
to combat sexual violence. We also provided financial
support to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for military judges to assist with the

12-23931

prosecution of soldiers accused of sexual violence in
the eastern part of the country. Belgium intends to
remain engaged in this project, in consultation with the
Special Representative and with national authorities.
As Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
Central African Republic configuration, Belgium
attributes particular importance to the issue of sexual
violence in that country. The Central African Republic
is on the priority list for action by the Special
Representative. The problem of violence against
women and children is discussed during each
Commission field visit, and regular contact on the
subject is maintained with the Office of the Special
Representative.
The reports on the situations in Libya, Egypt and
Syria are particularly relevant in the context of the
so-called Arab Spring. The issue of sexual violence in
countries in transition should not be ignored. I am
deeply concerned at reports by the United Nations
commission of inquiry to the effect that Syrian armed
forces and security personnel have used sexual torture
against detainees in various detention centers of the
intelligence and political security services. I trust we
shall have an opportunity to speak of that tomorrow, in
the framework of the meeting of the friends of Syria in
Tunis.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the collective
responsibility for the fight against sexual violence. The
Security Council must act on this report, in particular
by transmitting to the sanctions committees the list of
parties responsible for sexual violence, which is
annexed to the report, for effective follow-up. The
development of that list is a first, for which I
congratulate the Secretary-General.
I sincerely trust that the team of the Special
Representative will continue their excellent work. I
believe their report is one stage and that there will be
more.
The President (spoke in French): There are a
number of speakers remaining on my list. I intend, with
the consent of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

29
