A /72/PV.78

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

78th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 7 March 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
In the absence of the President, Mr. Brown
(Liberia), Vice-President took the Chair.
Agenda item 140 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
The Acting President: In keeping with established
practice, I would like to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to documents A/72/713/Add.1,
A/72/713/Add.2 and A/72/713/Add.3, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that since the issuance of the document
contained in A/72/713, Dominica, the Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Grenada, the Marshall
Islands and Suriname have made the payments necessary
to reduce their arrears below the amount specified in
Article 19 of the Charter of the United Nations.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of the
information contained in documents A/72/713/Add.1,
A/72/713/Add.2 and A/72/713/Add.3?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 33
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Note verbale from the Permanent Mission
of Australia transmitting the report of the
Kimberley Process (А/72/775)
Draft resolution (A/72/L.41)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia to introduce
draft resolution A/72/L.41.
Ms. Bishop (Australia): It is with pleasure that I
am here today on behalf of Australia, in its role as the
previous Chair of the Kimberley Process during 2017.
The Kimberley Process makes a valuable contribution
to the United Nations agenda for international peace
and security, development and human rights.
Fifteen years ago, when the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme was established, the global
diamond trade looked very different to that of today.
Together, the members of the Kimberley Process have
achieved most of what we had, at that time, dared to hope.
The debate before the Assembly on resolution 57/302,
held in 2003 (see A/57/PV.82), inspired real change.
Diamonds were being mined in conflict zones, and the
proceeds from the sale of those diamonds supported
the continuation of those conflicts and insurgencies. At
the far end of the supply chain, consumers had little
or no way of knowing where the diamonds they were
buying had come from — whether or not, in purchasing
a particular item of jewelry or fashion apparel, they

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-06273 (E)

*1806273*

A/72/PV.78

07/03/2018

were inadvertently contributing to and sustaining some
distant, deadly conflict.

who we are — are mirrored in our collective vision for
the broader role that the Kimberley Process has to offer.

We have cut the flow of diamonds to insurgencies
and to rebel groups that would sacrifice peace and
development for their own power. We have drained
their finances. We have removed or, at the least,
greatly reduced that threat to peace and development.
By safeguarding the legitimate trade in diamonds, we
have improved the livelihoods of those who rely on it
to feed and to educate their families. We have raised
awareness. According to a 2016 survey, millennials are
three times more likely than older generations to avoid
diamonds unless they have been responsibly sourced.
This is the future of our world, and while it is moving
in the right direction, we in turn must do our part to
move with it. We must support the standards that future
generations seek to uphold.

Australia has played a role in preparing this next
step and will work with all Member States to build on
the important achievements of the Kimberley Process.

Last year, during our chairmanship, I urged us all,
and I remind us all now, that even after all that we have
achieved, we can and should do more in preventing
trade in conflict diamonds. For example, we must look
at other ways in which the diamond trade can align
with and support the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and sustaining peace. We hope to see a
market free from human rights abuses and free from
forced labour.
The outcomes we have achieved so far are too
valuable for the Kimberley Process to be rendered
slowly irrelevant, a victim of its success to date. We
draw upon the aspirations that we remember from
2003, and we find inspiration from the vision and
the values that the Assembly had back then. Draft
resolution A/72/L.41, which we have before us today,
is the critical link between the excellent work of the
Kimberley Process so far and its potential to contribute
to the broader agenda of the United Nations in the years
to come.
Today, we ask for a system, through the Kimberley
Process, based on pragmatic action and targeted
reform. Strengthening the purpose and intent of the
Kimberley Process, establishing a dedicated secretariat
and supporting participation through a multi-donor
trust fund will secure a practical, stable system to
ensure that the Kimberley Process can live on and bring
us ever closer to our aspirations for 2030 and beyond.
Our world no longer accepts practices that, 15 years
ago, defined the lives of millions. The underpinning
ideologies of the United Nations — what we stand for,
2/6

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Parenti (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The European Union (EU) and its member States,
which act as a single participant in the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme, congratulate Australia
on hosting and leading the Kimberley Process and on
its contribution to strengthening it. The EU further
appreciates the forums organized by Australia to
address broader matters pertinent to the diamond trade.
First, let me welcome India as the current
Vice-Chair and as Chair for 2019. Let me also welcome
the Republic of Gabon and praise its determination
to fulfilling the Kimberley Process requirements to
become a Kimberley Process participant. Let me also
acknowledge and welcome the setting up, under the
Australian chairmanship, of the Ad Hoc Committee
on Review and Reform, tasked to review the core
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme document
and to examine ways to enhance administrative and
financial support to the Process.
The EU further congratulates India and Angola, as
Chair and Vice Chair, respectively, of the Review and
Reform Committee and affirms — in its capacity as a
member of the Committee and as the 2018 Kimberley
Chair — its readiness to contribute actively and
constructively to the very important tasks entrusted
to the newly established Committees as part of the
periodic review cycle.
The EU is honoured to have been selected as the
Chair of the Kimberley Process for 2018. We have been
at the forefront of the Kimberley Process from the very
start and we will continue to strive for the Kimberley
Process to fulfil its role as a unique tool for conflict
prevention and a catalyst for good governance and
transparency in natural resource management.
Throughout the life of the Kimberley Process, the
EU has been actively engaged in its committees and
working groups and in advancing the objectives of the
18-06273

07/03/2018

Process itself. It has worked to reinforce the integrity
of the Process scheme and to strengthen the peer
review system with a view to ensuring that all Process
participants meet minimum requirements. We will
continue in that endeavour as the Chair of the overall
Kimberley Process this year.
Through its 2018 chairmanship, the EU will work
to ensure that the Kimberley Process remains fit for
purpose in a changing world, addressing contemporary
challenges, including challenges due to instability and
conflict, and seizing the opportunity to ensure that
the Process remains an effective instrument of peace
and prosperity. In particular, the EU will promote an
open dialogue among the three pillars that make up the
Kimberley Process —Governments, industry and civil
society — with a view to forging consensus around the
reform agenda and to enhancing the effectiveness of
the Kimberley Process, both in terms of peacebuilding
and conflict prevention, and in terms of promotion of
in-country due diligence.
In that regard, a key priority for our 2018
chairmanship will be to strengthen the tripartite
relationship and to promote the establishment of
multi-stakeholder forums at the national level. The civil
society coalition is an essential part of the Kimberley
Process, and the EU will work towards ensuring
that it is given a prominent and effective space in
which to express its views with all actors on a truly
inclusive basis.
As the 2018 Chair, the EU will seek to enhance good
governance in the diamond sector at different levels
through exchanges of best practices and information
among producing, manufacturing and trading
countries and centres, through close cooperation
with international organizations such as the World
Customs Organization and INTERPOL, and through
the promotion of transparency in reporting and best
practice models for information among all participants.
The EU is strongly committed to contributing to
the implementation of the Washington Declaration
on Integrating Development of Artisanal and SmallScale Diamond Mining with Kimberley Process
Implementation. Human conditions in mining and the
prosperity of producing communities are key concerns.
The EU will support capacity-building efforts in
areas relevant to compliance with Kimberley Process
requirements and will assess how the Kimberley
Process can best contribute to the implementation of
18-06273

A/72/PV.78

the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals in producing
countries to promote economic and social development
and prosperity.
The EU would also encourage cooperation on issues
of implementation with a regional dimension, including
via its work on the regional approach in the Mano River
Union, and will explore ways and means to develop a
similar approach in other regions of the world, such as
the Central African region, in order to address similar
compliance challenges and concerns. In that context,
the EU welcomes the continuing commitment of the
Government of the Central African Republic to working
collaboratively with the monitoring team to ensure
the traceability of rough diamond shipments from
compliant zones, and encourages the Central African
Republic to continue implementing enhanced vigilance
measures. As a member of the Central African Republic
monitoring team, the EU believes that it is important
for the integrity of the Kimberley Process that the
monitoring recommendations be duly implemented.
The EU looks forward to working with India, as
Vice-Chair, with the Kimberley Process working bodies
and committees, and with all participants and observers
in the year ahead. The year 2018 will be crucial to
the Kimberley Process. We look forward to working
closely and constructively with all stakeholders in a
transparent and inclusive manner towards attaining the
shared objective of ensuring that the Kimberley Process
can face new challenges strengthened and re-enforced,
and that it remains fit for purpose in a changing world.
Ms. Furman (Israel): We would like to extend our
sincere gratitude and appreciation to Australia for its
chairmanship of the Kimberly Process in 2017. I would
also like to extend Israel’s welcome to this year’s Chair,
the European Union, and to the Vice-Chair, India. We
look forward to engaging closely with all of them.
More than 80 nations from across the world have
come together over the past 15 years to form what we
mark today as a great feat of cooperation across the
world — the Kimberley Process. What seemed like an
unprecedented goal in 2003 has since become reality,
thanks to a global commitment matched by consistent
global action. With 99.8 per cent of the world’s diamonds
now being considered conflict-free, we are closer than
ever to reaching our goal. Nevertheless, that 0.2 per
cent which is still not conflict-free leaves us with much
to be desired.
3/6

A/72/PV.78

Israel has always been committed to the Kimberly
Process. It was the first State to issue a Kimberley
certificate and the first to harness technology to aid the
process. Israel has mandated that the import of diamonds
must be fully computerized, with each and every
arriving delivery opened and examined at customs,
leaving zero margin for error. It was also among the
first nations to look into the leverage blockchain
technology in the development and maintenance of
regulatory measures aimed at upholding the process.
During the summer of 2017, Israel, alongside eight other
countries, hosted a review of the process, and we are
eagerly looking forward to the report. Israel will also
continue to take part in fellow participants’ reviews and
continue offering consult to countries seeking to build
and strengthen their national diamond sector and use
cutting edge technology to better ensure a united and
updated global front.
The Kimberly Process intertwines with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), as the
commitment to the Certification Scheme contributes
greatly to achieving the SDGs. The diamond industry
provides jobs for almost 40,000 people in sub-Saharan
Africa alone. Its revenues help more children than ever
to gain access to better education. It also plays a crucial
part in the funding of counselling, testing, treatment
programmes, clinics and hospices that help tackle the
HIV pandemic in sub-Saharan Africa.
Conflict-free diamonds bring the world a step
closer to ending poverty, protecting the planet and
ensuring prosperity. The greatest achievement of the
Kimberley Process lies in our ability as nations to unite
for a common goal. It allows us to foster a reality where
no one is left behind.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Let me at the outset
join my colleagues in thanking you, Sir, for convening
this important meeting to discuss the role of diamonds
in fuelling conflict, breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict
as a contribution to the prevention and settlement of
conflicts. As a founding member of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme and a diamond-producing
country, Botswana finds this topic to be extremely
important and pertinent.
Let me take this opportunity to express our sincere
appreciation to the delegation of Australia for its very
able stewardship of the Kimberley Process during its
4/6

07/03/2018

tenure as Chair in 2017. Under Australia’s able leadership,
we have had successful intersessional and plenary
sessions. Furthermore, we welcome and commend the
Chair for presenting the 2017 implementation report on
the Kimberley Process and draft resolution A/72/L.41,
on the role of diamonds in fuelling conflict.
One of the primary objectives of establishing
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme was to
eliminate illicit rough diamonds from the legitimate
diamond trade as a way of preventing these illegal
transactions from promoting armed conflict, which
is a threat to international peace and security. The
Kimberley Process is a unique initiative, bringing
together stakeholders such as Governments, the
diamond industry and civil society in order to stanch
the flow of conflict diamonds into the legitimate
diamond market.
The tripartite nature of the Kimberley Process
continues to be the main source of strength for the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. In this
regard, we have to jealously guard that relationship,
which remains one of the best examples of a successful
multi-stakeholder partnership. It is worth emphasizing
that the effective implementation of Security Council
resolution 1459 (2003) has significantly reduced the
trade in conflict diamonds, thereby improving the
living standards of people in economies such as that of
Botswana, which is highly dependent on the diamond
trade. We are therefore gratified to note from the 2017
progress report that the Kimberley Process continues to
make significant strides in regulating the international
trade of rough diamonds and in ensuring that traded
diamonds are from legitimate sources.
The report also underscores the urgent need to
reform and strengthen the Kimberley Process so
that it remains relevant and addresses the emerging
challenges of synthetic diamonds and the capacity
constraints of some Governments in putting in place
regulatory mechanisms. As a diamond-producing
country, Botswana remains committed to the ethical
utilization, sale and trade of diamonds. For this reason,
we are fully committed to safeguarding and promoting
the integrity of the diamond industry, which sustains
our economy.
To Botswana, diamonds are for development. They
account for our socioeconomic accomplishments over
the past 50 years since we gained our independence,
and for our graduation from being one of the poorest
18-06273

07/03/2018

countries in the world to being an upper-middle-income
country. As noted 10 years ago by our former President,
His Excellency Mr. Festus Mogae, in his capacity as
then Chair of the Kimberly Process,
“For our people in Botswana, every diamond
bought means food on the table, better living
conditions, better health care, safe drinking water,
more roads and much, much more. It means that
we can build new power stations and expand our
electricity network in the country. It means at
this time, when our future is threatened by the
HIV-AIDS pandemic, Botswana can give free
antiretroviral drugs to all those in need; provide
food, clothing and support for over 60,000 AIDS
orphans; and finance programmes to prevent
mother-to-child transmission of the virus.”
The importance of diamonds to Botswana’s
development agenda remains paramount. Proceeds
from diamond sales contribute to the implementation of
our National Development Plan 11 and Vision 2036, as
well as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the African Union Agenda 2063. The proper
management of natural resources such as diamonds
is crucial to achieving sustainable development and
sustainable peace, as our experience demonstrates.
Based on its development success, Botswana stands
ready to share lessons, experiences and best practices
with other producers of diamonds, especially those
emerging from conflict situations.
We welcome Gabon to the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme, as its membership contributes
to the growth of the Kimberley Process, which is
essential to effective implementation, monitoring and
compliance. This growth in membership also reaffirms
the importance, relevance and contribution of the
Kimberley Process to sustainable development and
international peace and security. We also welcome the
European Union as the incoming Chair of the Kimberley
Process for 2018, and assure it of my delegation’s
support and cooperation during its tenure.

A/72/PV.78

and objectives, aimed at eliminating the flow of illicit
rough diamonds from legitimate diamond trade.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.41 entitled
“The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the
link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds
and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and
settlement of conflicts”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of A/72/L.41: Israel, Italy, Malta, Montenegro,
Namibia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Ukraine and Zambia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.41?
Draft resolution A/72/L.41 was adopted (resolution
72/267).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 33?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/72/107)

The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme sets
minimum standards that regulate diamond trading,
which Process members have to adhere to, including by
putting in place national legislation and institutions and
export, import and internal controls, and by promoting
transparency and exchange of statistical data.

The Acting President: Members will recall
that, at its 74th and 76th plenary meetings, on 20 and
24 December 2017, respectively, the Assembly took
note of the appointments of Botswana, France, Iraq,
Nepal and the Russian Federation as members of
the Committee on Conferences for a period of three
years, beginning on 1 January 2018, and of China for
a term beginning on 20 December 2017 and ending on
31 December 2019.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana’s
commitment to the Kimberley Process and its principles

Members will also recall that one seat from the Latin
American and Caribbean States remains to be filled for

18-06273

5/6

A/72/PV.78

a term of office beginning on the date of appointment
and expiring on 31 December 2020. Members will
further recall that one seat from the Latin American
and Caribbean States remains to be filled for a term
beginning on the date of appointment and expiring on
31 December 2018.
After consultations with the Chair of the Group
of Latin American and Caribbean States during the
month of December 2017, the President of the General
Assembly has appointed Brazil for a term of office
beginning today, 7 March 2018, and expiring on
31 December 2020, and Ecuador for a term of office
beginning today, 7 March 2018, and expiring on
31 December 2018.

6/6

07/03/2018

May I take it that the Assembly takes note of
these appointments?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Regarding the one seat
from the African States that remains to be filled for
a term of office beginning on the date of appointment
and expiring on 31 December 2020, the President of the
General Assembly urges the Group of African States to
submit the candidature for this seat as soon as possible.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda
item 115.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

18-06273
