ao

General Auembly~th Seaaion

date specified in the letter of appointment shall be paid five
days' indemnity pay for each, month of uncompleted service,
but not less than thirty working days' indemnity pay.
( c) Indemnity pay shall be calculated on the basis of the
staff member's base salary or wages at the time of termination.
(d) No indemnity payment shall be made to:
A staff member who resigns, except where termination
notice has been given and the termination date agreed upon;
A staff member who has a temporary appointment which
is not for a fixed term and which is terminated during the
first year of service ;
A staff member who has a temporary appointment for a
fixed term which is completed on the expiration date specified in the letter of appointment.
A staff member who is summarily dismissed;
A staff member who abandons his post;
A staff member who is retired under the United Nations
Joint Staff PensiOfl Fund Regulations.
(e) Staff members specifically engaged for conference and
other short-term service or for service with a mission, as consultants, or as experts, and staff members who are locally recruited for service in established offices away from Headquarters may be paid termination indemnity if and as provided
in their letters of appointment.
Annex IV

Children'• allmc,ance, education 11ran1 and
repatriation 11rant

Full-time members of the staff, with the exception of
those specifically excluded by resolution of the General Assembly, shall be entitled to a children's allowance of $US 200 per
annum in respect of each child under the age of eighteen years,
or, if the child is in full-time attendance at a school or a university (or similar educational institution), or is totally disabled under the age of twenty-one years; provided that, if both
parents are members of the staff of the United Nations, only
one allowance will be paid in respect of each of their children;
and provided further that, where the Secretary-General deems
it advisable, no allowance or an allowance of an amount other
than $US 200 may be paid under special circumstances, as for
uample, short-term assignments or assignments at duty stations where the levels of United Nations salary scales are fixed
at levels varying from the Headquarters scale.
2. Each full-time member of the staff, with the exception of
those specifically excluded by resolution of the General Assem.bly, entitled to receive a children's allowance under paragraph
1 above, who is employed by the United Nations in a country
-other than his own country, as specified in: his letter of appointment, shall be entitled to the following education grant:
(a) The sum of $US 200 per annum for each child, in re.spect of whom a children's allowance is payable, in full-time
attendance at a school or a university in his home country; provided that where a child attended such an educational institution for a period of less than two-thirds of any .one scholastic
year, the grant shall be reduced to sui;h proportion of $US 200
as the period so attended bears to a full scholastic year;
(b) Once in each scholastic year the travelling expenses of
the outward and return journey of such a child by a route
approved by the Secretary-General ;
(c) Should staff members elect to send their children to
special national schools in the area where they are serving, in-eluding international schools orga_nized for children of United
Nations staff members, rather than to schools in their home
countries, the United Nations will pay for each child otherwise
eligible for the education grant, a grant equal to the difference between the cost of education at the special school which
he attends, and the cost at a comparable school attended by chil-dren of persons normally resident in the area, provided that
1.

the rrant shall not aceed $200 per year. This grant shall l>e
payable only trhen there is a valid reason for the child not to
attend school in the home country; for instance, in the case of
children under thirteen years of age or when the health of the
child is such that return to the home country is not feasible ;
(d) If both parents are members of the staff of United
Nations only one grant will be paid in respect of each of their
children.
3. The Secretary-General. may decide in each case whether
allowances or grants under paragraphs 1 and 2 above shall
extend to adopted children or step-children.
4. In principle, the repatriation grant shall be payable to
staff members whom the Organization is obligated to repatriate,
except those terminated by summary dismissal. Detailed conditions and definitions relating to eligibility shall be determined
by tlie Secretary-General. The amount of the grant shall vary
with the lehgth of service with the United Nations (exclusive
of periods when an expatriation allowance was received). The
mwmwn rates payable shall be as follows :

..

After 2 years
" 34
"

4

6

8

"

5

7

"

"
"
"

8
9
10
11
12

"
"

5

6

7

9

10
11
12
13
14

8
10
12
14
16
18

zo

22
24
26
28

The tnaximum grant payable under this plan shall be
$US Z;,W net for a staff member without dependants and
$US 5;000 net for a staff member with dependants.

591 f\rl). Queations concerning the llquidatloa

of the lntemational Inatitute of Intellectual
Co-operation

The General Assembly,
. Recalling its resolutions 24 (I) and 79 (I) of 12
February and 7 December 1946 respectively, whereby
it act:epted the transfer to the United Nations of certain assets belonging to the League of Nations and its
dependent organizations or institutes,
Considering that the Assembly of the League of Natid!:is, by its resolution dated 17 April 1946,20 decided
to ,transfer to the United Nations its right in any articles and, in particular, the archiv-es and collections
of documents deposited in the premises of the International Institute of Intellectual Co-operation by its
Governing Body, as well as any property which had
been acquired by the Institute during its period of
operation,
Considering that, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 71 (I) of 19 November 1946, the SecretaryGeneral in order to ensure, under the auspices of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the continuity of the work performed by
90
See Official Records of the Gnswal Assn,ibly, Second part
of the first session, Fifth Committee, Annex 13 (C) (document
A/136).

81

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Fifth Committee
the International Institute of Intellectual Co-operation,
has authorized the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to utilize the assets of
the Institute transferred by the League of Nations to
the United Nations,
Considering, however, that the Institute of Intellectual Co-operation has ceased to function, though its
assets have not been finally liquidated,
Con.ridering that, by the terms of a resolution adopted
at its second session at Mexico City, 21 the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization stressed the necessity for
the final liquidation of the assets of the Institute,
1. Deems it necessary that the International Institute of Intellectual Co-operation should be finally
liquidated ;
2. Decides for this purpose that all the property of
the Institute which was covered by a decision of transfer to the United Nations in conformity with the resolution of the Assembly of the League of Nations of 17
April 1946, shall be included among the assets in the
liquidation of the Institute;
3. Recommends the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization to accept responsibility for liquidating the property of fhe Institute;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to transfer full
and absolute ownership of all the assets of the Institute to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, on condition that the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization carries out the liquidation as aforesaid;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
next annual report to the General Assembly full particulars concerning the measures of liquidation taken.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.

592 (VI). Autho,-ization of expenditure11 for the
financial year 1952
The General Assembly
1. Resolves that, in accordance with paragraph 3
of its resolution 583 (VI) adopted on 21 December
1951, expenditures totalling $US 5,524,970 for the
financial year 1952 are hereby authorized in the
amounts shbwn for the following sections :
A.

UNITED NATIONS
Dol/1Jrs(US)

The General Assembly, Commissions
and Committees ............... .
42,100
3.
The Economic and Social Council,
Commissions and Committees ... .
9,970
5.
Investigations and inquiries ....... . 2,350,300
S(a) United Nations Field Service ...... .
510,000
16.
Administrative and Financial
Services ....................... .
100,000
20.
United Nations Office at Geneva ... .
20,000
1.

Carried forward 3,032,370
11

See Records of the General Conference of the United

Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,

Second Session, Mexico, 1947, volume II, Resolutions chapter
IX, annex VII, resolution 14.
'

Brought forward 3,032,370
20(a) Office of the United Nations High
139,100
Commissioner for Refugees ..... .
23,500
25.
Official Records .................. .
31 (a) Headquarters construction costs ...• 1,000,000
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
Cost-of-living adjustment at Headquarters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . 1,330,000

C.

34.

TOTAL

5,524,970

2. Authorizes the Secretary-General:
( i) To finance the expenditures authorized by paragraph 1 above up to $5,500,000 by transfer from section
33 ( Investigations, inquiries and other activities) of
the 1952 budget and for the balance,· amounting to
$24,970, by transfer of credits from other sections of
the 1952 budget ;
(ii) To transfer credits from section 34 (Cost-ofliving adjustment at Headquarters) to the various sections concerned of the 1952 budget.
373,-d/lenary meeting,
February 1952.

593 (VI). Control and limitation of
documentation
The General Assembly,
Noting the steps taken and the progress so far
achieved in the organization of documentation and the
stabilization of publication programmes,
Noting also, however, the continued increase in the
volume of documentation requested by the various organs of the United Nations, and the ever-growing difficulty encountered by delegations in making the most
effective use thereof,
Appreciating that, in order to be effective, further action to limit documentation costs must apply alike to the
number of documents, to their individual bulk and to
the number of copies issued,
1. Invites the governments of Member States:
(a) To assist in reducing the number and individual bulk of documents to a minimum by:
(i) Bearing in mind the desirability of ensuring that
all draft resolutions which may call for studies
and reports and for their dissemination clearly
indicate the scope of such studies and reports ;
(ii) Restricting both the number and the volume of
the documents submitted for processing to what is
strictly required by resolutions and other statutory decisions of a United Nations organ, or is
clearly relevant to agenda items under discussion ;
( b) To assist in reducing the number of copies of
such documents as are issued by:
(i) Reviewing and reducing as far as possible their
requests for documents issued in first distribution, and submitting to the Secretary-General
their revised lists;
(ii) Avoiding as far as possible conference room requests for additional copie!;;
