S/2007/690

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 November 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 28 November 2007 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I wish to inform the Security Council of my intention to appoint Mr. Robert H.
Serry of the Netherlands as the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and my Personal Representative to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority, succeeding Mr. Michael C. Williams.
Mr. Serry will act as my Envoy to the Quartet.
Mr. Serry is a career diplomat with over two decades of experience. Most
recently, he served as the Ambassador of the Netherlands to Ireland. His previous
professional experience has also included diplomatic postings in Bangkok, Moscow,
New York and Kyiv. In addition, Mr. Serry has held the position of Deputy Assistant
Secretary-General for Crisis Management and Operations at the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO). He led the Middle Eastern Affairs Division of the
Dutch Foreign Ministry at the time of the Madrid Conference in 1991.
It is my intention that the new Special Coordinator should be guided by the
principles set out in relevant Security Council resolutions and in the road map of the
Quartet, as endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 1515 (2003). I am also
asking that he work to consolidate the efforts of the United Nations to support the
political process that was announced at the conference held in Annapolis, United
States of America, on 27 November 2007.
The Special Coordinator’s functions and responsibilities will include
coordination of all United Nations activities on the ground related to the Middle
East peace process, with the aim of ensuring that the United Nations contribution is
fully integrated and coordinated.
As the Special Coordinator, Mr. Serry will represent me in all meetings and
structures involving the parties and the international community, and provide
political guidance to the United Nations family.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-62252 (E) 031207

*0762252*
