S/PV.9167

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9167th meeting

Wednesday, 26 October 2022, 4.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Ms. Nyakoe
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-65459 (E)
*2265459*

S/PV.9167

Maintenance of international peace and security

Government or from any other authority external to the
Organization”. And they must

The meeting was called to order at 4.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

“refrain from any action which might reflect on
their position as international officials responsible
only to the Organization”.

The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of the Islamic Republic of
Iran and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. João Miguel
Ferreira de Serpa Soares, Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. De Serpa Soares.
Mr. De Serpa Soares (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to address the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
I have been requested to brief the Council on
Article 100 of the Charter of the United Nations. I will
do so and also address the context in which this request
has come about by clarifying the nature of the work
performed by the Secretary-General and the Secretariat
with respect to resolution 2231 (2015).
Paragraph 1 of Article 7 of the Charter establishes
the Secretariat as one of the six principal organs of
the United Nations. Article 97 provides that “The
Secretariat shall comprise a Secretary-General and
such staff as the Organization may require”. Article
100 sets out obligations for the Secretary-General and
the staff of the Secretariat in the conduct of their work
and corresponding obligations on the part of Member
States vis-à-vis the Secretariat. The Article has been
frequently described as the foundation of the idea of the
Secretariat as an international civil service. Article 100
therefore defines the status of the Secretary-General and
the staff and sets out their attendant legal obligations.
Specifically, according to paragraph 1 of Article 100,
the Secretary-General and the staff are “international
officials responsible only to the Organization”. They
must not “seek or receive instructions from any
2/18

26/10/2022

With a view to safeguarding the international character
and independence of the Secretariat, the General
Assembly has laid down detailed standards of conduct
for staff members based directly on paragraph 1 of
Article 100 of the Charter.
Since they were first adopted by the General
Assembly in 1951, the Staff Regulations, like the
Provisional Staff Regulations before them, have
affirmed in their very first provision four key ideas:
that members of the Secretariat are international civil
servants; that their responsibilities are not national
but exclusively international; that they must discharge
their functions and regulate their conduct with the
interests of the United Nations only in view; and that
they shall not seek or accept instructions in regard to
the performance of their duties from any Government
or other source external to the Organization. Paragraph
2 of Article 100 is the counterpart to paragraph 1. It
sets out two corresponding obligations on the part of
Member States:
“to respect the exclusively international character
of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General and
the staff and not to seek to influence them in the
discharge of their responsibilities.”
The General Assembly has not adopted any
decisions specifically relating to this paragraph that
would throw much light on its interpretation. The
Assembly has referred to it in connection to appeals
to all Member States to respect the privileges and
immunities of officials of the United Nations and to allow
the Secretary-General to exercise the Organization’s
right of functional protection in respect to staff placed
under arrest or detention. Beyond that, however, the
Assembly has not given any specific guidance on the
application of the paragraph. On the other hand, the
Secretary-General and the Legal Counsel — both my
predecessors and I — have on a number of occasions
taken the position that this or that action on the part of a
Member State is or is not consistent with its obligations
pursuant to Article 100 of the Charter.
They have thus have expressed the view that it would
not, or might not, be consistent with paragraph 2 of the
22-65459

26/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Article for a State to attempt to make the recruitment,
transfer or dismissal of staff of its own nationality
subject to its approval; to limit the recruitment of
locally recruited staff to individuals recommended
by a Government agency; to impose conditions on the
engagement of locally recruited staff members; to limit
the appointment of staff of its nationality to fixed-term
appointments; to pressure the Secretary-General to
replace a qualified and competent staff member because
of a change of Government in their home State; to
require the Secretary-General to adapt the contracts of
locally recruited staff to conform to its national labour
laws; to cancel the work permits of staff members in
an apparent attempt to force the Secretary-General to
dismiss them; to withhold staff members’ passports
so that they could not return to their duty stations or
to not issue passports to successful candidates so as
to prevent them from taking up their posts; to require
a staff member deployed to that State to leave the
country; to demand the right to censor United Nations
materials; to assume the power to dictate or control
the activities of United Nations officials or United
Nations operations; to inspect or control the award of
United Nations contracts; and to refuse to recognize the
Secretary-General as Secretary-General.
Conversely, the Secretary-General and the Legal
Counsel have taken the position that it would not be
inconsistent with paragraph 2 of Article 100 for a State
to submit to the Secretary-General information on the
characters and records of candidates of its nationality,
provided that it was understood that it was left to the
Secretary-General to assess that information and
reach an independent decision on their recruitment; to
investigate staff members of its nationality and provide
information on the outcome of the investigation to
the Secretary-General; and to provide the SecretaryGeneral with its views on how the Secretary-General
should exercise political discretion that he may enjoy in
implementing a mandate from one of the Organization’s
political organs.
It is only natural, as a previous Secretary-General
has remarked, that Member States should wish to
exercise as much influence as they can over the activities
of the Organization, including its Secretariat. Most
days, permanent representatives contact the SecretaryGeneral and other senior officials to inform them of the
positions of their Governments and to seek to convince
them of their rightness. I myself frequently receive
visits from ambassadors who advance a particular view

S/PV.9167

of the law and try to convince me that it is correct or
who remonstrate me over a particular action on the part
of the Secretariat and seek to convince me that it is
unlawful and needs to stop. Throughout my mandate,
I have had exchanges with all the Ambassadors of the
permanent five members of the Security Council. All
of that is to be expected, and I do not think that anyone
here would wish to maintain that such activities are in
any way inconsistent with paragraph 2 of Article 100 of
the Charter of the United Nations.
As a previous holder of the office once remarked, the
Secretary-General knows very well that his effectiveness
in most situations will depend to a large extent on the
cooperation that he receives from Governments and, in
turn, that the extent of that cooperation will frequently
depend, at least to some degree, on how far what he
does coincides with the positions of those Governments.
But, as he also remarked, “the Secretary-General must
also insist that his duty under the Charter requires him
to draw a clear line between cooperation and pressure”.
I will now turn to the work performed by the
Secretary-General and the Secretariat with respect to
resolution 2231 (2015). Without deviating in any way
from the standards to which Article 100 requires the
Secretariat and Member States to adhere, the Secretariat
takes note of all information that is brought to its
attention by Member States in order to ascertain and
assess its relevance to the discharge of the mandates
that are entrusted to it. It was in that spirit and in no
other that Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
noted in her remarks to the Council, during its informal
consultations on 19 October, that the Secretariat was
ready to assess information if so requested by Member
States, as was also the case for the Spokesperson in his
remarks on 20 October.
Following the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2231 (2015) on 20 July 2015, the President of
the Security Council issued a note dated 16 January 2016
under the symbol S/2016/44 that “sets forth practical
arrangements and procedures for the Security Council
for carrying out tasks related to the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), particularly with respect to the
provisions specified in paragraphs 2 to 7 of annex B to
that resolution.” (para. 1)
Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the note request the SecretaryGeneral to appoint the Security Council Affairs
Division of what is now the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs to serve as a point of contact

22-654593/18

S/PV.9167

Maintenance of international peace and security

and support the work of the Security Council and of its
facilitator and, as envisaged by annex B to resolution
2231 (2015), to report to the Council every six months
on the implementation of the resolution. Paragraph 7 of
the note anticipates that the report will include findings
and recommendations and that the Security Council
will meet informally prior to the public release of the
report to review the findings and recommendations
it contains.
The Secretary-General duly acted on those requests
and the Security Council Affairs Division has prepared
the reports, starting with his first report, issued on
12 July 2016 under the symbol S/2016/589. The most
recent, the thirteenth report, was issued on 23 June
this year under the symbol S/2022/490. The structure
of those reports and the topics addressed are wellknown to the Council. In that regard, I note that, in his
statement to the Council introducing the first report,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey
Feltman pointed out that the report “strictly focuses
on the restrictive measures in annex B of resolution
2231 (2015)” and “our mandate is neither to report on
all aspects of the resolution or annex A of the JCPOA,
nor touch upon the work of the Joint Commission
established in the agreement.” (S/PV.7739, p. 2)
Consistent with that, the Secretariat has reported
on the implementation of the restrictive measures in
annex B that are in force during the reporting period,
including on information voluntarily brought to its
attention by Member States in writing and through
meetings at United Nations Headquarters or in capitals.
Also reflected are the positions of interested Member
States on such information that have been brought to
the attention of the Secretary-General.
As I just mentioned, the report includes findings
and recommendations in line with paragraph 7 of the
note. The Secretary-General is thus able to express his
views on relevant developments during the reporting
period and draw attention to matters of concern.

26/10/2022

the preparation of the Secretary-General’s six-monthly
reports to the Council. Absent further guidance by the
Security Council, the Secretary-General will continue
to prepare those reports in the manner that they have
been prepared to date.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. De
Serpa Soares for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank United Nations Legal Counsel De
Serpa Soares for his briefing.
Given the desire of our Western colleagues to
spin fake stories about drones that Iran is allegedly
supplying to Russia, I would like to begin by setting the
record straight. We convened this meeting on another
issue. There is the format under resolution 2231 (2015),
the corresponding biannual meetings of the Council
to discuss the implementation of that resolution. The
issue that we are discussing today is much broader.
It has to do with the threats posed by the actions of
some Council members to the integrity of the Charter
of the United Nations and the ability of the Security
Council to deliver on its core function of maintaining
international peace and security.
I am referring to the documented attempts by
the United States, the United Kingdom and France,
in addition to Germany, to give an explicit, direct
instruction to the Secretariat in violation of Article 100
of the Charter.
Letter
S/2022/781,
from
the
Permanent
Representatives of the United Kingdom, France,
and Germany, circulated to the Security Council on
21 October, in relation to the allegations made by those
countries of violations of resolution 2231 (2015). says:

As intended, the report is entirely for the
information of the Security Council in its consideration
of the status of the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), in particular annex B, and its determination of
whether any action is required.

“We would welcome an investigation by the
United Nations Secretariat team responsible for
monitoring the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) and stand ready to support the work
of the Secretariat in conducting its technical and
impartial investigation.”

The Secretary-General has not received any request,
pursuant to paragraph 6 (g) of the note or otherwise, that
supplements or modifies the nature and scope of the
work done by the Security Council Affairs Division in

Letter
S/2022/782,
from
the
Permanent
Representative of the United States expressly demands
that the Secretariat carry out such an investigation. That
is not Russian propaganda, as our Western colleagues

4/18

22-65459

26/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

like to say. Those are facts. Anyone who wishes to do
so can read those letters.
Those letters are written proof that the delegations I
mentioned are in breach of Article 100, paragraph 2, of
the Charter of the United Nations, which requires every
Member State to respect the exclusively international
character of the responsibilities of the Secretariat and
not to seek to influence its staff in the discharge of
their responsibilities.
Moreover, the United States, the United Kingdom,
France and Germany are in fact pushing the Secretariat
towards a dual violation of, first, paragraph 1 of Article
100 of the Charter of the United Nations, according to
which the Secretariat should not receive instructions
from any Government, and, secondly, the Secretariat’s
mandate in the context of resolution 2231 (2015) by
making it an ultra vires act.
I would like to elaborate on the second point. Time
and again, we hear from Western delegations that
the Secretariat is allegedly authorized to monitor the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). That is not
true. Paragraph 2 (a) of the note by the President of the
Security Council contained in document S/2016/44,
which is entitled “Security Council tasks under
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015)”, expressly
states that the Security Council itself should monitor
the implementation of the resolution. Subparagraphs (c)
and (d) unambiguously stipulate that it is the Security
Council that should answer enquiries from Member
States regarding the implementation of the resolution
and respond to information regarding alleged actions
inconsistent with the resolution.
Paragraph 4 of note S/2016/44 states that the
Security Council shall convene informal meetings at
the expert level to carry out such functions, including
those related to receiving information from Member
States. It is therefore clear that any information coming
from Member States should be considered by Council
members at those informal meetings. I would like to
point out that the note makes no mention of the role of
the Secretariat in that process.
It is also important that, in accordance with
paragraph 5 of note S/2016/44, the Security Council
should seek to make decisions related to its functions
in the context of resolution 2231 (2015) by consensus
through a no-objection procedure of at least five
working days.

S/PV.9167

That means that any action in relation to the functions
listed in paragraph 2 of the note, be it monitoring of
the implementation of the resolution or considering
reports about its possible violations, requires a separate
decision by the Security Council. The Council took no
such decision in relation to the allegations of violations
of resolution 2231 (2015) by Russia and Iran. Moreover,
it is clear that there are principled differences among
Council members in that regard.
I would now like to refer to paragraph 6 of note
S/2016/44, which provides an extensive list of the
Secretariat’s functions in relation to resolution 2231
(2015):
“Assist the facilitator in the organization ... of
informal meetings of the Security Council;
”Manage all incoming and outgoing
communications related to implementation of the
resolution and assist the facilitator in corresponding
with Member States;
“Draft correspondence, speaking notes and
briefings of the facilitator;
“Maintain and archive all information and
documents relating to the Security Council’s work
related to the implementation of the resolution;
”Maintain and promote publicly available
information on the restrictions imposed by
the Security Council, including through the
Council’s website;
“Provide administrative support for the
Security Council’s review of recommendations
from the Joint Commission.”
As participants can see, there is not a single mention of
investigations in that list.
Subparagraph 6 (g) clearly states that the Secretariat
may perform other tasks only when requested by
the Security Council. The Council did not give the
Secretariat any such mandate, particularly in terms of
conducting an investigation.
We saw attempts by our Western colleagues
and representatives of the Secretariat to justify their
authority to conduct such investigations by referring
to paragraph 7 of note S/2016/44. In particular, they
claim that the biannual report of the Secretary-General
should include what in the English version of the note
is termed “findings”, from the English word “to find”,

22-654595/18

S/PV.9167

Maintenance of international peace and security

which seems to imply that some kind of research should
be carried out. But that is another deliberate distortion.
The text of the note does not refer to research, but
analytical conclusions. That is how the word “findings”
is translated in the note in all the other United Nations
official languages — “les conclusions” in French,
“выводы” in Russian, “las conclusiones” in Spanish,
“ 调查结果” in Chinese and “‫ ”جياتن‬in Arabic.
The step by Western delegations demanding
that the Secretariat investigate the drone issue sets
an extremely dangerous precedent for the work of
the United Nations. From the legal perspective, they
are seeking to expand the Secretariat’s powers and
give it inappropriate functions by infringing on the
prerogatives of the Security Council.
Such an approach is not in line with the basic
principles of the work of the United Nations, including
the division of competences among its main organs
and their respective designation. It also contradicts
plain logic. If the Secretariat can unilaterally deal with
substantive and policy matters upon receiving orders
from certain Member States, then why do we need
collective bodies like the Security Council and the
General Assembly?
I want to stress the fact that the SecretaryGeneral was tasked with preparing reports on the
implementation of the resolution does not mean that
the Secretariat was, by default, authorized to collect
data and respond to reports from Member States about
possible violations of the resolution. That is the mandate
of the Security Council sanctions committees, with the
support of their respective groups of experts, but not of
the Secretariat. I hope that we all understand that the
resolution 2231 (2015) team cannot, by definition, be
considered a sanctions committee, since it is a division
of the Secretariat.
I assume that everyone now understands that, in the
context of resolution 2231 (2015), the Secretariat acts
solely as a point of contact. We therefore believe that
the only thing that it can do after receiving the letters
from the United Kingdom, France, Germany and the
United States is to transmit them to the Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) for
circulation among the Security Council members. The
Secretary-General’s report can only reflect the fact that
those letters were received.
We see in the behaviour of Western delegations
yet another manifestation of flagrant hypocrisy and
6/18

26/10/2022

double standards. They present themselves as the chief
champions of respect for the Charter of the United
Nations, they include calls for upholding the principles
of the Charter in various non-core resolutions of the
General Assembly and accuse other members of
violating them. What are we actually seeing here? It
turns out that when they need to, the same Council
members who just two weeks ago were foaming at
the mouth in this Chamber about the importance of
defending the Charter are now themselves openly
violating it and pushing the Secretariat to do the same.
As for the United States — which itself has already
been violating resolution 2231 (2015) for four years by
withdrawing unilaterally from the Joint Comprehensive
Programme of Action in 2018 — this is a completely
new level of disregard for the Charter and the decisions
of the Security Council that is unprecedented at the
United Nations.
Unfortunately, the Secretariat is not demonstrating
any particular resistance to such overt political
pressure either. We heard the statements by the official
representative of the Secretary-General about the
readiness to act upon requests of individual Member
States. Those statements run counter to the letter and
spirit of Article 100 of the Charter of the United Nations
and of resolution 2231 (2015) itself.
All of this poses serious risks to the integrity of the
Charter, the effectiveness of the work of the Security
Council and to our Organization as a whole. We call on
the members of the Council to stand up for the Charter,
to condemn the actions of those Western delegations
undermining it and to speak out clearly in favour of
ensuring that the Secretariat complies with Article
100 of the Charter and its mandate in accordance with
the framework established by the Security Council in
presidential note S/2016/44.
We would like to ask Mr. De Serpa Soares to
confirm that the investigation proposed by individual
delegations rather than the Security Council as a
whole would constitute a violation of Article 100 of
the Charter, as it would if the Secretariat consented to
conduct such an investigation.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General De Serpa Soares for
his briefing.
The claim that Russia is making is simply
dumbfounding. Once again, Russia has wasted the
Security Council’s time to deflect attention from its
22-65459

26/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

own egregious wrongdoing. Russia claims that requests
from the United States and other countries that the
Secretary-General investigate violations of resolution
2231 (2015) by Russia and Iran are a supposed violation
of Article 100 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Article 100 provides that “the Secretary-General and
the staff shall not seek or receive instructions from
any Government”. The requests of the United States
and other Council members were not instructions. Like
countless other requests made to the Secretary-General
by Member States, they were requests that he take
appropriate action.
Many Member States, including Russia, make
such requests to the Secretary-General. Indeed, as
recently as August of this year, Russia requested that
the Secretary-General investigate killings at a prison
in eastern Ukraine. In response to that request, the
Secretary-General decided to conduct a fact-finding
mission. Far from constituting instructions to the
Secretary-General, such requests for investigations are
common, appropriate and by no means in violation of
Article 100 of the Charter of the United Nations.
But this situation is even more clear-cut, given the
unique language and mandate in resolution 2231 (2015).
As our colleagues will recall, that important resolution
was adopted in July 2015 as the Iranian nuclear deal was
finalized. It established critical restrictions on Iran that
would last for a period of years. All Council members,
including Russia, voted for it. Russia was involved
in negotiating its provisions. In this case, Russia and
Iran teamed up to violate resolution 2231 (2015). Iran,
in violation of resolution 2231 (2015), provided Russia
with drones to wreak havoc and inflict destruction on
Ukrainian civilians. Russia, in violation of resolution
2231 (2015), procured them. Iran has been open and
vocal about its support and there is no doubt that the
transfer occurred without approval by the Council and
therefore in violation of resolution 2231 (2015). The
Security Council itself asked the Secretary-General
to play a vital role in reporting on violations of the
resolution. It is therefore well within the authority of
the Secretary-General to investigate Russia and Iran’s
violations of resolution 2231 (2015).
The resolution explicitly asked the SecretaryGeneral to report every six months on the implementation
of the resolution’s provisions. At the time it was adopted
and in the seven years since, Council members have
understood the mandate to include investigations of
alleged violations of the resolution, typically following

S/PV.9167

reports of concerns by Member States. In fact, there
is ample precedent for the Secretariat to carry out
independent investigations as part of that mandate to
report on implementation. Over the past seven years,
the Secretary-General has submitted to the Security
Council 13 reports summarizing its investigations and
findings on non-compliance. For example, in the report
contained in document S/2017/1030, the SecretaryGeneral reported on an investigation of allegations
that Iranian-supplied ballistic missiles were used by
the Houthis in attacks on Saudi Arabia. The SecretaryGeneral reported on a visit to Saudi Arabia, where an
examination of the weapons and debris, as well as other
investigative actions, was undertaken by the Secretariat
in response to the allegations.
More recently, in response to an invitation from the
authorities of Saudi Arabia, the Secretariat travelled
to Riyadh in October 2021 to examine the debris from
six ballistic missiles tied to the Houthi attacks. The
Secretariat’s team also went to Israel in 2021 to inspect
Iranian unmanned aerial vehicles that had infiltrated
Israeli airspace. In each of those cases, crucially, the
Secretary-General’s reports did not just consist of
the verbatim repetition of allegations of violations of
resolution 2231 (2015) or assertions by Member States
denying them. The Secretariat rather engaged in its
own investigations in order to evaluate the allegations
so that it could report, as it is mandated to do, on
the extent to which the alleged violations affected
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) by a
Member State.
It is therefore well established that it is well within
the authority of the Secretary-General to investigate
allegations of violations of resolution 2231 (2015).
Requests from the United States and other Member
States that the Secretary-General investigate the
latest violations by Iran and Russia were appropriate
and urgently needed. Russia’s response, claiming that
the Ukraine report should be treated differently and
that the United Nations leadership should block the
investigations typically undertaken in such cases,
is deeply troubling and inconsistent with years of
Council practice.
Now we see Russia making threats against the
United Nations. For reasons that are obvious to all,
Russia seeks to obstruct and confuse. But yielding to
those threats and acceding to Russia’s demand that the
Secretariat not carry out its mandate under resolution
2231 (2015) in this instance would be extremely

22-654597/18

S/PV.9167

Maintenance of international peace and security

problematic. It would undermine the implementation
of Security Council resolutions and give all countries,
including Russia, a free pass to flout obligations
imposed by the Council. The United States regrets that
Russia has once again abused its position as a Council
member to waste this organ’s time and seek to hide its
own violations of our resolutions.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I will be brief. Let me
begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs for his briefing.
India appreciates the important work of the
Secretariat in supporting the Security Council. We
value the Secretary-General’s periodic reports to the
Council and the professional work that goes into the
preparation of such reports. In preparing them, the
Secretariat should always be guided by the mandate
provided in the Council’s resolutions, presidential
statements and notes by the President.
In the current context, paragraph 7 of presidential
note S/2016/44 clearly requests the Secretary-General
to report to the Security Council every six months on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We hope
that the Secretariat will continue to function objectively
regarding such issues and undertake its activities in
accordance with the mandate provided to it by the
Council. Respect for the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations is an absolute must.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral De Serpa Soares for his pertinent clarifications.
The raison d’être of the Secretariat is to execute its
mandate with objectivity and impartiality and without
fear or favour, and that involves also reminding States
of their obligations and the degree to which they adhere
to them. Impartiality does not mean indifference or
detachment from reality when commitments are not
upheld and the law is broken. That is why we strongly
value and support the work of the Secretariat in its
endeavour to ensure consistency and continuity in the
application of the Charter of the United Nations, in
the service of all Member States, without distinction.
That is why we rightly expect all States to respect the
Charter’s prerogatives and cooperate in good faith with
the Secretariat.
Threats against the Secretariat are unconscionable
and further profess a total disregard for the rules that
underpin our Organization. The Secretariat should
not yield to them. Equally, Member States should not
8/18

26/10/2022

heed any demands that could prevent the Secretariat
from carrying out its duties and discharging its
obligations, including regarding the matter at hand, a
monitoring mandate for resolution 2231 (2015). Doing
so would create a dangerous precedent, undermine the
implementation of Security Council resolutions and
create the impression that some countries can disregard
obligations at will and with impunity.
We all know to read the rules, the Charter and what
we have adopted. But that is not the key issue. Let us
look at the core issue, which is the denial that Russia
has deployed Iranian-made unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs) against civilian infrastructure in Ukraine that
we know are wreaking havoc and killing civilians.
If what Russia says is the truth, if it has nothing to
hide and if it is implementing the resolutions of the
Security Council, upholding the Charter and respecting
international law — although the General Assembly
does not think that is the case — then in the interests of
truth and clarity, Russia should be the first to welcome
an independent and impartial verification to bring the
truth to light and not to threaten the mandate holders,
especially the Secretary-General.
In 2015, the Council adopted resolution 2231
(2015) to endorse the Iran nuclear deal and keep in
place certain critical restrictions on Iran for a period
of years. The resolution asked the Secretary-General to
“report to the Security Council on the implementation
of these provisions every six months.” And that was
amply mentioned by the Legal Counsel. With its
adoption of the resolution, the Council fully supported
the Secretariat in establishing a team and a process for
monitoring its implementation. And Member States
have supported the Secretariat’s resolution 2231 (2015)
team for years by providing information and analysis.
As the Legal Counsel mentioned, for the past seven
years the Secretariat has done that, submitting 13
reports summarizing its investigations and findings
on reported non-compliance, based on many visits
and inspections by the resolution 2231 (2015) team.
I also want to echo something that other delegations
have mentioned, which is that in December 2021 the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/995) mentioned the
Secretariat’s visit to Saudi Arabia to examine debris
from six ballistic missiles fired by the Houthis. A team
from the Secretariat also went to Israel in 2021 to inspect
Iranian UAVs that had infiltrated Israeli airspace. How
are those cases different from the Iranian-produced
UAVs that are being used today by Russia in Ukraine?
22-65459

26/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

Ukraine, a Member State, has submitted a
request to the President of the Security Council
based on its own evidence that Russia has used UAVs
of Iranian production and origin, whose transfer is
clearly prohibited in resolution 2231 (2015). Reliable
sources have shown that Russia is using those UAVs,
including against civilian infrastructure in Ukraine.
Such procurements and transfers are a clear violation
of paragraph 4 of annex B of the resolution, and two
Member States — Russia and Iran — are in clear breach
of it. That is why we reiterate our call to the Secretariat
to do its job and not get lost in intentionally confusing
semantics when its mandate is clear. It should organize
visits to sites, which Ukraine has offered to facilitate,
collect evidence and report on its findings. Following its
well-established procedures, the resolution 2231 (2015)
team should analyse the available evidence impartially
and report the findings to the Security Council. And we
look forward to that report.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
France deeply deplores the cynicism that Russia has
demonstrated in convening a meeting on the integrity
of the Charter of the United Nations. Because it is clear
that it is Russia that has been continually violating the
Charter and trampling on its principles by invading its
neighbour and annexing its territories. It was Russia
that voted, in total isolation, against General Assembly
resolution ES-11/4, entitled “Territorial integrity of
Ukraine: defending the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations”, which was supported by 143 countries
(see A/ES-11/PV.14).
I would like to thank the Secretariat for clarifying
the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) and the role
of the Secretariat in its implementation. The facts are
very clear. Iran provided drones to Russia, which has
used them in its war of aggression in indiscriminate
bombings of civilian targets. Those facts, which may
constitute war crimes, are well documented. The
provision of those drones by Iran to Russia without
the prior approval of the Council represents a violation
of paragraph 4 of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015),
which, I would like to remind everyone, the members of
the Council adopted unanimously in 2015.
France calls on Iran to immediately cease all forms
of support for Russia’s war of aggression on Ukraine
and to stop violating resolution 2231 (2015). We would
like the Secretariat to investigate the issue and inform
the members of the Council so that the SecretaryGeneral can report accurately on the implementation

S/PV.9167

of resolution 2231 (2015), as he has been mandated to
do twice a year since 2015. The Secretariat has already
deployed teams on several occasions in the past to
impartially investigate violations of resolution 2231
(2015) in similar circumstances. The representative of
Russia told us on 19 October, in consultations, that the
drones in question were Russian. It is therefore difficult
to understand why Russia does not want the debris to
be examined.
Let us be clear that it is Russia that is not respecting
Article 100 of the Charter of the United Nations and the
independence of the Secretariat. It is in fact Russia that
is blackmailing us by threatening to sever ties with the
United Nations unless the Secretariat bends to its will
and refrains from discharging its mandate. France will
continue to support Ukraine. And we will continue to
provide all the necessary support to the work that the
Secretariat carries out with professionalism, integrity
and independence.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I would like to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for his very useful
briefing today.
We welcome Ukraine’s invitation to the Secretariat
to visit Ukraine to inspect recovered unmanned aerial
vehicles with regard to the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) by the parties, and we expect the Secretariat
to keep the Security Council informed as appropriate
on the matter. We see that request by a State with
legitimate concerns regarding the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) as fully in keeping with both
the Charter of the United Nations and the terms of
resolution 2231 (2015) and presidential note S/2016/44,
which clearly sets out that the Secretary-General should
report on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
every six months and that the Council, in its resolution
2231 (2015) format, should review his findings
and recommendations. The necessary technical
investigations that the Secretariat conducts are an
integral part of preparing those findings. No further
decision by the Council is necessary in that regard.
The Secretary-General’s reports play an essential
role in assisting the Council in its mandated task to
monitor the implementation of the resolution and to take
action, as appropriate, to improve the implementation
by Member States of the resolution.
With regard to Article 100 of the Charter of the
United Nations, unfortunately, it is Russia that seeks
to influence the Secretary-General and his staff in the

22-654599/18

S/PV.9167

Maintenance of international peace and security

discharge of their responsibilities, including through
this meeting. It is clear that the Secretariat is acting
in good faith on the instructions that the Council has
given it. If those instructions are to change, that must
be agreed by the Council in line with presidential note
S/2016/44 and cannot be dictated by any one member.
I hope that Russia will cooperate as necessary with
the Secretariat in the conduct of its work and provide
any information required to clarify the issues regarding
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): I join previous delegations
in thanking Under-Secretary-General Ferreira de Serpa
Soares for his briefing and for clarifying the role of
the Secretariat in relation to the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
Our Russian colleagues have suggested that the
joint request by France, Germany and the United
Kingdom for an investigation by the Secretariat’s team
responsible for the monitoring and implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) into the reported transfer from
Iran to the Russian Federation of unmanned aerial
vehicles being used in Ukraine constitutes a violation
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Ghana is fully supportive of the objectives of
resolution 2231 (2015), which has at its core the
protection of humankind from the dangers of nuclear
capacities. We therefore urge full compliance with
its provisions and support the investigation of any
violations through appropriate channels.
The issue that currently confronts us, however, is
the continuing aggression of the Russian Federation
against Ukraine and the imperatives for the reversal of
that action.
We continue to be deeply concerned by the Russian
Federation’s unjustified invasion of the sovereign
territory of Ukraine, its targeted attacks against
civilians and the deliberate destruction of civilian and
critical infrastructure in violation of the principles of
international law and the values and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations.
It is those actions by the Russian Federation and
its subsequent wielding of the veto in a manner that
has to date restrained the requisite Council action that
casts doubts on our ability to deliver on the mandate to
promote international peace and security as it relates
to Ukraine. That is the reality that threatens the peace
10/18

26/10/2022

and stability of our international system and regrettably
impugns the integrity of our Organization.
We reiterate our call on the Russian Federation to
immediately and unconditionally withdraw its troops
from the internationally recognized borders of Ukraine
and bring an end to the war, which has not only affected
Ukraine and its people but has also precipitated
unpleasant socioeconomic challenges, especially for
developing countries such as Ghana.
We remain deeply concerned by the prevailing
conditions marked by intense fighting and heightened
rhetoric relating to the use or threat of the use of various
forms of weapons of mass destruction. We are also
concerned that the requirements for nuclear safety and
security at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant have
yet to be implemented. We strongly urge restraint and
caution against such rhetoric being used as justification
for any tactical use of nuclear weapons.
The precarious conditions in Ukraine and the
tendency towards its rapid escalation highlight the
urgency to intensify diplomatic efforts to end the
hostilities and further help the parties to seek a pathway
to a pacific settlement of the conflict through dialogue.
I conclude by reaffirming Ghana’s full support for
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Ferreira de Serpa Soares for
the clarifications presented.
Brazil takes note of the letter circulated jointly
by the Missions of France, Germany and the United
Kingdom (S/2022/781), as well as the letters circulated
by the Mission of the United States (S/2022/782) and
the Mission of the Russian Federation (S/2022/783).
The letters draw the attention of Council members to
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). More
particularly, the letter circulated by the Russian
Federation refers also to Article 100 of the Charter of
the United Nations.
It is our understanding that under paragraph 7 of
presidential note S/2016/44, dated 16 January 2016, the
Secretary-General is mandated to “report to the Security
Council every six months on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015)”. Any further action beyond that
mandate should be discussed by the Security Council,
including responding to information regarding alleged
actions inconsistent with the resolution, in accordance
22-65459

26/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

with article 2 (d) of the presidential note. Nonetheless,
it is worth recalling that in similar situations in the past,
in response to an invitation from concerned Member
States, the Secretariat travelled to examine and collect
relevant information for its regular reporting, as
described in previous reports of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Brazil trusts that the Secretariat will continue
to carry out its mandate strictly in accordance
with note S/2016/44 and Article 100 of the Charter
of the United Nations, preserving its exclusively
international character.
In an ever-more complex international security
context, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) provides a suitable framework for dialogue
among the parties concerned. Brazil counts on
the collective commitment of the JCPOA original
participants to conclude negotiations and immediately
resume full compliance with their respective obligations
under the agreement and with resolution 2231 (2015) of
the Council.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Ferreira de Serpa Soares for his briefing.
Norway fully supports the Secretariat’s role in
implementing resolution 2231 (2015).
The reported transfer of unmanned aircrafts
(UAVs) from Iran to Russia for use in Ukraine is of
great concern. Those drones are used to attack civilians
and civilian objects. That usage is prohibited under
international humanitarian law and may constitute
war crimes. The transfer of such UAVs would also be a
violation of paragraph 4 of annex B to resolution 2231
(2015).
In paragraph 7 of presidential note S/2016/44,
the Secretary-General was requested to report every
six months on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), including his findings and recommendations.
In fulfilment of that request, the Secretary-General has
reported 13 times to the Council. Many of the findings
have been based on first-hand assessments of evidence
collected on the ground and many of the assessments
have been initiated based on letters from Member
States with information concerning potential violations
and actions inconsistent with the provisions of annex
B to resolution 2231 (2015). Those letters have also
included travel invitations from relevant authorities in

S/PV.9167

order for the United Nations to conduct necessary firsthand assessments.
In our view, there is nothing about the conduct of the
Secretariat in connection with the request put forward
in the letter from Ukraine that could substantiate the
Russian claims of misconduct.
Let me recall that Article 100 of the Charter of
the United Nations requires each Member State to
respect the impartiality of the Secretary-General and
his staff and not to influence them in the discharge of
their responsibilities.
We regret that Russia, by accusing others of
violating that principle, is in fact itself disregarding the
spirit of Article 100. That can only be understood as
an attempt to draw attention away from Russia’s own
illegal war and actions.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We appreciate the valuable information
provided by the Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares.
I will refer briefly to two relevant issues on the
subject at hand, since the convening of today’s meeting
on the maintenance of international peace and security
is conducive to endorsing our position on some aspects
of the war in Ukraine that has now been going on for
more than eight months.
First, it should be remembered that the 1949
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols
contain specific provisions on the obligations of the
parties to a conflict, requiring that they distinguish
between the civilian population and combatants. Based
on that, we have condemned the indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks on the civilian population in
Ukraine, including the most recent ones using unmanned
aerial vehicles. There is no justification for attacks on
residential buildings, basic service infrastructure or
other civilian targets. We therefore reiterate our call to
put a stop to those aggressions.
Secondly, given the contradictory allegations
about the origin of the drones that attacked the
civilian population, we believe that the international
community should know the truth, and therefore an
independent investigation is needed to form the basis
for a credible opinion. Since there has been a request
to the Secretariat to investigate the origin of the drones
used in these attacks and since their possible Iranian
manufacture has been highlighted, my delegation,

22-6545911/18

S/PV.9167

Maintenance of international peace and security

having made the relevant legal analysis, considers the
request to be appropriately in accord with the provisions
of resolution 2231 (2015). Nor do we consider such an
investigation to be contrary to the provisions in Article
100 of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Secretary-General also has the authority
under the Charter to undertake investigations resulting
from the requests made by Member States through
the competent organs. That is the result of established
practice, based on Article 99 of the Charter, which
defines the role of the Secretary-General in matters of
prevention in relation to situations with the potential to
endanger international peace and security.
In conclusion, I want to insist that we focus
on finding a diplomatic solution and promoting
new mediation mechanisms that can strengthen the
Secretary-General’s efforts to bring about a cessation
of hostilities in Ukraine, which is the only way to fully
protect the civilian population.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Under-Secretary-General De Serpa Soares for
his briefing.
I understand that the theme of today’s meeting
concerns the Secretariat’s performance of its duties,
and I will address that issue first.
The Charter of the United Nations establishes
regulations for the Secretariat and its staff in the
performance of their duties. According to Article 100
of the Charter, in the performance of their duties the
Secretariat staff shall not seek or receive instructions
from any Government or any other authority external
to the Organization. They shall refrain from any action
that might reflect on their position as international
officials responsible only to the Organization. The
duties of the Secretariat staff should be of an exclusively
international character and Member States should
respect that and not seek to influence the Secretariat in
the discharge of its responsibilities. Adherence to the
relevant provisions of Article 100 of the Charter is an
important guarantee of the Secretariat’s impartiality
in carrying out its duties. The Secretariat should work
within its mandate, strengthen its communication with
Member States and aim to contribute to enhancing
mutual trust and maintaining unity among Member
States while handling differences of opinion among
Member States in a fair and appropriate manner.
12/18

26/10/2022

Many speakers today have mentioned the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). The
resolution’s main content is its endorsement of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). As the
current negotiations on resuming implementation of
the JCPOA have reached their final critical stage, all
the parties involved should exercise rational restraint
and accurately interpret the provisions of resolution
2231 (2015) and related documents to avoid further
complicating those negotiations or undermining the
hard-won results achieved thus far.
China has taken note of the letters to the Council
from the delegations of Ukraine, Iran, Russia, France,
the United Kingdom and other relevant parties on the
transfer of drones, and we have also noted the differing
interpretations of the Secretariat’s mandate as set out
in presidential note S/2016/44. In the light of such
clear differences, Council members should continue
consultations to strive to clearly define how the
Secretariat should carry out its mandate and avoid hasty
actions that would undermine the unity of the Council.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs,
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares, for his briefing to the
Security Council today.
I would like to begin by addressing the most
important element of this discussion for all of us
today, the preservation of Article 100 of the Charter
of the United Nations. It is stating the obvious that the
independence of the Secretariat is necessary to the
proper discharge of its duties. For that very reason,
Article 100 includes the corollary obligation on the part
of Member States to respect that independence. Perhaps
less apparent is how that independence is also in the
common interests of Member States.
Fundamentally, it is quite simple. There cannot be
sovereign equality of Member States if some, whether
through power or influence, are able to instruct the
Secretariat to act or refrain from acting in a certain
manner. Smaller States are most acutely aware of that
risk, but really it should worry all States that do not
enjoy the privilege of a permanent Council seat. It
would be naive of us to pretend that Member States have
never attempted to exert influence over the Secretariat.
We may talk about attempts and even erosion at times.
That is why it is so important today that we reaffirm
the fundamental nature of Article 100 for the proper
22-65459

26/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

functioning of the Secretariat and the Organization as
a whole.
Secondly, I would like to address prior practice
in the context of resolution 2231 (2015). Because
non-compliance with resolution 2231 (2015) has
implications across the Middle East, impartial
documentation of the resolution’s implementation is a
matter of principle for the United Arab Emirates. As
is publicly known, we have welcomed the Secretariat’s
resolution 2231 (2015) team to the United Arab
Emirates to inspect the Houthis’ weapons and their
debris or remnants, including, most recently, following
their terrorist attacks on my country. On all occasions,
the Secretariat conducted independent and impartial
inspections that we believe were important to the
findings and recommendations that it then submitted to
the Security Council.
Third, the discussion today is a reminder of why
clarity in our decisions and documents is so important.
As a member of the Security Council, we strive to
establish clear mandates in the resolutions we negotiate.
While constructive ambiguity can facilitate reaching
agreement on difficult issues, language prone to
multiple interpretations or even misinterpretation can
hinder collective action. Clear rules, applied equally,
remain the cornerstone of the multilateral system.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank the UnderSecretary-General for Legal Affairs for his briefing.
This meeting represents another attempt by
Russia to distract from its crimes in Ukraine and
from the failure by Iran and Russia to abide by their
international obligations.
Russia and Iran have been caught red-handed
violating resolution 2231 (2015). Russia is now
concocting an argument about process because it
cannot defend its actions. We have seen Russia do that
many times before. It is sad that that is now standard
procedure for Russia.
Based on the evidence provided by Ukraine and the
significant amount of open-source reporting, our view
is clear. Iran has supplied unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs) to Russia, with which Russia targets Ukrainian
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Those UAVs fall
under the list in annex B, paragraph 4, of resolution
2231 (2015). Given that no prior approval was sought
or granted by the Security Council, those transfers
represent violations of resolution 2231 (2015).

S/PV.9167

Unlike Russia, we are happy for our position to be
verified. We have therefore expressed support for an
impartial expert investigation to be conducted by the
Secretariat, in line with its mandate under resolution
2231 (2015), so that the facts can be clearly established.
As Council members are aware and as others have made
clear already today, the Secretariat has conducted many
such investigations, most recently in the United Arab
Emirates and Saudi Arabia. That is therefore entirely in
line with precedent and normal practice.
Russia’s claim that we are trying to unduly influence
the Secretariat is both absurd and hypocritical. It is
Russia, in trying to sustain its disinformation, that first
attacked the Secretary-General — and now the whole
Secretariat — just for doing their jobs. It is Russia
that threatened to end all cooperation with the United
Nations if the Secretariat does not do as Russia wants.
That is not the behaviour of a country with nothing to
hide. That is the behaviour of a bully.
What is Russia trying to do here today? It is trying
to make the United Nations ability to monitor the
implementation of a key non-proliferation resolution
subject to a new lock in the Security Council, in
which Russia itself has a veto. Russia is again trying
to abuse its seat on the Council to shield itself from
international scrutiny.
Further open-source reporting suggests that Iran
intends to transfer yet more UAVs and potentially
ballistic missiles to Russia. Any such transfers of items
could constitute further violations of resolution 2231
(2015) and represent a significant escalation.
In using Iranian drones to attack civilians as part
of its war on Ukraine, Russia is breaching the Charter
of the United Nations, violating a Security Council
resolution and is probably committing war crimes.
That is quite the hat trick. Those increasingly desperate
attempts to distract us from those facts and undermine
the system must be rejected.
Ms. Nyakoe (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Miguel de Serpa Soares for his briefing.
I also thank the Russian Federation for initiating
today’s meeting. It provides an opportunity for member
States to assess the challenges and opportunities of a
strong and independent Secretariat, particularly with
regard to the good offices of the Secretary-General.
Humankind needs a strong, independent Secretariat
and good offices of the Secretary-General that are

22-6545913/18

S/PV.9167

Maintenance of international peace and security

26/10/2022

credible and respected. They are needed to intervene,
mediate, provide relief in conflict situations and
emergencies worldwide, and respond to the urgent call
for development.

Charter. In practice, that means the membership
appreciating the fact that the Secretary-General is not
partial to a party to a conflict when he speaks up about
its outrages against the Charter.

Over time, the demand for the Secretary-General’s
good offices, whether expressly provided for, such as
under resolution 2646 (2022) or through his envoys,
has been growing. With regard to the war in Ukraine,
which is the reason for today’s meeting, the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices were consequential in achieving
the important Black Sea Grain Initiative. However, they
have not been engaged in negotiations to end the war.
In our view, one of the reasons for that is the impact
of years of Member States questioning the Secretariat’s
impartiality and eroding its independence.

The Secretary-General must be fully partial
to the Charter and should fully exercise Article 99
without regard for the approval or disapproval of any
State, no matter how pivotal in global affairs. His
or her doing so is a duty that cannot be shirked, and
therefore the Secretary-General’s good offices should
not be marginalized from the mediated settlement of
conflicts. That should be the case with regard to the
war in Ukraine or other wars involving members of
the Council.

The most powerful States, including some members
of the Council, have played a disproportionate role in
that unfortunate trend. Prominent examples of that
situation, during our current term on the Council,
are the claims and counter-claims of compromised
impartiality when the Secretariat reports on
disarmament, proliferation and banned weapons in
Syria. It appears that there is now a fully formed view
that the Secretariat’s impartiality equals standing on
the halfway line between conflicting parties. However,
that is not what the Charter of the United Nations
means by impartiality. Instead, the Secretary-General
and the Secretariat are an independent organ, whose
first and last loyalty is to the upholding and defence of
the Charter.
Even as we push for urgent Security Council
reform, we acknowledge that a more urgent task is the
membership rededicating itself to the principles of the
Charter. Otherwise, multilateralism as expressed in the
United Nations is unlikely to come close to meeting
that promise.
We propose that the most important starting point
is to renew our respect and utilization of the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices for the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. We propose three ways to strengthen those
good offices.
The first way to strengthen those good offices is to
redefine the impartiality and protect the independence
of the Secretariat. The reason that Article 100 protects
the Secretary-General and the staff from external
influence or instruction is not just because they are
a neutral referee. It is to enable them to speak truth
to power in the defence of the letter and spirit of the
14/18

The second way to strengthen those good offices
concerns the appreciation and use of the Secretary
General’s fact-finding capabilities. In order to
strengthen the role of the United Nations and enhance
its effectiveness in maintaining international peace
and security, the General Assembly adopted resolution
46/59, of 9 December 1991, which recognizes the need
for the Security Council to have knowledge of all
relevant facts in performing the functions relevant to its
mandate. The resolution also recognizes the SecretaryGeneral’s fact-finding capabilities and requires him to
monitor the state of international peace and security
in order to provide early warning and to share relevant
information with the Security Council, while making
use of the information-gathering capabilities of
the Secretariat.
The Security Council must make use of the reservoir
of capabilities of the Secretary-General to contribute
to the effectiveness of its discussions and decisions. In
the situation in Ukraine, rather than argue about the
facts on the ground here in the Council, where most
members have no independent means to ascertain their
veracity, we challenge the conflicting parties to agree
to United Nations fact-finding and verification. That
would be key to preventing and minimizing actions that
are contrary to the Charter and international law.
The third way to strengthen those good offices
involves the need to continually strengthen regional
good offices. Article 33 of the Charter recognizes the
important role of regional agencies and arrangements
in dispute resolution. Strong regional mechanisms
have increasingly played a key role in preventing the
escalation of conflicts and their termination in the
Security Council. We are proud of Africa’s peace and
22-65459

26/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

security architecture and its deployment of multilayered
and coordinated good offices. From the Chairpersons of
the African Union and the African Union Commission,
the Panel of the Wise and the regional economic
communities, it offers options and redundancies for
the protection of peace and security. Strengthening the
good offices of the Secretary-General and linking them
operationally and strategically to Africa’s improving
architecture would be an immense win for peace. We
urge other regions to take steps to develop and deploy
similar regional arrangements for early warning,
prevention and the resolution of disputes.
Lastly, I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter and our support
for the independence and impartiality of the SecretaryGeneral and his staff.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.
We thank Mr. De Serpa Soares, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Legal Affairs and United Nations Legal
Counsel, for his informative briefing.
The subject of this meeting concerns the scope
and interpretation of Article 100, a provision of the
Charter of the United Nations, in relation to the role
of the Secretariat, in accordance with the letter and
spirit of the Charter and subsequent accepted practice.
We closely followed the Legal Counsel’s authoritative
interpretation of the issue, which falls within his
purview. We understand his reading and interpretation,
which he explained in sufficient detail, and which are
based on the impartiality that the Secretariat’s reputation
is founded on. We want to reaffirm our commitment
to upholding the integrity of the Charter, which is the
cement holding together the edifice in which we the
international community all live, and which must form
the foundation of the essential negotiations that will
enable us to silence the guns and end the war in Ukraine.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of Russia has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have heard nothing legally significant
today in the statements of the countries that have
asked the Secretariat to carry out an investigation,
just the same sneaky arguments about the Secretariat’s

S/PV.9167

obligation to respond to the requests of Member States.
It was especially touching to hear accusations of
Russia’s violations of resolution 2231 (2015) from the
United States, the main violator of the resolution. The
Secretariat should respond to requests from Member
States, but it should act based on a clear and explicit
mandate and the Charter of the United Nations, not the
desires of individual countries.
In response to our request for an investigation into
the Olenivka incident, our Western colleagues are as
usual being deceptive. It has nothing to do with the
issue under discussion today or with resolution 2231
(2015). We are asking another question. What is behind
the Secretariat’s willingness to launch an investigation
into alleged violations of resolution 2231 (2015) at the
request not of the Security Council as a whole but a few
Member States? Where does that mandate come from?
They refer to practice, not legal norms, and do not
mention that we have consistently protested in writing
against every mention of an investigation in violation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
The fact that certain information was already
included in the Secretary-General’s reports does not
amount to evidence of any legitimate practice, much
less the Council’s. Such practices have been at odds
with the mandate of the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat as a whole from the very beginning. Once
again, neither the Secretary-General or the Secretariat
has such a mandate, and Russia has always objected
to such practices. How can we talk about establishing
a practice when it contravenes a mandate and is
persistently objected to by the permanent members of
the Council? The term “persistent objection” exists and
precludes the establishment of a practice, and we have
protested that since 2016 and continue to do so today.
Today we were urged to consent to an investigation
if we have nothing to hide. But the question is not
whether anyone is hiding anything, it is about the
legitimacy of such an investigation in the absence of a
mandate from the Security Council, which is the sole
entity that can confer it. The representative of Ireland
said that there was no need for a mandate from the
Security Council other than a letter of request. That is a
surprising statement coming from the Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). That is utter legal nihilism. We would advise
our colleagues from Ireland to better learn the basics,
or we will have to question their country’s ability to
chair that subsidiary body of the Council.

22-6545915/18

S/PV.9167

Maintenance of international peace and security

Frankly, a position based on hypocritical distortions
by Western countries should no longer surprise anyone,
and it does not surprise us. But today various members
of the Council have outdone themselves. How can
raising the issue of compliance with the mandate of
resolution 2231 (2015) at a meeting of the Council that
adopted it be viewed as an attack on the Secretariat and
blackmail of the Secretary-General, let alone a violation
of Article 100 of the Charter? Blaming others for what
they do themselves is a favourite ploy of our Western
colleagues. But on the whole, we are grateful to our
Western colleagues for the exhaustive list of violations
by the Secretariat of Article 100 of the Charter in the
form of illegitimate investigations carried out by the
resolution 2231 (2015) Facilitator’s team in defiance of
their mandate. That will now be on the record of our
meeting, as will the fact that we have pointed out those
violations in every case. They are now trying to get
the Secretariat to commit a new violation merely on
the grounds that such violations have been committed
before. We are very familiar with the pattern.
I would like to ask Mr. De Serpa Soares once
again if launching an investigation at the request of
individual Member States rather than the entire Security
Council would violate Article 100 of the Charter and
the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015), and if the
Secretariat’s consent to carry out such an investigation
would be in breach of the Charter.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. De Serpa Soares to answer the questions
and address the comments made by members of
the Council.
Mr. De Serpa Soares (spoke in French): I have no
further comments to make on the various statements.
With regard to the question from the representative
of the Russian Federation, I would like to say that
in my briefing earlier, I provided details on the text
and the customary application of Article 100 of the
Charter of the United Nations. I explained the text
and described the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) in practice. I have nothing to add to what I said
earlier. With regard to the question just asked, it is a
hypothetical question, and I am not in a position to
answer hypothetical questions.
The President: I thank Mr. De Serpa Soares for the
clarifications that he has just made.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
16/18

26/10/2022

Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): We join other States
in thanking the Under-Secretary-General for his
briefing today.
This meeting represents yet another attempt by the
Russian Federation to distract attention from its crime
of aggression, war crimes and crimes against humanity
in our country. Eight and a half years of Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine, including eight months of
full-scale invasion, is a blatant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that light, Russia’s appeal to the
United Nations Charter is hypocritical and cynical. The
Russian Federation remains consistent in its practices
of constant threats and blackmail — this time against
the Secretariat. We strongly condemn that unacceptable
pressure and threats to reconsider cooperation with the
United Nations if the Secretariat uses its authority to
investigate implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
The deliberate misuse of the provisions of the Charter
to obstruct the investigation is a clear attempt to put
pressure on the Secretariat aimed at avoiding its own
responsibility. We express our full support for the
Secretary-General and the Secretariat, in line with our
commitments under the provisions of Article 100 of the
United Nations Charter.
Last Friday, Ukraine informed the Security Council
about the use of long-range unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs) of Iranian origin by Russia in its attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure in my country
(see S/PV.9161). That represents a blatant violation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, signed by
China, France, Germany, the United Kingdom, the
United States, the European Union and the Russian
Federation itself and endorsed by the Security Council
in resolution 2231 (2015). As the Council is aware, that
is why Ukraine officially addressed the presidency of
the Security Council on 14 October and requested that
the relevant independent investigation be started.
In our letter, we drew attention to the alarming
situation with respect to the transfers of Mohajer and
Shahed-series UAVs from Iran to Russia, specifically
in late August. Paragraph 4 of annex B to resolution
2231 (2015) prohibits the transfer from Iran of all items,
materials, equipment, goods and technology set out in
the annex to document S/2015/546 unless approved
by the Security Council on a case-by-case basis.
Both Mohajer and Shahed-series UAVs are within the
parameters of the annex to document S/2015/546, at least
under category II, because they are capable of a range
equal to or greater than 300 kilometres. Furthermore,
22-65459

26/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security

we noted that the Mohajer-series UAV is manufactured
by Qods Aviation, which is subject to the assets-freeze
provision of paragraph 6 of annex B to resolution 2231
(2015). All States are required to freeze the funds of the
financial assets of designated entities.
According to the information available, no
States submitted those shipments for review by the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015).
They therefore did not receive advance case-by-case
approval, as required under the provisions of annex B
to resolution 2231 (2015).
In using Iranian drones to attack civilians, as well
as Ukraine’s civilian and critical infrastructure, Russia
is violating the United Nations Charter, international
humanitarian law and a Security Council resolution.
We see sufficient evidence to deem that the transfers
of UAVs from Iran to Russia should be considered.
Moreover, the international community should be
informed of the results of such an investigation. We
therefore requested that United Nations experts visit
Ukraine at the earliest possible opportunity to inspect
the recovered UAVs of Iranian origin. We believe that
the findings of the Secretariat’s investigations will
significantly contribute to assessing the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015).
The United Nations investigation should start
immediately. We call on all States to consider any
possible steps to stop the transfers of those kinds of
UAVs, missiles or conventional arms from Iran to be
used in the Russian war of aggression against Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic or Iran): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
Before I begin, I would like to express my sorrow
and sadness that our people and my country were
targeted today by a terrorist attack whereby, according
to the initial reports, a couple of armed gunmen attacked
a holy religious site, the Shah-e-Cheragh Shrine, in
Shiraz, resulting in at least 15 people martyred and
another 21 injured.
That is a heinous terrorist attack on civilians,
including children and women. Iran once again
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
as a real and grave threat to international peace and

S/PV.9167

security, and it is expected that the Security Council
explicitly and strongly condemn such a heinous crime.
First and foremost, I would like to clarify and
emphasize that Iran’s participation at this meeting is
confined to the matter raised in relation to resolution
2231 (2015), which is directly related to and affects
Iran. As a result, I feel compelled to attend this meeting
in order to elaborate on Iran’s position on the claims
made against my country in the context of resolution
2231 (2015).
Certain Security Council members, including the
United States, accuse Iran of violating resolution 2231
(2015) despite the fact that those States continue to
violate all their explicit legal obligations under that same
resolution. The main example is the illegal withdrawal
of the United States from the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, which is still openly used as bargaining
leverage today. Without a doubt, continuing such
unlawful acts violates international law, the Charter of
the United Nations and resolution 2231 (2015).
In yet another desperate effort, those States
have now attempted to establish an entirely artificial
linkage between resolution 2231 (2015) and the use
of unmanned aerial vehicles in the ongoing conflict
in Ukraine by disseminating unsubstantiated and
erroneous information, raising inaccurate assumptions
and resorting to totally flawed, arbitrary and misleading
interpretations of that resolution.
Let us be clear, and let us elaborate on Iran’s
position on resolution 2231 (2015). The claim regarding
the violation of paragraph 4 of annex B to resolution
2231 (2015) is an erroneous, arbitrary and misleading
interpretation that contradicts the letter and spirit
of that paragraph. The paragraph clearly refers to
restrictions on items, materials, equipment, goods and
technology that the State determines could contribute
to the development of nuclear weapon delivery systems.
As was stated in our letters of 19 October addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2022/776) and 24 October
addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/794), Iran has never
produced or supplied, neither does it intend to produce
or supply, items, materials, equipment, goods or
technology that could contribute to the development of
nuclear weapon delivery systems.
With regard to the request to the Secretariat
to conduct what is referred to as an investigation,
the resolution itself provides no legal basis for

22-6545917/18

S/PV.9167

Maintenance of international peace and security

such an investigation. Furthermore, the note by the
President of the Security Council dated 16 January
2016 (S/2016/44) clearly specifies the mandate of the
Secretariat regarding the resolution, which is only
administrative support. The Secretariat is tasked with
assisting the Facilitator in the organization and staffing
of informal Security Council meetings related to the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), managing all
incoming and outgoing communications related to the
resolution’s implementation, drafting correspondence,
speaking notes and briefings of the Facilitator related
to the resolution’s implementation and maintaining and
archiving all information and documents relating to
the resolution.
Having said that, I would like to once again
emphasize that any misuse of the functions described
in note S/2016/44 for conducting the so-called
investigation requested would be illegal and in clear
violation of the Secretariat’s mandate.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Iran’s clear and
consistent position on the conflict in Ukraine. Since the
beginning of the conflict, Iran has maintained a position
of active neutrality and has emphasized that all United

18/18

26/10/2022

Nations Member States must fully respect the purpose
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, including sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.
Iran consistently advocates for peace and an
immediate end to the Ukraine conflict. Despite a
bilateral defence cooperation agreement, Iran has never
provided the parties with weapons for use in the Ukraine
conflict, either before or after the conflict. Aside from
the legal and political position, Iran believes, from a
moral point of view, that providing military support
could not be intended to end the war but rather to escalate
it, increasing damage and destruction and causing more
suffering for civilians. That is why Iran has urged the
parties to uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law and conduct consultations to protect
civilians and critical infrastructure from attacks or
becoming military targets.
Against that background, my delegation completely
rejects all unfounded allegations made against my
country at this meeting by a certain State.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

22-65459
