and Herzegovina, in particular the incident which c ,,1 the
lives of four Italian ainnen in charge of the transportation
of humanitarian relief to the Sarajevo airport. It invites
him also to pass on to it any information which he could
gather on the responsibility for these incidents.

assistancr and a decisive step for the cessation of hostilities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Acting pursuant to the provisions of resolution 770 (1992)
of 13 August 1992 aimed at ensuring the safety of the delivery
of humanitarian assistance in Bosnia and Herzegovina,

"These serious incidents underline the urgent need for
reinforcing the security and protection of Force personnel
as well as of all personnel involved in the United Nations
activities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Council
expresses its readiness to adopt without delay measures to
this end."

1. Decides to establish a ban on military flights in the
airspace of Bosnia and Herzegovina, this ban not to apply to
United Nations Protection Force flights or to other flights in
support of United Nations operations, including humanitarian
assistance;

At its 3122nd meeting, on 9 October 1992, the Council
invited the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled
"The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina".

2. Requests the Force to monitor compliance with the
ban on military flights, including the placement of observers
where necessary at airfields in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia;

Resolution 781 (1992)

3. Also requests the Force to ensure, through an appropriate mechanism for approval and inspection, that the purpose
of flights to and from Bosnia and Herzegovina other than those
banned by paragraph 1 above is consistent with Council
resolutions;

or 9 October 1992
The Security Council,

4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council on a periodic basis on the implementation of
the present resolution and to report immediately any evidence
of violations;

Reaffinning its resolution 713 (1991) of25 September 1991
and all subsequent relevant resolutions,
Detennined to ensure the safety of humanitarian flights to
Bosnia and Herzegovina,

5. Calls upon States to take nationally or through
regional agencies or arrangements all measures necessary to
provide assistance to the Force, based on technical monitoring
and other capabilities, for the purposes of paragraph 2 above;

Noting the readiness of the parties, expressed in the
framework of the London stage of the International Conference
on the former Yugoslavia, held on 26 and 27 August 1992, to
take appropriate steps in order to ensure the safety of humanitarian flights and their commitment at that Conference to a ban
on military flights,

6. Undertakes to examine without delay all the information brought to its attention concerning the implementation of
the ban on military flights in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, in
the case of violations, to consider urgently the further measures
necessary to enforce this ban;

Recalling in this context the Joint Declaration signed at
Geneva on 30 September 199277 by the Presidents of the
Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro), and in particular paragraph 7
thereof,

7.

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.
Adopted al the 3122nd meeting by 14
votes to none, with 1 abstention
(China).

Recalling also the agreement reached on air issues at
Geneva on 15 September 1992 among all the parties concerned
in the framework of the Working Group on Confidence- and
Security-building and Verification Measures of the London
Conference,78

Decisions

Alarmed at reports that military flights over the territory of
Bosnia and Herzegovina are none the less continuing,
Noting the letter of 4 October 199279 from the President of
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina addressed to the
President of the Security Council,

At its 3132nd meeting, on 30 October 1992, the Council
discussed the item entitled 'The situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina: letter dated 29 October 1992 from the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/24740)". 17

Considering that the establishment of a ban on military
flights in the airspace of Bosnia and Herzegovina constitutes an
essential element for the safety of the delivery of humanitarian

At the same meeting, following consultations held earlier
with the members of the Security Council, the President made
the following statement on behalf of the Council: 80
27
