A/RES/71/84

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 December 2016

Seventy-first session
Agenda item 102

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 5 December 2016
[on the report of the First Committee (A/71/454)]

71/84.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use
of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious
or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 70/71 of 7 December 2015,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption and entry into force of the Convention
on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which
May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects 1 and
its amended article 1, 2 the Protocol on Non-Detectable Fragments (Protocol I), 1 the
Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and
Other Devices (Protocol II) 1 and its amended version, 3 the Protocol on Prohibitions
or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary Weapons (Protocol III),1 the Protocol on
Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV) 4 and the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of
War (Protocol V), 5
Recalling with satisfaction also the results of the Fourth Review Conference of
the High Contracting Parties to the Convention, held in Geneva from 14 to
25 November 2011,
Noting the results of the 2015 Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the
Convention, held in Geneva on 12 and 13 November 2015,
Welcoming the results of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Annual Conferences
of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II, held in Geneva on
11 November 2015 and 30 August 2016, respectively,
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1342, No. 22495.
Ibid., vol. 2260, No. 22495.
3
Ibid., vol. 2048, No. 22495.
4
Ibid., vol. 2024, No. 22495.
5
Ibid., vol. 2399, No. 22495.
2

16-21242 (E)

*1621242*

A/RES/71/84

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

Welcoming also the results of the Ninth and Tenth Conferences of the High
Contracting Parties to Protocol V, held in Geneva on 9 and 10 November 2015 and
29 August 2016, respectively,
Recalling the role played by the International Committee of the Red Cross in
the elaboration of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, and welc oming the
particular efforts of various international, non-governmental and other organizations
in raising awareness of the humanitarian consequences of various categories of
conventional weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have
indiscriminate effects,
1.
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to take all measures to
become parties, as soon as possible, to the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects 1 and the Protocols
thereto, as amended, with a view to achieving the widest possible adherence to these
instruments at an early date and so as to ultimately achieve their universality;
2.
Calls upon all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so
to express their consent to be bound by the Protocols to the Convention and the
amendment extending the scope of the Convention and the Protocols thereto to
include armed conflicts of a non-international character;
3.
Emphasizes the importance of the universalization of the Protocol on
Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V);5
4.
Welcomes the additional ratifications and acceptances of or accessions to
the Convention, as well as the consents to be bound by the Protocols thereto;
5.
Acknowledges the continued efforts of the Secretary-General, as
depositary of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, and of the respective office
holders of the conferences of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention,
Protocol V and Amended Protocol II, on behalf of the High Contracting Parties, to
achieve the goal of universality;
6.
Recalls the following decisions by the Fourth Review Conference of the
High Contracting Parties to the Convention:
(a) The adoption of an accelerated plan of action to promote universality of
the Convention and the Protocols thereto;
(b) The adoption of actions to enhance the implementation of the compliance
mechanism for the Convention and the Protocols thereto;
(c) The continuation of the Sponsorship Programme within the fra mework of
the Convention; and, with recognition of the value and importance of the
Sponsorship Programme, encourages States to contribute to it;
7.
Welcomes the decision of the 2015 Meeting of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention to convene the Fifth Review Conference of the High
Contracting Parties to the Convention in Geneva from 12 to 16 December 2016, and
encourages all efforts towards its successful conclusion;
8.
Also welcomes the commitment by States parties to continue to
contribute to the further development of international humanitarian law and in this
context to keep under review both the development of new weapons and uses of
weapons, which may have indiscriminate effects or cause unnecessary suffering;

2/3

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

A/RES/71/84

9.
Notes with satisfaction the decision of the 2015 Meeting of the High
Contracting Parties to the Convention to convene in 2016 a five -day informal
meeting of experts to discuss the questions related to emerging technologies in the
area of lethal autonomous weapons systems and to agree by consensus on
recommendations for further work for consideration by the Fifth Review
Conference, welcomes the informal discussions held from 11 to 15 April 2016, and
takes note of the comprehensive report of the Chair and the recommendations;
10. Welcomes the commitment of States parties to Protocol V to the effective
and efficient implementation of the Protocol and the implementation of the
decisions of the First and Second Conferences of the High Contracting Parties to the
Protocol establishing a comprehensive framework for the exchange of information
and cooperation;
11. Notes that, in conformity with article 8 of the Convention, conferences
may be convened to examine amendments to the Convention or to any of the
Protocols thereto, to examine additional protocols concerning other categories of
conventional weapons not covered by existing Protocols or to review the scope and
application of the Convention and the Protocols thereto and to examine any
proposed amendments or additional protocols;
12. Acknowledges the work of the Implementation Support Unit within the
Geneva Branch of the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat, which was
established following a decision by the 2009 Meeting of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention;
13. Notes the work of the meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the Fifth
Review Conference held from 31 August to 2 September 2016 under the overall
responsibility of the President-designate of the Fifth Review Conference;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to render the assistance necessary and to
provide such services as may be required for the Fifth Review Conference, to be
held from 12 to 16 December 2016, and other annual conferences and expert
meetings of the High Contracting Parties to the Conventi on and of the High
Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II and Protocol V, as well as for any
continuation of the work after the meetings;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as depositary of the
Convention and the Protocols thereto, to continue to inform the General Assembly
periodically, by electronic means, of ratifications and acceptances of and accessions
to the Convention, its amended article 1 2 and the Protocols;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-second
session the item entitled “Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious
or to Have Indiscriminate Effects”.
51st plenary meeting
5 December 2016

3/3
