THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING:

21 OCTOBER

1977

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2035)

Expression

of thanks to the retiring

Adoption

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General

. , . . . . . . . , _, . , . . . , . , . . . . , . . . . .
President

Page

. . . . . .. . , , , , . .. . , . . . . . . .

on the United

Nations

(S/12416) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I............................

Emergency

.

Force

spv.203s

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council(symbo1 S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplemerlts of the Officinl Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security CoLtncil. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

(’

President: Mr. Rikhi .IAII’AL (India).

I
P*

Presctzt: The rcprescntatives
of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab .Iamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great 13ritain and Northern Ireland,
Ifnited States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2035)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations Emergency Force (S/12416)
The meeting was called to order at II. 15 am.

Expressionof thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT: At the outset of this meeting, ii is
my pleasantduty to express. on my own behalf and on
behalf of all membersof the Ccruncil, our deep senseof
gratitude to Ambassador Ri’ldiger van Wcchmar of the
I-;cdcral Republic of (;crmany for his truly outstanding
scrviccsto the Council during his term as Presidentfor lhe
month of September.The immensepatience and skill with
which tic dischargedhis very delicate and often difficult
functions have carned the respect and admiration of all of
us. He hasset an exam@ of excellence that will surely be
an inspirationto those of us who follow him as President,
and particularly to me. On behalf of all the membersof’ the
Council,I should like to thank him most sincerely.

rr

Adoption of the agenda

The situationin the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
EmergencyForce (S/12416)

K

4
b
h

ft.-

”

2. The IVZSIDENT: Tflc Security Council will now
proceedwith its examination of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Emergency Force (LJNEF)
for the period from 19 October 1976 to 17 October 1977
/S/12416/. 1 should like to direct the attention of the
membersof the Council to the draft resolution contained in
document S/l 2419. During the consultations that took
place prior to this meeting, an agreement was reached
amongthe membersof the Council on this draft resolution,

as well as on the procedure to be folIowed, to the effect
that rcprcsentativeswishing to speakwould do SO after the
vote on the draft resolution.
3. Under the provisions of operative paragraph1 c, the
Security Council would request the Secretary-Generalto
stlbmit by 24 October 1978 a report on the developments
ill the situation and on the steps t‘aken to implement
C’mwil resolution 338 (1973). Members of the Council
have asked me to make it clear that, should developments
occur which would lead the Secretary-Generalto considerit
appropriate to report to the Council at an earlier date, they
would of course expect him to do so, and that he will
continue his efforts to assistthe early resumption of the
negotiations for a comprehensivesettlement in the Middle
East.
4. Furthermore, I have been asked by the delegationsof
China and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to say that they will
not participate in the vote on this draft resolution andthat,
as a result, they do not subscribeto the agreedstatement
which I havejust read out on behalf of the membersof the
Council.
5. Before the Council proceedsto the vote, I call on the
Secretary-General to make a statementin connexion with
his report.
6. The S1JCRI~TARY-CENERAL: The Security Council
has before it my report on the llnited Nations Emergency
Force which givesan account of the activities of the Force
over the pastyear.
7. I have little to add to what has already been stated in
this report in support of my recommendationfor another
extension of the mandate of the Force. I wish,however, to
emphasizeonce again that, in spite of the presentquiet in
the area, the situation will be increasingly unstable and
dangerousif no progressis made towards the achievetnent
of a just and durable settlement in the Middle East.
Intensive efforts are being made at various levels to
promote an early resumption of the negotiating processat
Geneva as a first step towards such a settlement. It is my
earnesthope that those efforts will prove successful.
8. I cannot conclude this brief statementwithout expressing againmy deep gratitude to the Governmentscontributing troops to the llnited Nations Emergency Force. I wish
alsoto take this opportunity to pay a specialtribute to the
officers and men of the Force who have servedso well
under the United Nations flag.

9. The PRESIDENT:
behalf of the Council.

I thank the Secretary-General

democratic, progressiveand anti-imperialist forces of the
region.

on

17. My delegation appreciatesthe courageousvigilance
displayedby the Arab and Palestinianpeoplesin facingthe
situation. The Arab States have shown moderation and a
readinessfor peace,to facilitate a peaceful,just andlasting
settlement of the problem. But my delegationstill notes
with regret the unacceptableintransigenceof the Israeli
leaders,who refuse to make concessions
that could opena
way out of the dangerousandunstablesituation referredto
in the Secretary-General’sreport. The newultra-reactionary
r&gime in Israel has raised the stakesand is blocking the
renewalof useful dialogue,a dialoguewhich cannot exclude
the Palestiniansof PLO, who havenow assertedthemselves
asa nation through their courageous
struggle.

10. I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/12419 in accordance with the agreed procedure.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none. 1
Two members (China and Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) did
not participate in the voting.
11. The PRESIDENT: A number of representatives have
expressed the wish to make statements after the vote. I
shall now call on them.

18. The Force will serve no purposeif we do not take
advantage of its presence to bring about a peaceful
settlement of the crisis. My delegation supports the
Secretary-General’sactions directed to the reconveningof
the Geneva Conference. The presenceof PLO at that
Conference is of vital importance, since it is the only
organizationrepresentingthe Palestinianpeople.

12. Mr. Cl-IOU Nan (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
In view of the fact that this meeting of the Security Council
is devoted exclusively to the consideration of the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Emergency Force, WC
have no intention of expounding our views here on the
present situation in the Middle East. With regard to the
question of the United Nations Force, we have always held
a different position in principle. Based on this position, the
Chinese delegation did not participate in the vote on the
draft resolution contained in document S/l 2419.

19. The policy of the Zionist regime of Israel, the
springboard of international imperialism, is one which
inevitably leads to war. One cannot ask others for rights
which onerefusesto one’snegotiatingpartners.

13. Mr. WOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, my delegation would like to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for October, My delegation much appreciates the
flexibility and skill which enable you to conduct the
proceedings of the Council with efficiency. Your militancy
on behald of just causes is familiar to the Council and your
delegation’s contribution
is most valuable, You are a
remarkable and very talented negotiator, and can call on
excellent assistants who are both active and discreet. Your
activities in the Council stand as an example to us all. My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to convey to
you, even though belatedly, our fraternal condolenceson
the brutal death of our unforgettable friend Hasmi.

20. Benin is opposedto any policy of aggression
and any
policy of illegal occupation and colonization of other
peoples’territory. The Israeli rigime must now understand
that the international community disapprovesof all its
initiatives, which will earn it further condemnation.
21. Mr. LEONARD (United Statesof America): Mr. President, may I first expressour profound gratitude to your
predecessor,the representativeof the Federal Republicof
Germany, for the mannerin which he carried out the duties
of President of the Council during the precedingmonth.
The skill and wisdom which he brought to that task have
been appreciatedby all of us. I should alsolike to support
the comments just addressedto you by the preceding
speaker with an eloquence which we in our delegation
could not muster. I should like only to add that we are
grateful that the skills which we know you possess
have
already been engagedin the searchfor solutionsto the very
difficult problemswith which the Council is facedeven in
the few remaining days of this month, and we deeply
appreciatehaving those talentsavailableto us.

14. My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Emergency
Force in the Middle East. In so doing, my delegation
wishes,in line with its well-known position on the Middle
East crisis, to formulate its reservations and scepticism
about the automatic renewal of the mandateof the United
Nations forces made periodically by the Council.
IS. It must be quite clear that my country, the People’s
Republic of Benin, is making no financial commitment with
regardto contributions for the maintenanceof the activities
of the Force. My delegation recognizes,however, a certain
usefulnessin the Force in maintaining an unstable equilibrium in a multifaceted war situation, but we are not
prepared to allow the real situation to be maskedor veiled.

22. The action of the Council today in extending the
mandate of the United Nations EmergencyForce for one
year is a constructive contribution to the maintenanceof
peace and stability in the region, During the past year,
intensive diplomatic contacts and negotiationshave taken
place with the aim of reconveningthe GenevaConference
by the end of 1977. It is an eloquent testimony to the
effectivenessof UNEF that this diplomacycould proceedin
an atmospherereflecting the urgencyand importanceof the
issue, but without a senseof emergency or military
confrontation. The presenceof United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Sinai and on the Golan Heightshas
helpedto make this possible.

16. My delegation ha,P closely followed the development
of the situation in this part of the world were a dangerous
crisis continues to be a threat. It notes that international
imperialism has intensified its policy of resisting the
1 See resolution416

(1977).

2

Secretary-General’s praise of the efficiency and dedication
with which the members of UNEF perform their duties
under those trying conditions. I should like to add my
Government’s appreciation to Major-General Rais Abin and
his staff and to the other troop-contributors
in UNEF for
the highly professional way jn which they are fulfilling an
extremely difficult task.

23. We are gratified that the parties have once again agreed
to an extension of the mandate of UNEF. We believe that,
in doing so, they have reaffirmed their commitment to the
cease-fire and disengagement as well as to the larger goal of
a peaceful settlement in the Middle East. We would hope
that they will continue scrupulously
to observe their
responsibilities in regard to the cease-fire and the disposition of their forces and that they will also continue to
co-operate fully with the United Nations commanders in
the field.

30. Today Lieutenant-General Siilasvuo, the Chief Coordinator of United Nations Peace-keeping Missions in the
Middle East, is present in this chamber, and this affords an
opportunity for me to say, on behalf of my Government, a
special word of appreciation for the outstanding way in
which he fulfils his function as Chief Co-ordinator. General
Siilasvuo is an officer of the highest principles who has
quite deservedly won the respect of the parties in the area,
and it is because of this respect that he is able to carry out
his duties in such an exemplary fashion.

24. All of us are deeply indebted to those nations whose
forces are participating in UNEF. We salute the officers and
men who are serving in the Sinai with such distinction. It is
appropriate that Lieutenant-General Siilasvuo should be
singled out for particular praise for the integrity and skill
with which he has represented the Secretary-General in the
Middle East and led the forces under his command. I wish
also to pay a tribute to UNEF Commander Major-General
Rais Abin, who has performed his duties in a manner that
brings credit to his profession and has furthered the cause
of peace in the area.

31. It is obvious that, in order for the forces in the area
and General Siilasvuo to fulfil their mandates properly,
they must have the full and complete backing of the
Secretary-General
and his staff in the Office of the
Under-Secretaries-General for Special Political Affairs, and I
would be negligent if I did not express appreciation to them
also.

25. Mr. President, I should like also to thank you for your
efforts which have facilitated the orderly and calm considcration of this matter.
26. Mr. BARTON (Canada): Mr. President, I wish to join
other representatives who have already spoken in expressing
appreciation and gratitude to your predecessor, Ambassador van We&mar, and to you for the excellent job you
have both done in guiding the Council through some very
difficult negotiations. I know that there are more to come,
and I shall undoubtedly wish to express more praise for you
at the end of your term as President of the Council. But
even at this stage I can see that we have a firm hand at the
tiller at a time when WC riced it most.

32. We notice in the report that there are still restrictions
on the freedom of movement of personnel of certain
contingents in the Force. We cannot but be concerned that
the Secretary-General’s
efforts to achieve freedom of
movement of personnel of all contingents in the Force has
not been successful, although we are glad that some
progress has been made. It is the Canadian Government’s
position that freedom of movement in the conduct of
operations of a peace-keeping force is an essential element.
We therefore fully support the Secretary-General’s continued efforts to secure that freedom of movement.

27. My Government is happy to note from the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Emergency
Force covering the period from October 1976 to October
1977 that the situation in the area of UNEF operations
remains quiet. It is encouraging to see that both parties
have continued generally to comply with the cease-fire
called for by the Security Council and with the provisions
of the Agreement signed by Egypt and Israel in September
1975/S/11818/A&?1J.

33. The peace-keeping forces established by the United
Nations require and deserve the unstinting support of all
Members States if they are to be effective in the service of
peace on our behalf. I have been authorized to announce
that, for its part, Canada will continue to maintain its
contribution of troops to UNEF during this next mandate
period. But is is not only we troop-contributors
who can
demonstrate our support for UNEF. Other Member States
confirm their support for UNEF by paying their assessed
contributions to the Force and most, I ‘am happy ta say,
have done so. But I must urge those Member States that
have not paid those contributions in full to do so in order
that the Force may continue to enjoy the financial stability
which is necessary if it is to fulfil its task.

28. In his report, the Secretary-General points out that it
has been possible to reduce the estimate for the cost of
maintaining the Force for a further 12 months to approximately $73 million, a reduction of more than $3 million
over the amount appropriated for the present mandate.
That it has been possible to do so is welcome proof of the
Secretary-General’s
success in exercising the utmost
economy consistent with the efficient performance of the
Force.

34. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation .fiam Russian): The Soviet delegation talces great pleasure in congratulating you, Mr. President, the representative of the great Indian people, on your
assumption of the important post of President of the
Security Council. We are very familiar with your diplomatic
skill and tact, which have won you deep respect and
gratitude within the United Nations. The Soviet delegation
is particularly pIeasedto seeyou in the presidentialChair
becausethe relations of traditional friendship between our

29. Early this year, I was fortunate enough to be able to
visit UNEF and to meet the Commander and visit some of
the contingents. I acquired a great appreciation for the
arduous and trying conditions in which a11 ranks of the
Force are working on our behalf in the service of peace. It
was therefore with pleasure that I noted in the report the
3

r&~-ions that have been strengthened by the 19’71 IndianSoviet Treaty on Priendship and Co-operation have stood
the test of time and continue to develop successfully.
Indeed, within the next few days, Mr, Desai,
the Prime
Minister of India, will visit the Soviet Union. This constitutcs a further contribution to the deveiopment of cornprehensive friendly relations between the Soviet Union and
India. I should like to express to you our warmest wishes
for your success in carrying out your responsibilities.

39. We consider that a settlcruent of the situation in the
Middle l:ast is :1 realistic goal. At the present
time,
objectively favourable conditions are arising for progress to
be made towards the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in that part of the world. We are firmly convinced
that what is necessary in that regard is the earliest possible
resurrlptiurl of the work of the (;enev:t l’eace CderCnCe.
‘rile
well-known
joint
Statement
of the Soviet Union and
the CJnited States on the Middle East, issued on 1 October
1977, represents a considerable step towards ensuring
resumption of that Conference.

35. We should like to take this opportunity ah
to
congratulate the representative of the Federal Republic of
Germany, Ambassador von We&mar, on his SUCCESS in
guiding the proceedings of the Council in September. WC
cannot fail to express our satisfaction at the positive
development of relations between the Soviet Union and the
Federal Republic of Germany in recent years.

40. l should like to take this opportunity to say that the
Soviet Union will continue to do everything in its power to
achieve the kind of settlement in the Middle I:d
that
would establish lasting peace and would not infringe upon
the legitimate rights or interests of any people or State in
that area.

two

countries,

based

upOn

Inullral

respect

ad

irL1St-m

41. In consenting to a renewal of the mandate of the
LJnited Nations Emergency Force, the Soviet delegation
acts in the belief that the Secretariat of the LJnited Nations
and the Command of the Force will make persistent efforts
to see to it that the troops are maintained as economically
as possible. In this connexion, we have drawn attention to
the assurance in the report of the Secretary-General that he
and his staff will constantly take into account the need fol
the maximum economy in the use of the funds for the
maintenance of the Force. The delegation of‘ the Soviet
Union considers that, in the present circumstances, it would
be possible to carry qut ccrt;iin reductions in the strength
of the Force without any detriment to the performance of
its functions. Such a step would make it possible to reduce
expenses in the maintenance of the Force and would relieve
the. burden of expense on Member States.

36. The Security Council has just adopted a resolution 011
a further extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Emergency Force in the Middle East. The Soviet delegation
did not object to this further renewal of the mandate of
UNEF in the Egypt-lsrael sector. However, our position is
based on the belief that this period will be used for an
effective search for a comprehensive Middle East settlement. As has been stressed repeatedly by the Soviet
delegation in the Council, the United Nations Emergency
Force in the Middle East has always been only one of the
means for creating a situation
which
would
pmmote
a
comprehensive settlement. In the absence of progress in this
extremely important matter, United Nations forces might
become merely a means of breezing the existing situation,
and that is why we continue to believe that. the question of
renewing the mandate of those forces cannot be viewed
separately from the over-all con text of the situation in the
Middle East and the attainment of a comprehensive
settlement in that area.

42. The Soviet delegation would like to take this oppO~‘tunity to confirm its position of principle on the question
of the financing of UNEF. The Soviet IJnion dots not
intend to bear expenditures connected with the performance by UNEI: of additional functions arising out of the
second Sinai agreement of 4 September 1075 /S’/llCrlS/
Al/d. I]. The Soviet LJnion had nothing whatsoever to do
with that agreement, which was concluded on a separate
basis and which in fact by-passed the Geneva Peace
Conference. Therefore, we do not and will not bear any
responsibility for its consequences including the financing
of additional expenditures for the United Nations armed
forcesL.

37. The position of the Soviet Union on the question of
the character of a comprehensive Middle East settlement
and the ways of achieving it is well known. This position
has repeatedly been set forth in statements by the General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, the Chairman of the Presidium
of the Supreme Soviet of the LJnion of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Andrei Andreyevich Gromyko. Therefore, there is no need
here to go into any detail about individual aspects of this
position.

43. In conclusion, permit me once again to stress that the
Soviet CJnion considers the stationing of IINEF in the
Middle East to be entirely provisional and esteems that it
should not be used to protract and delay a comprehensive
settlement in the area.

38. We entirely share the concern of the Secretary-General
with regard to the situation in the Middle East. Along with
other members of the Security Council, we have drawn
attention to the serious warning contained in the report of
the Secretary-General, where it is stressed that:

44. The PRESIDENT:
I am grateful to Ambassndol
Troyanovsky for his kind remarks about me and for his
observation about the friendly relations existing between
his country and mine. I reciprocate the cordial sentiments
expressed by him.

“Unless and until a comprehensive settlement covering
all aspects of the Middle East problem can be reached, the
situation in the area will continue to be unstable and,
with the passage of time, become increasingly dangerous.” [S/l 2416, paru. 40.1

45. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (intcrprctdon
from French):
My first words will be words of cordial congratulation to
4

the sovereignty, independenceand territorial integrity ofevery State in the area. 111this regard, a positive role could
bc played by the Geneva Peace Conference, with the
participation of all parties concerned, including the
Palestine Liberation Organisation. It is now generally
concededthat the Palestinianproblem is at the very heart
of the Middle East conflict and that peacein the region
cannot be negotiated without the participation of the fully
authentic representativesof the Palestinianpeople.

you, Mr. President, from the Romanian delegation on your
accession to the presidency of the Council for the month of
October. Our complete confidence in your ability to
conduct our work successfully is based upon the universal
recognition of your personal prestige. Our confidence is
further strengthened by the fact that you represent India, a
great non-aligned country, whose active role in the search
for co-operation between nations is of long standing and
widely recognized; a country with which my OWI~ count.r)jr
enjoys excellent relations.

5 I, While expressing the hope that the consultations
which have begunand the efforts now under way w-i11
lead
to a resumptionof the GenevaPeaceConference,we would
venture to recommendto all partiesdirectly concernedthat
they should take advantageof this further renewal of the
UNEF mandal-eto unblock the road leadingto peacein the
Middle East.

46. l should also like to pay tribute to Ambassador von
We&mar, the representative of the Federal Republic of
Germany, who discharged his functions elegantly and
effectively as President of the Council last month. We
should like to convey to him our sincere gratitude.
47. The Security Council has just decided once again to
prolong the mandate of the lJnited Nations Emergency
Force by one year. In taking this decision,the Council has
foIlowed the advice given by the Secretary-Generalwho, in
his report, after having taken account of al1 the factors
involved, said “1 considerthe continued presenceof UNEF
in the areato be essential”/S/1241
6, para. 411.

52. Mr. AL-GAYED (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya): Mr. President, allow me first to congratulate you 011 yOLIr Xsumption of the duties of the presidencyof the Security
Council. Your personaldiplomatic skillsand your senseof
devotion and commitment arc well known to us all, not
only in the context of the debatesand deliberationsof the
Council but alsoin that of the non-alignedrepresentatives
here at the United Nations. These qualities you have
displayed will, we are confident, prove invaluable to the
successfulconclusion of the affairs of the Council this

48. As in the past, the Rumanian delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolulion whereby the mandate 01
UNEF hasjust been renewed,consideringthat the activities
of the Force constitute a contribution from the Organization to the maintenanceof an atmospherefavourable to the
search for ways and meansof bringing about a pcaccful
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East. But 1should
like to repeat here too that the maintenanceof LJNEF in
the region, though usefuland necessary,shouldnot become
an end in itself. The activities of the force were conceived
as temporary, that is, limited in duration, so as to permit
the countries concerned to embark on negotiations. pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the Organization, to
resolve the conflict in which tlley have been engagedfor
almost 30 years.

mon

t11.

53. Allow me also to convey my congr:ltulatiuns and
commendationsto your predecessorin your high post, the
representativeof the I’ederal Republic of Germany, Ambassador van We&mar, for the wise manner in which he
presidedover the affairs of the (‘ouncil lastmonth.
54. The position of the Socialist People’sLibyan Arab
Jamahiriya in regard to the question on our agendais well
known and unambiguous,This position is basedon some
fundamental precepts and principles not only of our own
country, but also aslaid down in the Charterof the Ilnited
Nations, Our position therefore remainsunaltered.

49. Of course, as the Secretary-Generalhas pointed out,
the situation in the Egypt-Israel sector rcmnined quiet
during the period under review. That is mainly because
both partics continued to comply with the cesase-firecalled
for by the Security Council and with the provisions of the
Agreement of 4 September1975/S/IIS18fAd~l.l/.
But we
cannot disregardthe fact that the situation in the areawill
remain unstable and dangerousas long as there is no
progress towards a comprehensive,just and lasting settlement of the problem of the Middle East in all its aspects.
The political settlement of the conflict remainsa task of
extreme urgency which should be accorded the highest
priority,

55. As previously stated by the Libyan delegationin the
Security Council, it is our opinion that Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 33X (1973), on which the presenceof the
United Nations Emergency Force is based,areirrelevant as
a framework for a just and lasting solution to the question
of Palestineand the Middle East. We contend that anyjust
and lasting solution must be solidly basedon the principles
enshrined in the Charter, including that of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by the useof force.
Moreover, General Assemblyresolutions3236 (XXIX) and
3237 (XXIX), reaffirming the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, resolution 3376 (XXX), proposing
meansdesignedto enable the Palestinianpeopleto achieve
their national rights, and rcsnhltion 3379 (XXX), condemning Zionism as a racist movement, must be fully incnrporaled into any framework calling for a just and peaceful
solution. Theseand other recent resolutionsof the Gencrnl
Assemblyreflect the profound changeand developmentof
attitudes in the world community and international public
opinion in regard to these issues.Theseprinciples, cesolutions and attitudes require a re-examination of the entire

50. Romaniais convinced that the Organization must, for
all thesereasons,redoubleits efforts and act firmly in order
to bring about a political settlement of the Middle East
situation. In our view, a just and la’stingpeacein the area
presupposesthe withdrawal of Israel from all the Arab
territory occupied asa result of the war of 1967, settlement
of the problem of the Palestinianpeoplein accordancewittl
its legitimate aspirations,including the establishmentof a
free and independent PalestinianState, and a guaranteeof

s

question, and of the basis on which the United Nations
Emergency Force was established, lest in continuously and
mechanically renewing its mandate year after year we run
the risk of perpetuating the aggression, occupation and
injustice the United Nations seeks to eliminate.
56. It is for this reason that my delegation did not
participate either in the vote on the draft resolution on this
matter or in what preceded it.
57. Mr, BYATT
(United Kingdom):
Mr. President, I
should like to begin by offering you my delegation’s
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We welcome this both
because of the diplomatic talents which we know you
personally will bring to the conduct of our debates and
because of the very warm relations between our two
countries as fellow members of the Commonwealth. I should
also like to offer our sincere thanks to Ambassador von
We&mar of the Federal Republic of Germany for the
skilful way in which he handled our affairs during the
month of September.
58. As we have done in previous years, my delegation was
pleased to vote in favour of the resolution just adopted
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Emergency
Force for a further year. There can be no doubt of the
continuing importance of the role played by UNEF in
maintaining the cease-fire, in carrying out the tasks assigned
to it under the Agreement between Egypt and Israel of
4 September 1975 [S/I1818/Add.I]
and, perhaps most
important, in providing the necessaryclimate of confidence
within which negotiations towards a lasting settlement in
the Middle East can be undertaken. We agreetherefore with
the recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
mandate of the Force should be extended for oneyear. At
the sametime, we also agree with hisjudgement that the
present quiet in the area is a precariousone and that the
situation in the area will become increasingly dangerous
over the passageof time urdessmoves towards a comprehensivesettlement are carried forward.

future. Here at last is a uniqueopportunity to break out of
the stalemateof the last few years and take a significant
step towards peace,The renewalof the mandateof UyEy
today
is another important elementin this processand It 1~
essentialtlrdt the time which it provides should be made
good useof.
60. Once again I should like to express,aswe have done
on previousoccasions,the gratitude of my delegationto the
Secretary-General, to Lieutenant General Siilasvuo and
Major-General Rais Abin, to the officers and men of the
United Nations Emergency Force and to the staff of the
Secretariat here in New York, for the way in which they
have carried out their tasks in managingUNEF over the
past year. We owe them a realand lastingdebt of gratitude
for what they are doing and it isa tribute to their skillsthat
the Secretary-Generalhas beenableto report that the tasks
of UNEF have been carried out satisfactorily. There is, I
think, a very wide measureof agreementon the continuing
importance of the tasks performed by UNEF and OJI the
fact that the financial support without which the Force
cannot operate is an international responsibility which is
sharedby the international community asa whole. We are
grateful to the Secretary-Generalfor the way in which he
hascarried out his mandateand for the attention which he
hasgiven to the need to exercisethe utmost economy in
the running of UNEF consistentwith its efficient performance. At the sametime, we considerit of great importance
that we, the Membersof the United Nations, shoulddo our
part in ensuring that we pay promptly and fully our
assessed
contributions to the budget of the Force in order
to enableit to carry out its responsibilitiesefficiently.
61. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representativeof the
United Kingdom for his kind remarksabout me andalsofor
his reference to our common Commonwealthconnexion
which we regardasof continuing importance.
62. Mr. von WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
Mr. President,I shouldlike to beginby sayingthank you to
you and other speakersin this chamberfor the very kind
words that have been addressedto me. Permit me alsoto
join those who have wished you well in the high office
which you have assumedfor this month. Your country and
t.he Council can be proud to have at the helm during our
proceedingsa man of your skill, your experience, your
patience,your tact and, last but not least,your drafting and
mediationabilities.

59. It is now nearly four years since the Unjted Nations
Emergency Force was first establishedand it is a matter of
great regret to my delegation that more progresshas not
been made during that time in the negotiationscalled for in
Security Council resoIution 338 (1973). As the British
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
said when speaking recently in the general debate of the
GeneralAssembly:

63. My delegation was particularly pleasedto vote in
favour of the draft resolutionjust adopted, renewing, on
the recommendationof the Secretary-General,the mandate
of the United Nations EmergencyForce for another year.
My delegationfeels that the renewalof the UNEF mandate
is of special significance in the present situation of
intensified efforts to arrive at a resumptionof the negotiating processfor an agreedover-all settlement of the Middle
East problem. This brings into focusvery appropriately the
principal aim of UNEF, namely, to provide the necessary
conditionsfor the peace-makingprocess.

“The United Nations cannot . . . in either Cyprus or the
Middle East be usedindefinitely asa cover for a stalemate
in negotiations. It cannot continue to be seenasa refuge
of last resort-a permanent crutch for remainingin a state
of ‘no peace,no war’.“2
We have therefore been much encouragedby the intense
diplomatic activity that has taken place over the last few
weeksand that now givesriseto the hope that a resumption
of the GenevaPeaceConferencemay be possiblein the near
2 Officinl
sion, Plenary

Records
Meetings,

of the General

Assembly,
9th meeting,para.120.

Thirty-second

64. My delegation has noted with relief and satisfaction
the Secretary-General’sstatementin his detailed and lucid
report that both parties havecontinuedto comply with the

Ses-

6

cease-fire and also generally with the provisions of the
Agreement between Egypt and Israel of 4 September 1975
/s/11818/Add.l/.
Thus the situation in the Egypt-Israel
sector has remained quiet and there have been no incidents
of a serious nature.

for peace,aswell asto the usefulness
of the forces not only
in maintaining the cease-firebut also in creating an
atmosphere propitious for the active pursuit of peace
efforts. The presenceof the United Nations could not in
any case,aswe seeit, serveasa pretext for maintainingthe
status quo or for a lack of action, On the contrary, it is
justified and has real significanceonly in combination with
genuine and sustainedefforts to seeka political solution to
the fundamentalproblemsof the region.

65. While agreeing with the Secretary-General’s judgement
that the present quiet is, by its nature as the quiet of a
cease-fire, a precarious one, my delegation attaches even
greater importance to his reference to

70. I do not wish to dwell at length today on such
observations, but we note that, in the present circumstances,they once againbecomenecessary.The decision
which we have just adopted to renew the mandate of the
Force in the Sinai commitsus, even more than in the past,
to seeka better future and the realization of the hopesfor
peace of the international community. That decisionwas
My delegationjoins the Secretary-Generalin the hope
made possiblebecauseof the agreementof the parties.But
a broader dimensionmust be given to the efforts that have
“that these efforts will be pursuedby all concerneduntil
the objective setby the Councilis attained” [ibid.].
beenundertaken to reach ajust and lastingsettlement in the
Middle East by peacefulmeans,becausewe must not forget
My Government urges the parties, in using this perhaps that a part of the territory of one of the parties continues
unique opportunity, to refrain from all unilateral measures to be occupiedby the forcesof the other party.
which might endangerfurther progress.
71. At a time when, on various sides,sincereefforts are
being made to convene a peaceconferenceand when, as
66. In concluding, my delegationwould like to expressits
sincereappreciation and gratitude to the Secretary-General, emphasizedby the Secretary-Generalin ltis recent report,
to Lieutenant-General Siilasvuo and Major-General Rais we are at a crucial stagein the quest for a just and lasting
Abin and their respectivestaffs and troops aswell asto the
peacein the Middle East,I shouldlike firmly to expressthe
military observersof the United Nations Truce Supervision wishthat developmentsmay confirm our hopes.
Organization in Palestine for the skilful, inspired and
dedicatedway in which they have carried out their difficult
72. In conclusion,I shouldlike to expressthe appreciation
tasks in the past year. We also include in these words of
of my Government for the mannerin which the Secretarythanks Lieutenant-General Liljestrand who was in comGeneral and his assistants,aswell asthe Commanderof the
mand of UNEF’ until 12 January 1977. I should alsolike to
Force, whose presenceI welcomehere, and the various
expressthrough you, Mr. President,my delegation’sgraticontingents fulfil the tasksentrustedto them. All the staff
tude to the countries contributing more than 4,000 troops
of the Force give distinguishedproof of the indispensable
to UNEF. My deeply felt condolencesgo to the Governrole of the United Nations in seekingand maintaining
ments of Ghana, Indonesiaand Poland whosesoldierslost
peace.
their lives in the fulfilment of their duties for the causeof
peace.
73. Miss LOPEZ (Venezuela) (interpretation from
Spanish): We are convinced that the contribution of the
67. Finally, Mr. President,I wish to pay a tribute to the
United Nations Emergency Force has been valuable in
extraordinarily skilful way in which you have preparedand
maintaining peace in the region, and we have accordingly
brought about the extensionof this mandate.
given our firm support to the resolutionjust adopted. We
consider that the part played by the United Nations in the
68. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interpretation from
field of peace-keepingin variousareasof the world hasbeen
French): Mr. President, first of all I should like to acquit
outstanding. It is our hope that, in this specific problem,
myself of a very pleasanttask by extending to you the
the presenceof the Organization, besidesdischargingthe
congratulationsof my delegationon your accessionto the
duties entrusted to it, will createconditions favourable for
presidency of the Council. You represent your great
arriving at a generaland lastingunderstandingin the Middle
country here with unanimouslyrecognizedexperience and
East.
talent and this is a guaranteeof the successof our work. I
also wish to extend the congratulationsof my deldgationto
74. This meeting presentsa suitableopportunity to repeat
Ambassadorvon Wechmar for the skill and effectiveness our hope that the obstacleswhich bar the way to a just and
with which he presidedover the Council last month in the
lasting peace in the region may be overcome. In order to
considerationof particularly delicatematters.
achievethat goal, it isessentialfor the parties concernedto
comply with the relevant resolutions of the General
69. Eachof the meetingswhich the Council hasin the past
Assemblyand the Security Council.
devoted to the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations forces in the Middle East has given us an
75. We should like to express our gratitude to the
opportunity to make some remarks on the subject. In
Secretary-Generalfor the report that hehassubmitted to us
on the activities of the United NationsEmergencyForce, to
generalthese have referred to the temporary nature of
thoseforces as an instrument of peacebut not a substitute
the countries which have contributed contingents and to
“intensive efforts . . . at various levels to bring about an
early resumption of the negotiating process aimed at the
establishment of a just and durable peace in the Middle
East” /S/i241 6, pat-a.40/.

7

Under no circumstancesthis procedure becomea routine
practice whereby we meet every year during the month of
October for the samepurpose.In this case,asin the caseof a
1luJIlan
body, a diseaseneglectedbecomesmore seriousand,
what is worse,may lead to tragedy.

the outstanding officers who have directed activities in the
region.
76. Before concluding, I should like to express the
gratitude of the delegation of Venezueia and our warmest
congratuiations to the representative of the Federal RepubJic of Germany, Ambassador von Weclunar, for the effeo
tive, intelligent and skilful manner in which he guided the
Council during the month of September. Mr. President, we
should like to congratulate you most warmly on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We are certain that you will guide 11s with you1
characteristic skill and ability.

82. The statement just madeby the Secretary-Generalis
yet another proof of his devoted dedicationto the causeof
peacein the Middle East. His report describesthe complex
situation in very clear terms.The Council accordinglyhasa
duty to act in line with the tirelessefforts of this high
United Nations official and the world community. We
should think very seriously about the statement in paragraph40 of the report that:

77. Mr. RIOS (Panama)
(irzterprctutiojl j&n Spanish):
Mr. President, it is a great pleasure to see you, a highly
esteemedand skilful diplomat, presidingover the work of
the Security Council during this montll of October. You
represent a country with which my country maintains
traditional diplomatic, socialand cultural ties. Weoffer you
our ready co-operation in all matters pertaining to Security
Council affairs.

“Unless and until a comprehensivesettlementcovering
all aspectsof the Middle Eastproblemcan be reached,the
situation in the area will continue to be unstableand,
with the passageof time, become increasinglydangerous.>,
The Secretary-Generalexpresseshimselfhere in unmistakuble terms.

78. It is also a great pleasureto expressour appreciation
to the representative of the Federal Republic of Germany,
Mr. von We&mar, for the efficient, responsibleand dedicated manner in which he dealt with the delicateproblems
before the Council during the month of Septemberlast.

83. The Government of Panama,which hasendorsedthe
principle of the peaceful settlementof disputesand which
maintains good relations both with Israel and with many
Arab States, hopes that in October 1978 the Council will
not have to meet to renew once again a mandate for an
emergencyforce. Let us hopethat the Council will meet to
ratify peace, harmony and peacefulcoexistenceamongall
the governmentsand peopiesof that part of the world, the
cradle of civilizations and of the three religionswhich have
the largestnumber of followersthroughout the world,

79. Once again this most important world body is meeting
to cansider the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Emergency Force to maintain peacein the Middle
East. The delegation of Panama,which has been and is a
member of the Council-I am referring to the years 1972
and 1973 and the years 1976 and 1977-has at all times
given its most determined and firm support to the
Emergency Force in order to allow time for the parties
directly concerned to find a way to bring to the tormented
region of the Middle East a just and lasting peace,a peace
founded on the right of all States of the region to exist in
freedom and sovereignty within secure and recognized
frontiers, a peace that would give due regard to the
inalienablerights of the Palestinianpeople.

84. Panama, which at one time contributed a military
contingent to peace-keepingoperations in the legendary
Sinai Peninsula, today pays a tribute to the skilful work
carried out in the Middle Eastby the Chief Co-ordinator of
United Nations Peace-keeping
Missionsin the Middle East,
Lieutenant-General Ensio Siilasvuo,to the Commanderof
UNEF, Major-General RaisAbin, to the officers and IWI~ d
the Force and its civilian staff, and to the military observers
assignedto assistUNEF in the fulfilment of its rosponsis
bilities. We alsoexpressow appreciation to the Secretariat
staff here at Headquarters.

80. For many years the Middle East hasbeenan explosive
region and upheavals there have thrcatcned international
peace and security, For tl~oa-~oi’ us who have closely
followed events the situation has become increasingly
dangerousand precarious by reason of the state of “no
peace, no war”. 011 more than one occasion we have
advocated the r<.:surnptionof the GenevaPeaceConference.
Today, i :I!I~ bound to state that, in our opinion, that
appfs:r:!,IO be the only hope for the peacewhich is so much
dt:;jl:d. It is our understandingthat the two Co-Chairmen
oi‘ the Conference are makingspecialefforts to bring about
tile convening of that Conference. We should, like to
encouragethem to be unflagging in those efforts. On the
other hand, it must not be forgotten that the Conference
can arrive at the desiredgoal only with the participation of
all the parties directly involved in the conflicl.

!SS. For all these reasons,in fulfilment ol’ our historic
responsibility, we voted for the draft resolution contained
in document S/l 2419.
86. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President,for reasons
of brevity, I reservethe inalienableright of my delegation
to expressall the pleasant--orunpleasant-ritual remarksto
you and to our colleague, Baron von Wechmar of the
Federal Republic of Germany, the noble author of the
Nine-plus-One Commandmentsin connexion with the
presidency of the Council, at a later date when, it is hoped,
we sllall be discussingissuesregardingracist South Africa.
87. My delegationvoted in l’avourof the draft resolution
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Emergency
Force for a period of one year, that is, until 24 October
1978. We earnestly hope, however, that this force will not

81. We bring these thoughts before the Council because
we are convinced that the mere renewal of the mandateof
the Emergency Force is not the solution to the problem.
8

.

turn out to be a permanent force and that the parties
concerned will mi1ke ;I special effort to implement Security
Council rosullI~ion
338 (1973). Only such impIcmeIlt~ltion
wit] pave Ihe way for menningflll peXC illld security
iii thC
Middle East.
88. 1 sa]ute the presence in tllis chamber uf’ I-ieutcmmtGeneral Ensit) Siilasvuo, the Cllief Co-ordinator of IUnited
Nations Peace-Keeping Missions in the Middle East. My
delegation pays ~1welldeserved tribute to the LicutenontGeneral, as well 11s to the Cnmmandcr of IINEI:, MajorGenel-al Rais Abin, and to the officers and I~CII of the
force, as well as the civilian stul:I: Indeed, all of those
involved in the pexc-kecpiug exercise descrvc OLIT;1drniriition for the impccmbie nxmner in wliich they have fulfilled
their responsibilities.
0ur csteemcd Secretary-General
deserves our highest appreciation and praise.

03. The lJRESIDENT: There are no further spcukcrs
inscribed on the list. I shalltherefore take this opporiuni~y
to tll;tke ;I SI:ttCnlCnt
in my CapCity
3s the rcpresentntivc
~)f
INDIA.
94. We arc‘ glad ti9 note from the Sc~rctury-(;cnrr;ll’s
report that the United Nations Emergency Force of bc)~nt:
4,000 militilry personnel has continued to supervisellle
cease-fireand has assistedin the iInpletnentritioIl of the
Agrccmcnt between Egypt and Israel of 4 September
/S/IIS18/z411tl. I/ and the I”rotoco1 of 22 September107.5
/S/I ISI8/:ldi..~/.
It is important tll:ll LINEI’ shcruld
continue to receive tlic full co-opcratitin of tllc pintics
concerned in currying out the functions entrustedto it, end
we are therefore happy to note that that hasin filet been
thtt

c;w.

‘The
C’cxmcilhas now decided to extend the u~:u~d;ltc
fc)r another year, and, according to the Secretary-(;ener:ll,
the cost of maintaining the Force for I:! more montlls
would lx of the order of $73 million. Now, apart from the
financial burden on the United Nations, it is a miltter for
regret that. despite intensive efforts m:tdc during tile last
year, tll~ negotiating processtt9wardsii peacesettlementIlas
not
CVCN COIIIIIICIKC~.
‘I’llat is IW doubt an indication of the
complexity of the problem, hut perhapsit is it reflection
also of the impo~~d~rnblehisloric forces at work z~ncithe
unl9redictnblc huniun reacliuns. Even so, ii is necessaryto
remind the purtics concerned that the interni\tionid comInunity cannot
be expected to continue indefinitely to
provide the I:orcc and hear tilt‘ cxpenditu~c. WCt1ie:rel’cli.e
cxprtct the partics conccrncd to nlake
sincereand deter..
mined efli9rts tu ncgotialc ;I peacesettlcmxit wIlicll is nut
only just alld durable but is alsu bnscd on a pr~lfoltnd
~fnilcrstxidir~g of prnctiml problemsand mulual c01Icc~11s.
I lntil then. the international community must expect tllc
p:li’tics sc1~~ptrlously
to ninintuhi the mist!-fire.
9s.

89. Mrs. I-IYDEII (Pakistan): Mr. I’rcsidcnt, I should IirsL
like to take this opportunity to cxprcss the udmiration of
my delegation for lllc brilliant wild statcsnianlik~ manner in
which your predecessor, Ambassador van Wcchmar of LIE
Federal Republic of Germany, conducted the pruccediugs
uf the Council last nionth.
May I also congratulate you on your assumptionof’
the presidency of thp Council
ti9r this month. My delcgation is confident Ihut under your
able guidance, Lhc
C’ouncil will be able to dcliberatc successfullyOII the issues
which arc likely tcr colnc up in lhe nosLfew days.
90.

91. ‘l’he decision just taken by the Security (‘au~r~il tu
t’encw the mandate 01‘ihe United Niitions lln~rgency Force
may appear to bc ;I routine
one but, in the opinion of‘ nay
deieg:ation, it is fraught with considcrablc significance. It
implies renewal aid CunIinUiIticm
of
conl’idencc in tlic
United Natiuns pc;uA~eeping mechanismswhich my clclcgation I’ecls is important ill ;1 time whCIt thcr’e is ;I
bvidesprcad tendency tu dOWngril&
and
qwzsliorl
tliC
ZffiCilCy
of LIlCScnicclianisnis.But iIt tile Silll~C time, tllC
zontinuatien~of the milndti(c sl~onlrlnot make US obliviuus
to the
urgent need to coi~vfxc
the (krlova
Confcrcncc, witll
* view to negotiittilig a11 cquitablr: n11d dnrablc pt~acc
;ettlemenl in the Middle liiut on the basisol’ Security
:‘OUIIC~~
resoluCuns242 (1967) and 338 ( Ig73) and olllc9
%olutions of Iho United Nations recognising[ho legitimate
lational rights 01‘the l’alcstinians.
22. Tllerc is often ;z tcndcncy to look upon tllc induction

>f peace-keeping forces as II substitute li9r tlic more
difficult and complex tilsk of working out 1 pcoccful
;ettlement. This has hecn manifest iu most C:ISCS wllcrcvct
lace-keeping forces ~PIU beenintroduced. hly clelcg;l~i~tIl,
Aierefore, sincerely hopes that the cxtcnsinn of tlie
nandate will in no way 1eild to the slackeningof efforts
awards working CM ;I pcrmancnt settlcmt‘nt il9the Middle
kt,
but that it will help ‘to create the rig1lt pclliticat
Itmospherc, ccrnducivc to the holding of peacenegoti;itions
11the near I‘uture. Any dC1iIyin working out ;I scteletncntin
he Middle Last is likely lo hrced greator tension ;md
‘rustration in the arca and create a very dangeroussitu:ltion
vhich, in my delegation’sopirliun, will posea very serious
hreat to international peaceanclsecurity.

06. We continue tcl nourish the hope that ttic prcscnl
renewal of lhc nrandatc will enable the partics to rcdou~~k
lhcir efforts to reacl~ il cornprchensive peace scttlcmeut
during the coming year. Weare opposedtu any tendency to
Rgilrd
the rcncwill of the IllandatC as il rc9utine aId
plX9CCdUIXll
exercise. Such roncwnlsC:InIl0l
IX! ;I substitu(C
for p!I3llilIl~llt
pclilCC.
IHowever,110 pCXC SC!tllfJ1ll~Ilt
Cilll I:lYI
tullcssil rwognizcs
tllt2 fundamental reiilitiesof the coiltlict
siluatim in the Middle East, ;1 situation which has ~CCII
churnotcrized by aggression,occupation ml injustice. :I
siluatiuli which has been further COI~lpliCil~Ctl
tly
Llic
ilisplaceincnt oi I’alestini:tns froni their lion~cland. ‘Tlic
i.ecogiGti~ln;u~rlresloraliun of the lcgitinintc national riglils
of tile Pulcstininn people thercfC)rr remain an Csse~i
ti;il
precondition for ;i just a1ld lasting pttilC0
S~ttl~I~lellt.
l!qu~lly. we recognia tile right of all States in the are3 to
mist witl1iri boundariesthat xc universally rccqgiizcd.
Lastly. there is no doubt Lliat, in termsof tile (“~nnicil
from .2tXb
rcsolutiolis, Israel is ruqi1irecl
10 WitldriiW
territories occupied since 5 Junt: 1967. We hope tlutt the
present initiative in the direclion of reconveningthe GCIlWri
I’CiICC
C’oIlli2rcuCc
will bc3r fruit Shortly. WCWOOIdpncour.
age tllc two C’o-C’ll;lirnicn of the C’(9nferuna to give
single-mindedattention to its reconvening
ilnd bring
to bw
tllcir beneficent ;tnd weightly influence on the parLics
07.

concerned in the direction of a negotiated peace settlement
in conformity with the Council resolutions.
98. Before concluding, my delegation wishes to place on
record its tribute to the Force Commander and the officers
and troops serving in the Emergency Force and we express
our appreciation to those countries which have provided
them. My country has some experience in United Nations
peace-keeping operations and we recognize the difficult
nature of the duties performed by UNEF. We congratulate

the various contingents for the efficiency and devotion with
which they have been perfOrming
their functions. We wish
also to express our thanks and appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his hard-working
staff for their
commendable supporting role as well as to LieutenantGeneral SjJasvuo, the Chief Co-ordinator of United Nations
peace-keeping Missions in the Middle East.
The imeting rose at 12.35 pm.

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: sU.S. 1.00 (or equivalentin other

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978--Voo
