S/PV.7765

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7765th meeting

Wednesday, 31 August 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-27472 (E)
*1627472*

S/PV.7765

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): I
am grateful for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the latest developments in the pursuit for
peace in Yemen.
The past month has been tragic for Yemen. The
departure from Kuwait without an agreement has
betrayed the expectations of millions of Yemenis,
who had hoped that the talks would bring an end to
the conflict and open the way for Yemen’s return to a
peaceful and orderly transition. The end of the Kuwait
talks was followed by a severe breakdown in the
cessation of hostilities and a dangerous escalation in
military activities. Extensive military confrontations
have been on-going in recent weeks in Sana’a, Taiz,
Al-Jawf, Shabwa and Mareb governorates, as well as
along the border between Yemen and the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. The clashes have involved the use
of artillery, airstrikes and ballistic missiles and have
resulted in dozens of casualties, extensive destruction
and renewed displacement.
As has been the case throughout the conflict,
numerous violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law have accompanied the fighting.
On 17 August, the Secretary-General noted with concern
the continued escalation of hostilities in Yemen and
along the border area, including airstrikes and ground
fighting. He also condemned in the strongest terms the
attack on a rural hospital in Hajjah.
According to human rights organizations, at
least 60 members of the Baha’i community in Sana’a
2/5

31/08/2016

have been detained without charge, including six
children. Further arrests were reportedly carried out on
16 August. That shows a worrying disrespect for the
human rights of minority groups, and I echo the call
from human rights groups for the immediate release
of those still in detention. I also call on all the parties
to fulfil their obligations and release all prisoners and
detainees. I furthermore call upon all groups to uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian
law and human rights law to protect civilian lives
and infrastructure.
The military escalation will continue to provide
opportunities for the spread of terrorist groups.
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State continue to wreak havoc
in significant parts of Yemen. For example, a suicide
attack in Aden killed or injured dozens of Yemenis
on 29 August. That attack was strongly condemned.
The Yemeni army’s increasing ability to confront
extremist groups, as evidenced by the recent detention
of suspected militants from Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula and the carrying out of military operations
in Zinjibar and Hadramout, is encouraging. However,
the absence of the State in many parts of Yemen, in
addition to the chaos created by war, will continue to
facilitate the expansion of those terrorist groups, which
represents a real threat to the region.
The Kuwait talks concluded after more than
three months of difficult negotiations. I would like to
reiterate my gratitude to the Amir of Kuwait for hosting
the talks and for his efforts to encourage the Yemeni
parties to conclude an agreement. The talks in Kuwait
did not yield an agreement, but they were not without
important results. During the talks, the architecture of
a road map emerged, which we will expand upon in the
coming weeks. Before departing Kuwait, I agreed with
both parties to continue consultations separately and to
reconvene direct talks at a later stage.
Delaying progress towards an agreement
is particularly dangerous considering the grave
deterioration in the economic situation. Of particular
concern are delays in the payment of salaries in many
parts of the country. Without external support, the lack
of revenue and the shortage of liquidity could make it
impossible for salaries to be paid in the coming months.
There are reports of civil servants unable to collect
their wages in Aden and other parts of the south. The
stoppage of salary payments risks driving many more
Yemenis into destitution and vastly exacerbating the
humanitarian situation. It will be necessary to find
16-27472

31/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

practical solutions that will allow Yemen to overcome
the liquidity crisis and ensure continued payments
of salaries without discrimination everywhere in
the country.
From a humanitarian perspective, the escalation
in fighting has led to tragic and unnecessary civilian
deaths, casualties and a worsening of humanitarian
suffering. The number of internally displaced persons
has risen to over 3 million. Food prices are on average
at least 60 per cent above pre-crisis levels, while income
levels have dropped dramatically. Despite the growing
levels of need, it has become increasingly difficult
for humanitarian agencies to access many areas. The
health-care system and other basic social services are
struggling to cope with an increased workload and
fewer resources. The cessation of Yemenia flights to
and from Sana’a has blocked access to Yemenis seeking
urgent medical treatment abroad, thereby removing a
much needed humanitarian lifeline. In that context,
I welcome United States Secretary of State Kerry’s
announcement of an additional $189 million to the
Yemen humanitarian response plan, which remains
funded at only 28 per cent.
Over the past two weeks, I have conducted intensive
meetings in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Sultanate
of Oman, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar. In
Riyadh, I met with President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour and Prime Minister Ahmed Obaid Mubarek
Bin-Dagher, who reaffirmed their willingness to
continue consultations on the basis of the principles
agreed upon in Kuwait. During those visits, I also held
extensive discussions with the Foreign Ministers and
senior officials of Yemen, the Sultanate of Oman, the
State of Qatar, the Russian Federation, the United Arab
Emirates, the United Kingdom and the United States.
The discussions reaffirmed the strong international
and regional support for a settlement of the conflict
in Yemen and a commitment to help overcome the
desperate economic and humanitarian challenges
facing the country.
During my latest visit to the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, I briefed a joint meeting of Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom and
the United States that had been called specifically to
discuss how to overcome obstacles in the peace process.
That meeting was followed by a discussion with the
Foreign Ministers of the member States of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC), who emphasized their
full support of the United Nations efforts in Yemen. In

S/PV.7765

both encounters, there was strong support for a return
to the cessation of hostilities, which began on 10 April.
There was also consensus on the need for a full and
comprehensive political solution involving clearly
sequenced political and security measures and firmly
grounded in the GCC initiative and its implementation
mechanism, resolution 2216 (2015) and the National
Dialogue Conference outcomes.
That proposed agreement would define a path for
the rapid formation of a Government of national unity
to be formed immediately following the withdrawal
and handover of heavy weapons in Sana’a and some
other vital areas. Implementation would be overseen
by military and security committees made up of senior
military professionals acceptable to both parties, who
would assume responsibility for the security of the
population, critical infrastructure and State institutions.
The agreement would also provide for the immediate
restoration of the functioning of State institutions, free
from interference by revolutionary committees or other
bodies created during the conflict.
The effective resumption of talks will be possible
only if all parties maintain their commitment to a
negotiated settlement and refrain from unilateral actions.
I am extremely concerned by the announcement by
Ansar Allah and former President, Ali Abdullah Saleh,
of the formation of a supreme political council with
broad administrative, security, economic and legislative
powers. Those actions breach the commitments
provided by both Ansar Allah and the General People’s
Congress to engage constructively in the peace process,
as requested by the Security Council, and creates a
new potential impediment to make progress towards
an agreement. Unilateral actions of that sort will only
complicate Yemen’s path to peace and delay the end of
military violence. We cannot effectively negotiate new
political arrangements while unilateral steps are being
taken that are inconsistent with a future comprehensive
agreement. I therefore urge both parties to refrain
from taking any additional unilateral steps that could
undermine attempts to reach a peaceful settlement.
On the basis of international and regional support,
I will resume consultations with the Government of
Yemen, Ansar Allah and the General People’s Congress
in order to take advantage of this new initiative to and
build on the progress made in Kuwait.
In order to accelerate progress along the path
to renewed talks, the resumption of the cessation of

16-274723/5

S/PV.7765

The situation in the Middle East

hostilities will be critical. Further military violence
will not ease the way to a negotiated settlement. As
we resume consultations, my priority will be to gain
a recommitment from all sides to the cessation of
hostilities. That should start with the full deployment
of the De-escalation and Coordination Committee
in Dharan Al-Janub. As specified in the terms and
conditions agreed upon before the start of the Kuwait
consultations, the cessation of hostilities should include
a full end to all military activities by land, sea or air,
using any kind of weapon. It should also include a
complete de-escalation along Yemen’s border with
Saudi Arabia.
The recommitment to the cessation of hostilities
will spare Yemen further loss of life, allow for an
increase in the flow of humanitarian assistance and
generate much-needed confidence for the negotiation
of a comprehensive and peaceful solution. Only a
negotiated political settlement can put an end to
the devastation and injustice brought about by this
horrific war. The Yemeni people have suffered for far
too long, and understandably demand that Yemen’s
leaders demonstrate their commitment to the wellbeing of Yemen and the Yemeni people, and that they
restore peace and security to their country without
further delay.
Peace in Yemen is a priority, and the safety and
security of all Yemenis should not be taken for granted.
The United Nations has dedicated all of its political and
administrative expertise to help Yemenis, but that will
not be sufficient if the decision makers do not uphold
their responsibilities and prioritize the interest of the
population. The United Nations has not, and will not,
fail Yemen. Yemen’s leaders must not fail the Yemeni
people — all the Yemeni people — in the south and in
the morth.
The President: I thank Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to express my sincere thanks to
you, Sir, Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, Permant
Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations,
for your leadership of the Security Council for the
month of August and for this opportunity to address
the Council. I would also like to express my gratitude to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his Special Envoy
for Yemen, Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed, for the efforts
4/5

31/08/2016

that continue to be made since the end the of the latest
round of talks in Kuwait in the ongoing efforts to reach
a definitive peace and end the tragic war launched by
the Houthi and pro-Saleh militias against our people in
September 2014.
We had great hopes that today’s briefing would be
held against the backdrop of progress along the path to
peace. We had hoped that the putchists would be aware
of the tragedy of the situation in Yemen and that they
would have agreed to the paper presented by the Special
Envoy as the successful result of ongoing negotiations
of over 100 days between the Government delegation
and the putchists in neighbouring country of Kuwait.
However, the pernicious Houthi and pro-Saleh militias
have continued to wage war, kill innocent victims, expel
civilians and blow up homes and houses of worship.
They have continued to attack areas bordering Saudi
Arabia, unleashing death and fuelling the terrorist
gangs in Iraq through the regional proxy, Hizbullah.
Those gangs took the State hostage back in September
2014. Without any form of legitimacy or legal basis, they
have continued to destroy the homeland through their
sectarian endeavour to gain legitimacy in promoting
pro-Saleh factions and Houthis as representatives of the
Yemeni people — a people who has fully rejected them
and the family fiefdom of Saleh.
The Yemeni Government has unconditionally
renewed its firm commitment to choose the path
of peace in order to end the suffering of the valiant
Yemeni people, who continue to face the consequences
of the unjust war launched by the Houthi and pro-Saleh
militias in all areas of Yemen. The Government believes
that peace is the only way to rid the country of those
criminal gangs and warlords. Since the very beginning,
the Yemeni Government has responded positively
to the efforts made by the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy for Yemen. The Government of Yemen
continues to make the painful and difficult concessions
for peace in the country, whereas the putchists have
remained staunchly opposed to any peaceful solution.
With regard to the people of Yemen’s present and future
fate, they have insisted on the status quo and the rule of
gangs and militias.
While we stress the importance of the terms
of reference in resolving the crisis in Yemen, the
initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC),
the results of National Dialogue Consultations and
the relevant Security Council resolutions on Yemen,
namely resolution 2216 (2015), the putchists have
16-27472

31/08/2016

The situation in the Middle East

insisted on circumventing them —particularly in their
latest unilateral statement, which buries those terms
of reference because they do not serve their plans to
lay hand on the State. The regional community as well
as the international community have stressed that the
solution to the Yemeni crisis cannot be a repetition of
the Hizbullah model in Yemen and that the presence of
statelets cannot be accepted within Yemen.
When the Kuwait talks collapsed following
the rejection of the putchists to deal in a positive
manner with the efforts of the Special Envoy and
States encouraging the political process in Yemen,
international efforts continued and resulted in ideas
that emerged from the ministerial meetings of the
Quartet in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia as well as other efforts
on the part of the GCC, the United States and the
United Kingdom, in cooperation and coordination with
Russia and the participation of the Special Envoy. The
Yemeni Government was among the first to embrace
those ideas, whereas the putchists rejected them.
Those who are working towards peace have taken
different stances with regard to dealing with militias
whose slogan promotes death and who trade in death
and destruction, introduce children to the theatre of
war, are driven by sectarian expansionist ideas and call
for increased international terrorism. The war could
be ended today if the Yemeni people were allowed to
overcome those criminal gangs, which have transformed
their daily lives into a nightmare, and if Yemeni
political forces were able to implement the results of the
National Dialogue to rejoin humankind and implement
the Sustainable Development Goals. Meanwhile, the
Houthi and pro-Saleh gangs are destroying the little
that we were able to build in Yemen with the assistance
of Powers in the region and the world. At a time when
the putchists continue raise the flags of death, we in the
Yemeni Government continue our efforts to renew the
hope of returning to a normal life in the areas in which
the Government is present and of a democratic and
federal State of Yemen in which everyone is a winner,
living in peace and security with all our neighbours in
the Gulf and the Arabian peninsula.
The people of Yemen are suffering because of the
war launched by the Houthi and pro-Saleh militias

S/PV.7765

on the Yemeni provinces. That suffering has reached
inconceivable levels in connection with public
health, education and various services. On a daily
basis, violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law are being committed. In response,
the Government of Yemen is working around the clock
to lessen the destructive consequences of the chaos
created by the war launched by the militias against our
people. Yemen’s National Independent Commission has
taken up the grave violations of human rights committed
against our nation and people. We in the Government of
Yemen call upon the international community and the
friends of Yemen to stand with our people to confront
this intransigeance and rejection on the part of the
putchists, thereby enabling the Government to assume
its responsibilities for rebuilding Yemen.
In conclusion, the Government of Yemen
sincerely appreciates the tireless efforts made by the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for Yemen.
We also appreciate the efforts of the Council and the
Ambassadors of the group of 18, which are aimed at
achieving peace and stability in Yemen. We renew our
deep appreciation to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates and all other members of the Arab
coalition in contributing to regain legitimacy in Yemen.
The Government of Yemen appeals to all members of
the Security Council to continue their unified efforts,
which have accompanied the crisis in Yemen since
its onset in 2011. Because of the unified stand of the
Security Council, much has been achieved in Yemen,
which can be added to the outstanding record of the
United Nations in the settlement of disputes throughout
the world.
We call on the Security Council to take a firm stand
vis-à-vis the putchists, who have shown their rejection
of all the commitments required to achieve peace and
continue daily to obstruct the resumption of the peace
process led by the United Nations.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
this subject.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

16-274725/5
