VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the framework of the development plans of developing
countries;
10. Requests the Commission on Social Development
at its twenty-eighth session to give high priority to the ex­
amination and discussion of the 1982 Report on the World
Social Situation and to submit its views and observations
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session through
the Economic and Social Council;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the 1982
Report on the World Social Situation to other United
Nations bodies concerned with operational activities and to
the regional commissions for their consideration;
12. Invites Member States to convey to the Secretary­
General their comments on the 1982 Report on the World
Social Situation so as to facilitate the preparation of the
1985 report;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to issue the 1985
report on the world social situation, taking into consideration
the provisions of the present resolution and including an
analysis of the implementation of the Declaration on Social
Progress and Development in the light of the goals and
objectives of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade, and taking into
account the comments of delegations on this question made
during the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly
and to be expressed during the thirty-eighth session as well
as the comments received by the Secretary-General from
Member States and the observations made by the Commis­
sion for Social Development, through the Economic and
Social Council;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General, in preparing
the 1985 report on the world social situation, to take into
account the recommendations made in section II of General
Assembly resolution 34/152 and to report thereon periodi­
cally to the Economic and Social Council;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General, when pre­
senting the 1985 report on the world social situation, to
submit an analysis of the co-ordination between the United
Nations and the specialized agencies in the collection of
social statistics and the preparation of reports on social issues;
16. Invites the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to co-operate fully with the
Secretary-General in the preparation of future reports by
making available all relevant information pertaining to their
respective areas of competence;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to make the nec­
essary arrangements for the wide dissemination of all future
reports;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "World social
situation".
90th plenary meeting
3 December /982
37/SS.

Popular participation in its various forms as an
important factor in development and in the
realization of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/152 of 17 December 1979,
Recalling also the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, contained in General Assembly resolution
2542 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969, in which, inter alia.
it was emphasized that all peoples and all human beings
have the right to live in dignity and freedom and to enjoy
the fruits of social progress and should, on their part, con­
tribute to it,

189

Bearing in mind that social progress and development are
founded on respect for the dignity and value of the human
person and should ensure the promotion of human rights
and social justice,
Stressing the importance of the adoption of measures to
ensure the effective participation, as appropriate, of all ele­
ments of society in the preparation and implementation of
national economic and social development policies and of
the mobilization of public opinion and the dissemination of
relevant information in support of the principles and objec­
tives of social progress and development,
Recognizing that popular participation, including the par­
ticipation of workers in management and workers' self­
management in countries where they exist, constitutes an
important factor of socio-economic development as well as
of respect for human rights and dignity of the human person,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General52
on the International Seminar on Popular Participation, held
at Ljubljana, Yugoslavia, from 17 to 25 May I 982,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General;
2. Invites Member States to take into consideration in
their development policies and programmes the recommen­
dations of the International Seminar on Popular Participa­
tion, keeping in view their specific economic and social
conditions;
3. Calls upon the organs and organizations of the United
Nations system to promote, as appropriate, popular partici­
pation in the execution of their programmes to the extent
and in the form appropriate to the nature of their work;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit his report
on the Seminar to Member States and the relevant United
Nations bodies for their consideration;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to con­
sider at its thirty-ninth session the question of popular par­
ticipation in its various forms as an important factor in
development and in the realization of human rights, taking
into account, inter alia, the results of the deliberations of
the Seminar, as contained in the report of the Secretary­
General, and to submit to the General Assembly, through
the Economic and Social Council, appropriate suggestions
for the more complete realization of human rights;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
comprehensive progress report on the implementation of the
present resolution, taking account of the suggestions made
in the Commission on Human Rights, and to submit his
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session, under the item relating to the world
social situation, a subitem entitled "Popular participation
in its various forms as an important factor in development
and in the realization of human rights" in order to review
the progress made in this field.
90th plenary meeting
3 December /982
37/56.

International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 36/ 128 of 14 December 1981, in
which it underlined the importance of the contributions of
the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women to the work of all United Nations
" A/37/442.
