United Nations

A/RES/55/33

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 January 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 73

Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the First Committee (A/55/559)]

55/33.

General and complete disarmament
A
M ISSILES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/54 F of 1 December 1999,
Reaffirming the role of the United Nations in the field of arms regulation and
disarmament and the commitment of Member States to take concrete steps to
strengthen that role,
Realizing the need to promote regional and international peace and security in
a world free from the scourge of war and the burden of armaments,
Convinced of the need for a comprehensive approach towards missiles, in a
balanced and non-discriminatory manner, as a contribution to international peace
and security,
Bearing in mind that the security concerns of Member States at the
international and regional levels should be taken into consideration in addressing the
issue of missiles,
Underlining the complexities involved in considering the issue of missiles in
the conventional context,
Expressing its support for the international efforts against the development and
proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General,
submitted pursuant to resolution 54/54 F, 1
2.
Requests the Secretary-General further to seek the views of Member
States on the issue of missiles in all its aspects and to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-sixth session;

1

00 56137

A/55/116 and Add.1.

A/RES/55/33

3.
Also requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of a panel of
governmental experts to be established in 2001 on the basis of equitable
geographical distribution, to prepare a report for the consideration of the General
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session on the issue of missiles in all its aspects;
4.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Missiles”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

B
P RESERVATION OF AND COMPLIANCE WITH THE T REATY ON THE LIMITATION OF
A NTI-B ALLISTIC M ISSILE SYSTEMS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/60 of 12 December 1995 and 52/30 of 9 December
1997 on compliance with arms limitation and disarmament and non-proliferation
agreements and its resolution 54/54 A of 1 December 1999 on preservation of and
compliance with the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems, 2
Recognizing the historical role of the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic
Missile Systems of 26 May 1972 between the United States of America and the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as a cornerstone for maintaining global peace
and security and strategic stability, and reaffirming its continued validity and
relevance, especially in the current international situation,
Stressing the paramount importance of full and strict compliance with the
Treaty by the parties,
Recalling that the provisions of the Treaty are intended as a contribution to the
creation of more favourable conditions for further negotiations on limiting strategic
arms,
Mindful of the obligations of the parties to the Treaty under article VI of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 3
Concerned that the implementation of any measures undermining the purposes
and provisions of the Treaty affects not only the security interests of the parties, but
also those of the whole international community,
Recalling the widespread concern about the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery,
1.
Calls for continued efforts to strengthen the Treaty on the Limitation of
Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems 2 and to preserve its integrity and validity so that it
remains a cornerstone in maintaining global strategic stability and world peace and
in promoting further strategic nuclear arms reductions;
2.
Calls also for renewed efforts by each of the States parties to preserve
and strengthen the Treaty through full and strict compliance;

2
3

2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 944, No. 13446.
Ibid., vol. 729, No. 10485.

A/RES/55/33

3.
Calls upon the parties to the Treaty, in accordance with their obligations
under the Treaty, to limit the deployment of anti-ballistic missile systems, to refrain
from the deployment of anti-ballistic missile systems for the defence of the territory
of their country, not to provide a base for such a defence and not to transfer to other
States or deploy outside their national territory anti-ballistic missile systems or their
components limited by the Treaty;
4.
Considers that the implementation of any measure undermining the
purposes and the provisions of the Treaty also undermines global strategic stability
and world peace and the promotion of further strategic nuclear arms reductions;
5.
Urges all Member States to support efforts aimed at stemming the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery;
6.
Supports further efforts by the international community, in the light of
emerging developments, towards safeguarding the inviolability and integrity of the
Treaty, which is in the strongest interest of the international community;
7.
Welcomes the decision taken by the United States of America on
1 September 2000 not to authorize deployment of a national missile defence at this
time, and considers that it constitutes a positive step for the preservation of strategic
stability and security;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Preservation of and compliance with the Treaty on the Limitation of
Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

C
T OWARDS A NUCLEAR - WEAPON -FREE WORLD : THE NEED FOR A NEW AGENDA
The General Assembly,
Noting its resolutions 53/77 Y of 4 December 1998 and 54/54 G of
1 December 1999,
Expressing its deep concern at the continued risk for humanity represented by
the possibility that nuclear weapons could be used,
Noting the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice, on the
Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued at The Hague on
8 July 1996, 4
Noting also that three States continue to operate unsafeguarded nuclear
facilities and have not acceded to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, 3 and concerned at the continued retention of the nuclear-weapons option
by those three States,
Declaring that nuclear test explosions carried out in 1998 by two of the States
that have not renounced the nuclear-weapons option do not in any way confer a
nuclear-weapon State status or any special status whatsoever,
4

Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1996, p. 226.

3

A/RES/55/33

Noting that, despite achievements in bilateral and unilateral arms reductions,
the total number of nuclear weapons deployed and stockpiled still amount to many
thousands,
Welcoming the significant progress achieved in nuclear weapon reductions
made unilaterally or bilaterally under the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START)
process, as a step towards nuclear disarmament,
Welcoming also the ratification of the Treaty on Further Reduction and
Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (START II) 5 by the Russian Federation as an
important step in the efforts to reduce strategic offensive weapons, and noting that
completion of ratification of START II by the United States of America remains a
priority,
Concerned that negotiations on nuclear arms reductions are not actively under
way,
Welcoming the significant unilateral reduction measures taken by other
nuclear-weapon States, including the closing down and dismantling of nuclearweapon-related facilities,
Welcoming also the efforts of several States to cooperate in making nuclear
disarmament measures irreversible, in particular through the adoption of initiatives
on the verification, management and disposition of fissile material declared excess
to military purposes,
Noting the declaration by the nuclear-weapon States that none of their nuclear
weapons are targeted at any State,
Underlining the necessity of strict compliance by all parties with their
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Noting the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 6 in which the heads of
State and Government resolved to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and to keep all options open for
achieving this aim, including the possibility of convening an international
conference to identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers,
Welcoming the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,7
Taking into consideration the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon
States, in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to accomplish the total
elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all
States parties to the Treaty are committed under article VI of the Treaty,8
Underlining the need for action to achieve a world free from nuclear weapons,
Determined to pursue practical steps for systematic and progressive efforts to
implement article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
5

The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 18: 1993 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.94.IX.1), appendix II.
6
Resolution 55/2.
7
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Final Document, vols. I-III (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I-IV)).
8
Ibid., vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, art. VI, para. 15:6.

4

A/RES/55/33

paragraphs 3 and 4 (c) of the decision on principles and objectives for nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty, 9
1.
Agrees on the importance and urgency of signatures and ratifications,
without delay and without conditions and in accordance with constitutional
processes, to achieve the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty; 10
2.
Calls for the upholding of a moratorium on nuclear-weapon-test
explosions or any other nuclear explosions pending entry into force of the abovementioned Treaty;
3.
Agrees on the necessity for negotiations in the Conference on
Disarmament on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and
effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, in accordance with the report of the
Special Coordinator of 1995 11 and the mandate contained therein, taking into
consideration both nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation objectives,
and urges the Conference on Disarmament to agree on a programme of work which
includes the immediate commencement of negotiations on such a treaty, with a view
to their conclusion within five years;
4.
Agrees also on the necessity of establishing within the context of the
Conference on Disarmament an appropriate subsidiary body with a mandate to deal
with nuclear disarmament, and urges the Conference to agree on a programme of
work which includes the immediate establishment of such a body;
5.
Calls for the principle of irreversibility to apply to nuclear disarmament,
nuclear and other related arms control and reduction measures;
6.
Calls also for the early entry into force and full implementation of the
Treaty on Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms
(START II) 5 and the conclusion of START III as soon as possible, while preserving
and strengthening the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems 2 as
a cornerstone of strategic stability and as a basis for further reductions of strategic
offensive weapons, in accordance with the provisions of that Treaty;
7.
Calls further for the completion and implementation of the Trilateral
Initiative between the United States of America, the Russian Federation and the
International Atomic Energy Agency;
8.
Calls for steps to be taken by all nuclear-weapon States that would lead
to nuclear disarmament in a way that promotes international stability and, based
upon the principle of undiminished security for all, for:
(a) Further efforts to be made by the nuclear-weapon States to reduce their
nuclear arsenals unilaterally;
(b) Increased transparency by the nuclear-weapon States with regard to
nuclear weapons capabilities, and the implementation of agreements pursuant to
article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons3 and as a
9

1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)), annex, decision 2.
10
See resolution 50/245.
11
CD/1299.

5

A/RES/55/33

voluntary confidence-building measure to support further progress in nuclear
disarmament;
(c) The further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons, based on
unilateral initiatives and as an integral part of the nuclear arms reduction and
disarmament process;
(d) Concrete agreed measures to reduce further the operational status of
nuclear weapons systems;
(e) A diminishing role for nuclear weapons in security policies so as to
minimize the risk that these weapons will ever be used and to facilitate the process
of their total elimination;
(f) The engagement, as soon as appropriate, of all the nuclear-weapon States
in the process leading to the total elimination of their nuclear weapons;
9.
Calls also for arrangements by all nuclear-weapon States to place, as
soon as practicable, the fissile material designated by each of them as no longer
required for military purposes under International Atomic Energy Agency or other
relevant international verification and arrangements for the disposition of such
material for peaceful purposes in order to ensure that such material remains
permanently outside military programmes;
10. Reaffirms that the ultimate objective of the efforts of States in the
disarmament process is general and complete disarmament under effective
international control;
11. Calls for regular reports, within the framework of the strengthened
review process for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, by all
States parties on the implementation of article VI of the Treaty and paragraph 4 (c)
of the decision on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty, 9 and, in this regard, recalls the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice of 8 July 1996;4
12. Agrees to pursue the further development of the verification capabilities
that will be required to provide assurance of compliance with nuclear disarmament
agreements for the achievement and maintenance of a nuclear-weapon-free world;
13. Calls upon all States not yet party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons to accede to the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon States, promptly
and without condition, in particular those States that operate unsafeguarded nuclear
facilities, and also calls upon those States to bring into force the required
comprehensive safeguards agreements, together with additional protocols, consistent
with the Model Protocol Additional to the Agreement(s) between State(s) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards approved by
the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency on 15 May
1997, 12 for ensuring nuclear non-proliferation, and to reverse clearly and urgently
any policies to pursue any nuclear weapons development or deployment and refrain
from any action that could undermine regional and international peace and security
and the efforts of the international community towards nuclear disarmament and the
prevention of nuclear weapons proliferation;

12

6

International Atomic Energy Agency, INFCIRC/540 (Corrected).

A/RES/55/33

14. Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to conclude full-scope
safeguards agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency and to
conclude additional protocols to their safeguards agreements on the basis of the
Model Protocol;
15. Notes the paramount importance of effective physical protection of all
nuclear material, and calls upon all States to maintain the highest possible standards
of security and physical protection of nuclear materials;
16. Notes also that the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons agreed that legally binding security
assurances by the five nuclear-weapon States to the non-nuclear-weapon States
parties to the Treaty strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime, and that it
called upon the Preparatory Committee to make recommendations on this issue to
the 2005 Review Conference; 13
17. Reaffirms the conviction that the establishment of internationally
recognized nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at
among the States of the region concerned enhances global and regional peace and
security, strengthens the nuclear non-proliferation regime and contributes towards
realizing the objective of nuclear disarmament, and supports proposals for the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones where they do not yet exist, such as in
the Middle East and South Asia;
18. Affirms that a nuclear-weapon-free world will ultimately require the
underpinning of a universal and multilaterally negotiated legally binding instrument
or a framework encompassing a mutually reinforcing set of instruments;
19. Acknowledges the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of General Assembly resolution 54/54 G, 14 and requests him, within existing
resources, to prepare a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: the need for a new agenda”,
and to review the implementation of the present resolution at that session.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

D
2000 R EVIEW C ONFERENCE OF THE P ARTIES TO THE T REATY ON THE
N ON -P ROLIFERATION OF N UCLEAR W EAPONS
The General Assembly,
Recalling the decision on strengthening the review process for the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons of the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty, in which it was agreed that Review

13

2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, art. VII, para. 2.
14
A/55/217.

7

A/RES/55/33

Conferences should continue to be held every five years and that, accordingly, the
next Review Conference should be held in the year 2000, 15
Recalling also its resolutions 50/70 Q of 12 December 1995 and 51/45 A of
10 December 1996,
Recalling further that the parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons met in New York from 24 April to 19 May 2000 to review the
operation of the Treaty, as provided for in its article VIII, paragraph 3, taking into
account the decisions and the resolution adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference, 16
Welcomes the adoption by consensus on 19 May 2000 of the Final Document
of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons,7 including in particular the documents entitled “Review of the
operation of the Treaty, taking into account the decisions and the resolution adopted
by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference” and “Improving the effectiveness of
the strengthened review process for the Treaty”. 17
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

E
U NITED N ATIONS STUDY ON DISARMAMENT AND NON -PROLIFERATION EDUCATION
The General Assembly,
Desirous of stressing the urgency of promoting concerted international efforts
at disarmament and non-proliferation, especially in the field of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems, with a view to
strengthening international security and enhancing sustainable economic and social
development,
Conscious of the need, more than a decade after the end of the cold war and at
the start of the twenty-first century, to combat the negative effects of cultures of
violence and complacency in the face of current dangers in this field through longterm programmes of education and training,
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with the assistance of a group
of qualified governmental experts, a study on disarmament and non-proliferation,
that would have the following aims:
(a) To define contemporary disarmament and non-proliferation education
and training, taking into account the need to promote a culture of non-violence and
peace;
(b) To assess the current situation of disarmament and non-proliferation
education and training at the primary, secondary, university and postgraduate levels
of education, in all regions of the world;
15
1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)), annex, decision 1, para. 2.
16
Ibid., annex.
17
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I.

8

A/RES/55/33

(c) To recommend ways to promote education and training in disarmament
and non-proliferation at all levels of formal and informal education, in particular the
training of educators, parliamentarians, municipal leaders, military officers and
government officials;
(d) To examine ways to utilize more fully evolving pedagogic methods,
particularly the revolution in information and communications technology, including
distance learning, to enhance efforts in disarmament education and training at all
levels, in the developed and the developing world;
(e) To recommend ways in which organizations of the United Nations system
with special competence in disarmament or education or both can harmonize and
coordinate their efforts in disarmament and non-proliferation education;
(f) To devise ways to introduce disarmament and non-proliferation education
into post-conflict situations as a contribution to peace-building;
and considers that the group of experts should invite representatives of organizations
of the United Nations system with special competence in disarmament or education
or both to participate in its work, and should also invite university educators,
disarmament and peace-related institutes and non-governmental organizations that
have special qualifications in education and training or in the field of disarmament
and non-proliferation to make written and oral presentations to it;
2.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its fifty-seventh session on this question.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

F
A SSISTANCE TO S TATES FOR CURBING THE ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN SMALL ARMS
AND COLLECTING THEM

The General Assembly,
Considering that the proliferation, illicit circulation of and traffic in small arms
constitute an impediment to development, and a threat to populations and to national
and regional security and are a factor contributing to the destabilization of States,
Gravely concerned at the extent of the proliferation, illicit circulation of and
traffic in small arms in the States of the Saharo-Sahelian subregion,
Welcoming the conclusions of the United Nations advisory missions sent to the
affected countries of the subregion by the Secretary-General to study the best way of
curbing the illicit circulation of small arms and collecting them,
Welcoming also the designation of the Department for Disarmament Affairs of
the Secretariat as the coordination centre for all United Nations activities concerning
small arms,
Thanking the Secretary-General for his report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa, 18 and bearing in
18

A/52/871-S/1998/318.

9

A/RES/55/33

mind the statement on small arms made by the President of the Security Council on
24 September 1999, 19
Welcoming the recommendations made at the meetings of the States of the
subregion held at Banjul, Algiers, Bamako, Yamoussoukro and Niamey to establish
close regional cooperation with a view to strengthening security,
Welcoming also the initiative taken by the Economic Community of West
African States concerning the declaration of a moratorium on the importation,
exportation and manufacture of small arms and light weapons in West Africa,
Recalling the Algiers Declaration adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-fifth ordinary
session, held at Algiers from 12 to 14 July 1999, 20 and bearing in mind the report of
the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity on the proliferation,
illicit circulation of and traffic in small arms,
Emphasizing the need to advance efforts towards wider cooperation and better
coordination in the struggle against the stockpiling, proliferation and widespread use
of small arms, inter alia, through the common understanding reached at the meeting
on small arms held at Oslo on 13 and 14 July 1998 21 and the Brussels Call for
Action adopted by the International Conference on Sustainable Disarmament for
Sustainable Development, held at Brussels on 12 and 13 October 1998, 22 as adopted
in document A/53/681, paragraph 4,
1.
Welcomes with satisfaction the Declaration of the Ministerial Conference
on Security, Stability, Development and Cooperation in Africa, held at Abuja on 8
and 9 May 2000, encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts, in the
context of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 49/75 G of
15 December 1994 and of the recommendations of the United Nations advisory
missions, to curb the illicit circulation of small arms and to collect such arms in the
affected States that so request, with the support of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa and in close cooperation with the
Organization of African Unity;
2.
Encourages the setting up in the countries in the Saharo-Sahelian
subregion of national commissions against the proliferation of small arms, and
invites the international community to support as far as possible the smooth
functioning of the national commissions where they have been set up;
3.
Welcomes the Declaration of a Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa,
adopted by the heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States at Abuja on 31 October 1998, 23 and urges the international
community to give its support to the implementation of the moratorium;
4.
Recommends the involvement of organizations and associations of civil
society in efforts to combat the illicit circulation of small arms in the context of the
national commissions and their participation in the implementation of the
moratorium on the importation, exportation and manufacture of small arms;
19

S/PRST/1999/28; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1999.
A/54/424, annex II, decision AHG/Decl.1 (XXXV).
21
See CD/1556.
22
A/53/681, annex.
23
A/53/763-S/1998/1194, annex.
20

10

A/RES/55/33

5.
Takes note of the conclusions of the meeting of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Economic Community of West African States, held at Bamako on 24
and 25 March 1999, on the modalities for the implementation of the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and Development, and welcomes the
adoption by the meeting of a plan of action;
6.
Expresses its full support for the appeal launched by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its thirtyfifth ordinary session for a coordinated African approach, under the auspices of the
Organization of African Unity, to the problems posed by the proliferation, illicit
circulation of and traffic in small arms, bearing in mind the experiences and
activities of the various regions in this regard; 24
7.
Encourages cooperation among State bodies, international organizations
and civil society in combating the illicit circulation of small arms and supporting
operations at the subregional level;
8.
Expresses its full support for the convening of a United Nations
conference on the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects in
June/July 2001, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 54/54 V of
15 December 1999;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to examine the question and
to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and
collecting them”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

G
C ONSOLIDATION OF PEACE THROUGH PRACTICAL DISARMAMENT MEASURES
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/45 N of 10 December 1996, 52/38 G of
9 December 1997, 53/77 M of 4 December 1998 and 54/54 H of 1 December 1999,
Convinced that a comprehensive and integrated approach towards certain
practical disarmament measures, such as arms control, particularly with regard to
small arms and light weapons, confidence-building measures, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, demining and conversion, often is a prerequisite
to maintaining and consolidating peace and security and thus provides a basis for
effective rehabilitation and social and economic development in areas that have
suffered from conflict,
Noting with satisfaction that the international community is more than ever
aware of the importance of such practical disarmament measures, especially with
regard to the growing problems arising from the excessive and destabilizing
24

A/54/424, annex II, decision AHG/Dec.137 (XXXV), para. 10.

11

A/RES/55/33

accumulation and proliferation of small arms and light weapons, which pose a threat
to peace and security and reduce the prospects for economic development in many
regions, particularly in post-conflict situations,
Stressing that further efforts are needed in order to develop and effectively
implement programmes of practical disarmament in affected areas,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General prepared with the assistance
of the Group of Governmental Experts on Small Arms, 25 and in particular the
recommendations contained therein, as an important contribution to the
consolidation of the peace process through practical disarmament measures,
Taking into account the deliberations at the 2000 substantive session of the
Disarmament Commission in Working Group II on agenda item 5, entitled “Practical
confidence-building measures in the field of conventional arms”, 26 and encouraging
the Disarmament Commission to continue its efforts aimed at the identification of
such measures,
1.
Stresses, in the context of the present resolution, the particular relevance
of the “Guidelines on conventional arms control/limitation and disarmament, with
particular emphasis on consolidation of peace in the context of General Assembly
resolution 51/45 N”, 27 adopted by the Disarmament Commission by consensus at its
1999 substantive session;
2.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the consolidation of
peace through practical disarmament measures, submitted pursuant to resolution
51/45 N, 28 and once again encourages Member States, as well as regional
arrangements and agencies, to lend their support to the implementation of the
recommendations contained therein;
3.
Welcomes the activities undertaken by the group of interested States that
was formed in New York in March 1998, and invites the group to continue to
analyse lessons learned from previous disarmament and peace-building projects, as
well as to promote new practical disarmament measures to consolidate peace,
especially as undertaken or designed by affected States themselves;
4.
Encourages Member States, including the group of interested States, to
lend their support to the Secretary-General in responding to requests by Member
States to collect and destroy small arms and light weapons in post-conflict
situations;

25

A/54/258.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/55/42),
para. 29.
27
Ibid., Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42), annex III.
28
A/52/289.
26

12

A/RES/55/33

5.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Consolidation of peace through practical disarmament measures”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

H
I MPLEMENTATION OF THE C ONVENTION ON THE P ROHIBITION OF THE D EVELOPMENT,
P RODUCTION , S TOCKPILING AND U SE OF CHEMICAL W EAPONS AND
ON T HEIR D ESTRUCTION
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject of chemical weapons, in
particular resolution 54/54 E of 1 December 1999, adopted without a vote, in which
it noted with appreciation the ongoing work to achieve the objective and purpose of
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, 29
Determined to achieve the effective prohibition of the development,
production, acquisition, transfer, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons and their
destruction,
Noting with satisfaction that since the adoption of resolution 54/54 E, fourteen
additional States have ratified or acceded to the Convention, bringing the total
number of States parties to the Convention to one hundred and forty,
1.
Emphasizes the necessity of universal adherence to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction,29 and calls upon all States that have not yet done
so to become parties to the Convention without delay;
2.
Notes with appreciation the ongoing work of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to achieve the objective and purpose of the
Convention, to ensure the full implementation of its provisions, including those for
international verification of compliance with it, and to provide a forum for
consultation and cooperation among States parties;
3.
Stresses the importance of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in verifying compliance with the provisions of the Convention as
well as in promoting the timely and efficient accomplishment of all its objectives;
4.
Also stresses the vital importance of full and effective implementation of
and compliance with all provisions of the Convention;
5.
Urges all States parties to the Convention to meet in full and on time
their obligations under the Convention and to support the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in its implementation activities;
6.
Stresses the importance to the Convention that all possessors of chemical
weapons, chemical weapons production facilities or chemical weapons development

29

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/47/27),
appendix I.

13

A/RES/55/33

facilities, including previously declared possessor States, should be among the
States parties to the Convention, and welcomes progress to that end;
7.
Welcomes the cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the signature of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the Organization, in
accordance with the provisions of the Convention;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

I
N UCLEAR - WEAPON - FREE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE AND ADJACENT AREAS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/45 B of 10 December 1996, 52/38 N of
9 December 1997, 53/77 Q of 4 December 1998 and 54/54 L of 1 December 1999,
Welcoming the adoption by the Disarmament Commission at its 1999
substantive session of a text entitled “Establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region
concerned”, 30
Determined to pursue the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
Determined also to continue to contribute to the prevention of the proliferation
of nuclear weapons in all its aspects and to the process of general and complete
disarmament under strict and effective international control, in particular in the field
of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, with a view to
strengthening international peace and security, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling the provisions on nuclear-weapon-free zones of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 31 the first special session
devoted to disarmament,

30
31

14

Ibid., Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42), annex I.
Resolution S-10/2.

A/RES/55/33

Stressing the importance of the treaties of Tlatelolco, 32 Rarotonga, 33 Bangkok 34
and Pelindaba, 35 establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, as well as the Antarctic
Treaty, 36 to, inter alia, achieve a world entirely free of nuclear weapons,
Underlining the value of enhancing cooperation among the nuclear-weaponfree zone treaty members by means of mechanisms such as joint meetings of States
parties, signatories and observers to those treaties,
Recalling the applicable principles and rules of international law relating to the
freedom of the high seas and the rights of passage through maritime space, including
those of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 37
1.
Welcomes the continued contribution that the Antarctic36 and the treaties
of Tlatelolco,32 Rarotonga, 33 Bangkok 34 and Pelindaba35 are making towards freeing
the southern hemisphere and adjacent areas covered by those treaties from nuclear
weapons;
2.
Calls for the ratification of the treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok
and Pelindaba by all States of the region concerned, and calls upon all concerned
States to continue to work together in order to facilitate adherence to the protocols
to nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties by all relevant States that have not yet done so;
3.
Welcomes the steps taken to conclude further nuclear-weapon-free zone
treaties on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region
concerned, and calls upon all States to consider all relevant proposals, including
those reflected in its resolutions on the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones
in the Middle East and South Asia;
4.
Convinced of the important role of nuclear-weapon-free zones in
strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime and in extending the areas of the
world that are nuclear-weapon-free, and, with particular reference to the
responsibilities of the nuclear-weapon States, calls upon all States to support the
process of nuclear disarmament and to work for the total elimination of all nuclear
weapons;
5.
Calls upon the States parties and signatories to the treaties of Tlatelolco,
Rarotonga, Bangkok and Pelindaba, in order to pursue the common goals envisaged
in those treaties and to promote the nuclear-weapon-free status of the southern
hemisphere and adjacent areas, to explore and implement further ways and means of
cooperation among themselves and their treaty agencies;
6.
Welcomes the vigorous efforts being made among States parties and
signatories to those treaties to promote their common objectives, and considers that
an international conference of States parties and signatories to the nuclear-weaponfree zone treaties might be held to support the common goals envisaged in those
treaties;

32

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 10: 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.86.IX.7), appendix VII.
34
Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone.
35
A/50/426, annex.
36
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778.
37
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.V.10.
33

15

A/RES/55/33

7.
Encourages the competent authorities of the nuclear-weapon-free zone
treaties to provide assistance to the States parties and signatories to such treaties so
as to facilitate the accomplishment of these goals;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Nuclear-weapon-free southern hemisphere and adjacent areas”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

J
M EASURES TO UPHOLD THE AUTHORITY OF THE 1925 G ENEVA P ROTOCOL
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, in particular resolution
53/77 L of 4 December 1998,
Determined to act with a view to achieving effective progress towards general
and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control,
Recalling the long-standing determination of the international community to
achieve the effective prohibition of the development, production, stockpiling and
use of chemical and biological weapons as well as the continuing support for
measures to uphold the authority of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in
War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of
Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925, 38 as expressed by consensus in many
previous resolutions,
Welcoming the end of the cold war, the ensuing easing of international tension
and the strengthening of trust between States,
Welcoming also the initiatives by some States parties to withdraw their
reservations to the 1925 Geneva Protocol,
1.
Renews its previous call to all States to observe strictly the principles and
objectives of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at
Geneva on 17 June 1925, 38 and reaffirms the vital necessity of upholding its
provisions;
2.
Notes with appreciation the recent withdrawal of reservations by two
State parties to the Geneva Protocol; 39
3.
Calls upon those States that continue to maintain reservations to the 1925
Geneva Protocol to withdraw those reservations;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-seventh session a report on the implementation of the present resolution.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000
38
39

16

League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929), No. 2138.
See A/55/115 and Add.1.

A/RES/55/33

K
O BSERVANCE OF ENVIRONMENTAL NORMS IN THE DRAFTING AND IMPLEMENTATION OF
AGREEMENTS ON DISARMAMENT AND ARMS CONTROL

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/70 M of 12 December 1995, 51/45 E of
10 December 1996, 52/38 E of 9 December 1997, 53/77 J of 4 December 1998 and
54/54 S of 1 December 1999,
Emphasizing the importance of the observance of environmental norms in the
preparation and implementation of disarmament and arms limitation agreements,
Recognizing that it is necessary to take duly into account the agreements
adopted at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, as
well as prior relevant agreements, in the drafting and implementation of agreements
on disarmament and arms limitation,
Mindful of the detrimental environmental effects of the use of nuclear
weapons,
1.
Reaffirms that international disarmament forums should take fully into
account the relevant environmental norms in negotiating treaties and agreements on
disarmament and arms limitation and that all States, through their actions, should
fully contribute to ensuring compliance with the aforementioned norms in the
implementation of treaties and conventions to which they are parties;
2.
Calls upon States to adopt unilateral, bilateral, regional and multilateral
measures so as to contribute to ensuring the application of scientific and
technological progress in the framework of international security, disarmament and
other related spheres, without detriment to the environment or to its effective
contribution to attaining sustainable development;
3.
Welcomes the information provided by Member States on the
implementation of the measures they have adopted to promote the objectives
envisaged in the present resolution; 40
4.
Invites all Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General
information on the measures they have adopted to promote the objectives envisaged
in the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
containing this information to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session;
5.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Observance of environmental norms in the drafting and
implementation of agreements on disarmament and arms control”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

40

See A/55/129.

17

A/RES/55/33

L
R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DISARMAMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of
the General Assembly31 concerning the relationship between disarmament and
development,
Recalling also the adoption on 11 September 1987 of the Final Document of
the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and
Development, 41
Recalling further its resolutions 49/75 J of 15 December 1994, 50/70 G of
12 December 1995, 51/45 D of 10 December 1996, 52/38 D of 9 December 1997,
53/77 K of 4 December 1998 and 54/54 T of 1 December 1999,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Twelfth Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Durban, South Africa, from
29 August to 3 September 1998, 42 and the final document of the Thirteenth
Ministerial Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Cartagena, Colombia, on 8 and 9 April 2000, 43
Welcoming the different activities organized by the high-level Steering Group
on Disarmament and Development, as contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 44
Stressing the growing importance of the symbiotic relationship between
disarmament and development in current international relations,
1.
Calls upon the high-level Steering Group on Disarmament and
Development to strengthen and enhance its programme of activities, in accordance
with the mandate set out in the action programme adopted at the International
Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development;45
2.
Urges the international community to devote part of the resources made
available by the implementation of disarmament and arms limitation agreements to
economic and social development, with a view to reducing the ever-widening gap
between developed and developing countries;
3.
Invites all Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General, by
15 April 2001, their views and proposals for the implementation of the action
programme adopted at the International Conference on the Relationship between
Disarmament and Development, as well as any other views and proposals with a
view to achieving the goals of the action programme, within the framework of
current international relations;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take action, through
appropriate organs and within available resources, for the implementation of the
action programme adopted at the International Conference;
41

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.87.IX.8.
A/53/667-S/1998/1071, annex I.
43
A/54/917-S/2000/580, annex.
44
A/55/258.
45
United Nations publication, Sales No. E.87.IX.8, para. 35.
42

18

A/RES/55/33

5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-sixth session;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Relationship between disarmament and development”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

M
C ONVENING OF THE FOURTH SPECIAL SESSION OF THE G ENERAL ASSEMBLY
DEVOTED TO DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 I of 15 December 1994, 50/70 F of
12 December 1995, 51/45 C of 10 December 1996, 52/38 F of 9 December 1997,
53/77 AA of 4 December 1998 and 54/54 U of 1 December 1999,
Recalling also that, there being a consensus to do so in each case, three special
sessions of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament were held in 1978, 1982
and 1988, respectively,
Bearing in mind the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 31 adopted by consensus at the first special session devoted to
disarmament, which included the Declaration, the Programme of Action and the
Machinery for disarmament,
Bearing in mind also the objective of general and complete disarmament under
effective international control,
Taking note of paragraph 145 of the Final Document of the Twelfth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Durban, South
Africa, from 29 August to 3 September 1998,42 which supported the convening of
the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, which
would offer an opportunity to review, from a perspective more in tune with the
current international situation, the most critical aspects of the process of
disarmament and to mobilize the international community and public opinion in
favour of the elimination of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction and of
the control and reduction of conventional weapons,
Taking note also of the report of the 1999 substantive session of the
Disarmament Commission 46 and of the fact that no consensus was reached on the
item entitled “Fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament”,
Desiring to build upon the substantive exchange of views on the fourth special
session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament during the 1999
substantive session of the Disarmament Commission,
Reiterating its conviction that a special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament can set the future course of action in the field of
disarmament, arms control and related international security matters,
46

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42).

19

A/RES/55/33

Emphasizing the importance of multilateralism in the process of disarmament,
arms control and related international security matters,
Noting that, with the recent accomplishments made by the international
community in the field of weapons of mass destruction as well as conventional
arms, the following years would be opportune for the international community to
start the process of reviewing the state of affairs in the entire field of disarmament
and arms control in the post-cold-war era,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 47 regarding the views of
States Members of the United Nations on the objectives, agenda and timing of the
fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament,
1.
Decides, subject to the emergence of a consensus on its objectives and
agenda, to convene the fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of States Members of
the United Nations on the objectives, agenda and timing of the special session and to
report to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session;
3.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Convening of the fourth special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

N
R EDUCING NUCLEAR DANGER
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the use of nuclear weapons poses the most serious threat
to mankind and to the survival of civilization,
Reaffirming that any use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would constitute a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
Convinced that the proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its aspects would
seriously enhance the danger of nuclear war,
Convinced also that nuclear disarmament and the complete elimination of
nuclear weapons are essential to remove the danger of nuclear war,
Considering that, until nuclear weapons cease to exist, it is imperative on the
part of the nuclear-weapon States to adopt measures that assure non-nuclear-weapon
States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Considering also that the hair-trigger alert of nuclear weapons carries
unacceptable risks of unintentional or accidental use of nuclear weapons, which
would have catastrophic consequences for all mankind,

47

20

A/55/130 and Add.1.

A/RES/55/33

Emphasizing the imperative need to adopt measures to avoid accidental,
unauthorized or unexplained incidents arising from computer anomaly or other
technical malfunctions,
Conscious that limited steps relating to detargeting have been taken by the
nuclear-weapon States and that further practical, realistic and mutually reinforcing
steps are necessary to contribute to the improvement in the international climate for
negotiations leading to the elimination of nuclear weapons,
Mindful that reduction of tensions brought about by a change in nuclear
doctrines would positively impact on international peace and security and improve
the conditions for the further reduction and the elimination of nuclear weapons,
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly31 and by the
international community,
Recalling that in the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on
the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons4 it is stated that there exists an
obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion
negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and
effective international control,
Welcoming the call in the United Nations Millennium Declaration6 to seek to
eliminate the dangers posed by weapons of mass destruction and the resolve to strive
for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons,
including the possibility of convening an international conference to identify ways
of eliminating nuclear dangers,
1.
Calls for a review of nuclear doctrines and, in this context, immediate
and urgent steps to reduce the risks of unintentional and accidental use of nuclear
weapons;
2.
Requests the five nuclear-weapon States to take measures towards the
implementation of paragraph 1 of the present resolution;
3.
Calls upon Member States to take the necessary measures to prevent the
proliferation of nuclear weapons in all its aspects and to promote nuclear
disarmament, with the objective of eliminating nuclear weapons;
4.
Takes note of the report 48 prepared by the Advisory Board on
Disarmament Matters and submitted by the Secretary-General in pursuance of
paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 54/54 K of 1 December 1999, including
the need for the Board to continue its discussions on the subject;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to continue to
seek inputs from the Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters on information with
regard to specific measures that would significantly reduce the risk of nuclear war,
including the proposal contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration for
convening an international conference to identify ways of eliminating nuclear
dangers, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session;

48

See A/55/324.

21

A/RES/55/33

6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of the fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Reducing nuclear danger”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

O
R EGIONAL DISARMAMENT
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/58 P of 4 December 1990, 46/36 I of 6 December
1991, 47/52 J of 9 December 1992, 48/75 I of 16 December 1993, 49/75 N of
15 December 1994, 50/70 K of 12 December 1995, 51/45 K of 10 December 1996,
52/38 P of 9 December 1997, 53/77 O of 4 December 1998 and 54/54 N of
1 December 1999 on regional disarmament,
Believing that the efforts of the international community to move towards the
ideal of general and complete disarmament are guided by the inherent human desire
for genuine peace and security, the elimination of the danger of war and the release
of economic, intellectual and other resources for peaceful pursuits,
Affirming the abiding commitment of all States to the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations in the conduct of their international
relations,
Noting that essential guidelines for progress towards general and complete
disarmament were adopted at the tenth special session of the General Assembly,31
Taking note of the guidelines and recommendations for regional approaches to
disarmament within the context of global security adopted by the Disarmament
Commission at its 1993 substantive session, 49
Welcoming the prospects of genuine progress in the field of disarmament
engendered in recent years as a result of negotiations between the two super-Powers,
Taking note of the recent proposals for disarmament at the regional and
subregional levels,
Recognizing the importance of confidence-building measures for regional and
international peace and security,
Convinced that endeavours by countries to promote regional disarmament,
taking into account the specific characteristics of each region and in accordance
with the principle of undiminished security at the lowest level of armaments, would
enhance the security of all States and would thus contribute to international peace
and security by reducing the risk of regional conflicts,
1.
Stresses that sustained efforts are needed, within the framework of the
Conference on Disarmament and under the umbrella of the United Nations, to make
progress on the entire range of disarmament issues;

49

22

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/48/42), annex II.

A/RES/55/33

2.
Affirms that global and regional approaches to disarmament complement
each other and should therefore be pursued simultaneously to promote regional and
international peace and security;
3.
Calls upon States to conclude agreements, wherever possible, for nuclear
non-proliferation, disarmament and confidence-building measures at the regional
and subregional levels;
4.
Welcomes the initiatives towards disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation
and security undertaken by some countries at the regional and subregional levels;
5.
Supports and encourages efforts aimed at promoting confidence-building
measures at the regional and subregional levels in order to ease regional tensions
and to further disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation measures at the regional
and subregional levels;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Regional disarmament”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

P
C ONVENTIONAL ARMS CONTROL AT THE REGIONAL AND SUBREGIONAL LEVELS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/75 J of 16 December 1993, 49/75 O of
15 December 1994, 50/70 L of 12 December 1995, 51/45 Q of 10 December 1996,
52/38 Q of 9 December 1997, 53/77 P of 4 December 1998 and 54/54 M of
1 December 1999,
Recognizing the crucial role of conventional arms control in promoting
regional and international peace and security,
Convinced that conventional arms control needs to be pursued primarily in the
regional and subregional contexts since most threats to peace and security in the
post-cold-war era arise mainly among States located in the same region or
subregion,
Aware that the preservation of a balance in the defence capabilities of States at
the lowest level of armaments would contribute to peace and stability and should be
a prime objective of conventional arms control,
Desirous of promoting agreements to strengthen regional peace and security at
the lowest possible level of armaments and military forces,
Noting with particular interest the initiatives taken in this regard in different
regions of the world, in particular the commencement of consultations among a
number of Latin American countries and the proposals for conventional arms control
made in the context of South Asia, and recognizing, in the context of this subject,
the relevance and value of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, 50
which is a cornerstone of European security,
50

CD/1064.

23

A/RES/55/33

Believing that militarily significant States and States with larger military
capabilities have a special responsibility in promoting such agreements for regional
security,
Believing also that an important objective of conventional arms control in
regions of tension should be to prevent the possibility of military attack launched by
surprise and to avoid aggression,
1.
Decides to give urgent consideration to the issues involved in
conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels;
2.
Requests the Conference on Disarmament, as a first step, to consider the
formulation of principles that can serve as a framework for regional agreements on
conventional arms control, and looks forward to a report of the Conference on this
subject;
3.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Conventional arms control at the regional and subregional levels”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

Q
I LLICIT TRAFFIC IN SMALL ARMS AND LIGHT WEAPONS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/54 R of 1 December 1999,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report, 51
Recognizing the human suffering caused by illicit trafficking in small arms and
that Governments bear the responsibility of intensifying their efforts by developing
an understanding of the issues and practical ways of addressing the problem,
Bearing in mind the interface among violence, criminality, drug trafficking, the
illicit trade in diamonds, terrorism and illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons,
Stressing the importance of the efforts to elaborate an international convention
against transnational organized crime, including a protocol to combat the illicit
manufacturing of and illicit trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and
ammunition, within the framework of the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice,
Convinced of the importance of national, regional and international measures
to combat illicit trafficking in and illicit circulation of small arms and light weapons,
including those suited to indigenous regional approaches,
Welcoming, in this regard, the decision by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity, to convene an African ministerial conference on the
illicit proliferation, circulation and trafficking of small arms and light weapons at
Bamako in November 2000, the establishment of the Consultative Committee by the
States parties to the Inter-American Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of
51

24

A/55/323.

A/RES/55/33

and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials,
the decision by the Council of Ministers of the Southern African Development
Community to conclude its negotiations on a protocol on the control of firearms,
ammunition and other related materials in the region of the Southern African
Development Community, the decision by the States members of the Economic
Community of West African States to implement their Declaration of a Moratorium
on the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons
in West Africa,23 and the adoption by the European Union of the Programme for
Preventing and Combating Illicit Trafficking in Conventional Arms and the other
initiatives it has taken, such as the Joint Action on Small Arms 52 that has been
endorsed by several Member States not members of the European Union,
Noting, in this regard, the commitments made by the Foreign Ministers of the
Group of Eight industrialized countries, contained in the Miyazaki Initiatives for
Conflict Prevention, 53 the Foreign Ministers of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership
Council, the members of the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe in the Joint
Declaration on Responsible Arms Transfers, the members of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe at the Istanbul Summit, the members of the
South Pacific Forum in the Nadi Framework of principles, and by participants in the
Great Lakes Region and Horn of Africa Conference on the Proliferation of Small
Arms in the Nairobi Declaration on the Problem of the Proliferation of Illicit Small
Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa, 54
Noting also that several regional and subregional workshops, seminars and
conferences were held and that individual States have undertaken initiatives to
promote measures to combat illicit trafficking in and illicit circulation of small arms
and light weapons,
Welcoming the assistance provided by States in support of bilateral, regional
and multilateral initiatives aimed at addressing illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons and, in this regard, welcoming also the establishment of the United
Nations Development Programme Trust Fund for Support to Prevention and
Reduction of the Proliferation of Small Arms, the United Nations Trust Fund for the
Consolidation of Peace through Practical Disarmament Measures and the United
Nations Global and Regional Disarmament Trust Fund,
Welcoming also the preparatory process for the 2001 United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
bearing in mind the recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his report
on small arms, 55 prepared with the assistance of the Group of Governmental Experts
on Small Arms, as well as the views of Member States on the objectives, scope,
agenda, dates and venue of the Conference, 56
Recalling the presidential statement issued by the Security Council on 24
September 1999 57 and the request of the Council therein to the Secretary-General to
develop, with the assistance of technical experts and the support of Member States,
a reference manual for use in the field on ecologically safe methods of weapons,
52

A/54/374, annex.
A/55/161-S/2000/714, annex.
54
A/54/860-S/2000/385, annex.
55
A/54/258.
56
A/54/260 and Add.1-3.
57
S/PRST/1999/28; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1999.
53

25

A/RES/55/33

ammunition and explosives destruction in order better to enable Member States to
ensure the disposal of weapons, ammunition and explosives voluntarily surrendered
by civilians or retrieved from former combatants,
Considering that the United Nations could, through a coordinated approach,
collect, share and disseminate information to Member States on useful and
successful practices to prevent the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, and mindful of the role of the mechanism for coordinating action on small
arms in this regard,
Recalling that the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Africa and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, respectively, held workshops on
illicit trafficking in small arms at Lomé and Lima in 1999, and noting with
appreciation the regional seminar held at Jakarta on 3 and 4 May 2000 under the
auspices of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia
and the Pacific,
Mindful of the impact of surplus small arms and light weapons on the illicit
trade in these weapons, and welcoming the practical measures taken by States to
destroy surplus weapons and confiscated or collected weapons, in accordance with
the recommendations of the Secretary-General in his report on small arms,55
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his broad-based
consultations, within available financial resources and with any other assistance
provided by States in a position to do so, and to provide the 2001 United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
with information on the magnitude and scope of illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons, measures to combat illicit trafficking in and circulation of small arms
and light weapons, and the role of the United Nations in collecting, collating,
sharing and disseminating information on illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons;
2.
Encourages States to promote regional and subregional initiatives and
requests the Secretary-General, within available financial resources, and those States
in a position to do so, to assist States in undertaking such initiatives to address the
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons in affected regions, and invites the
Secretary-General to utilize these initiatives as part of his consultations;
3.
Encourages also States in a position to do so to take appropriate national
measures to destroy surplus, confiscated or collected small arms and light weapons,
and to provide, on a voluntary basis, information to the Secretary-General on the
types and quantities of arms destroyed as well as the methods of their destruction,
and requests the Secretary-General to circulate this information annually to all
States;
4.
Invites States in a position to do so to continue to provide assistance,
bilaterally, regionally and through multilateral channels, such as the United Nations,
in support of measures associated with combating illicit trafficking in small arms
and light weapons, including assistance, in response to requests by States, in
collecting and destroying surplus, confiscated or collected small arms and light
weapons;
5.
Invites the Secretary-General to provide advisory and financial
assistance, within available financial resources and with any other assistance

26

A/RES/55/33

provided by States in a position to do so, in response to requests by States, in
support of measures associated with combating illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons, including assistance in collecting and destroying surplus, confiscated
or collected small arms and light weapons;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session an
item entitled “Illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

R
A PATH TO THE TOTAL ELIMINATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 H of 15 December 1994, 50/70 C of
12 December 1995, 51/45 G of 10 December 1996, 52/38 K of 9 December 1997,
53/77 U of 4 December 1998 and 54/54 D of 1 December 1999,
Recognizing that the enhancement of international peace and security and the
promotion of nuclear disarmament mutually complement and strengthen each other,
Reaffirming the crucial importance of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons 3 as the cornerstone of the international regime for nuclear nonproliferation and as an essential foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the progress made by the nuclear-weapon States in the reduction of
their nuclear weapons unilaterally or through negotiation, and the efforts made
towards nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation by the international community,
Reaffirming the conviction that further advancement in nuclear disarmament
will contribute to consolidating the international regime for nuclear nonproliferation, ensuring international peace and security,
Bearing in mind the recent nuclear tests, as well as the regional situations,
which pose a challenge to international efforts to strengthen the global regime for
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons,
Taking note of the report of the Tokyo Forum for Nuclear Non-Proliferation
and Disarmament, 58 bearing in mind the various views of Member States on the
report,
Welcoming the successful adoption of the Final Document of the 2000 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, 7 which contains, inter alia, an unequivocal undertaking by the nuclearweapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals, leading
to nuclear disarmament to which all States parties are committed under article VI of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,

58

A/54/205-S/1999/853, annex.

27

A/RES/55/33

1.
Reaffirms the importance of achieving the universality of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 3 and calls upon States not parties to the
Treaty to accede to it as non-nuclear-weapon States without delay and without
conditions;
2.
Also reaffirms the importance for all States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to fulfil their obligations under the Treaty;
3.
Stresses the central importance of taking the following practical steps for
the systematic and progressive efforts to implement article VI of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and paragraphs 3 and 4 (c) of the decision
on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament of the
1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty:9
(a) The early signature and ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty10 by all States, especially by those States whose ratification is required
for its entry into force, with a view to its early entry into force before 2003, as well
as a moratorium on nuclear-weapon-test explosions or any other nuclear explosions
pending its entry into force;
(b) The immediate commencement of negotiations in the Conference on
Disarmament and the conclusion as early as possible before 2005 of a nondiscriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty
banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices, in accordance with the report of the Special Coordinator of
1995 11 and the mandate contained therein, taking into consideration both nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation objectives and, pending its entry into force, a
moratorium on the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons;
(c) The establishment of an appropriate subsidiary body of the Conference
on Disarmament in the context of establishing a programme of work, with a mandate
to deal with nuclear disarmament;
(d) The inclusion of the principle of irreversibility to apply to nuclear
disarmament, nuclear and other related arms control and reduction measures;
(e) The early entry into force and full implementation of the Treaty on
Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (START II) 5 and the
conclusion of START III as soon as possible, while preserving and strengthening the
Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems of 26 May 1972 between
the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics2 as a
cornerstone of strategic stability and as a basis for further reductions of strategic
offensive weapons, in accordance with its provisions;
(f) Steps by all nuclear-weapon States leading to nuclear disarmament in a
way that promotes international stability, and based on the principle of undiminished
security for all:
(i) Further efforts by all nuclear-weapon States to continue to reduce their
nuclear arsenals, unilaterally or through negotiation;
(ii) Increased transparency by the nuclear-weapon States with regard to their
nuclear weapons capabilities and the implementation of agreements pursuant to
article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and as
voluntary confidence-building measures to support further progress in nuclear
disarmament;

28

A/RES/55/33

(iii) The further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons, based on
unilateral initiatives and as an integral part of the nuclear arms reduction and
disarmament process;
(iv) Concrete agreed measures to reduce further the operational status of
nuclear weapons systems;
(v) A diminishing role for nuclear weapons in security policies so as to
minimize the risk that these weapons will ever be used and to facilitate the
process of their total elimination;
(vi) The engagement, as soon as appropriate, of all nuclear-weapon States in
the process leading to the total elimination of their nuclear weapons;
4.
Recognizes that the realization of a world free of nuclear weapons will
require further steps by the nuclear-weapon States, including:
(a)

The continuation of the nuclear disarmament process beyond START III;

(b) Deeper reductions by all nuclear-weapon States, unilaterally or through
negotiation, in nuclear weapons in the process of working towards their elimination;
5.
Invites the nuclear-weapon States to keep the States Members of the
United Nations duly informed of the progress or efforts made towards nuclear
disarmament;
6.
Welcomes the ongoing efforts in the dismantlement of nuclear weapons,
notes the importance of the safe and effective management of the resultant fissile
materials and calls for arrangements by all nuclear-weapon States to place, as soon
as practicable, the fissile material designated by each of them as no longer required
for military purposes under the International Atomic Energy Agency or other
relevant international verification and arrangements for the disposition of such
material for peaceful purposes in order to ensure that such material remains
permanently outside military programmes;
7.
Stresses the importance of further development of the verification
capabilities, including International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, that will be
required to provide assurance of compliance with nuclear disarmament agreements
for the achievement and maintenance of a nuclear-weapon-free world;
8.
Calls upon all States to redouble their efforts to prevent the proliferation
of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction, including their means of delivery,
confirming and strengthening, if necessary, their policies not to transfer equipment,
materials or technology that could contribute to the proliferation of those weapons;
9.
Also calls upon all States to maintain the highest possible standards of
security, safe custody, effective control and physical protection of all materials that
could contribute to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction;
10. Stresses the importance of the Model Protocol Additional to the
Agreement(s) between State(s) and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the
Application of Safeguards12 with a view to enhancing nuclear non-proliferation, and
encourages all States which have not done so to conclude an additional protocol
with the International Atomic Energy Agency as soon as possible;
11. Welcomes the adoption by the General Conference of the International
Atomic Energy Agency on 22 September 2000 of resolution GC(44)/RES/19, which
contains elements of a plan of action to promote and facilitate the conclusion and

29

A/RES/55/33

entry into force of safeguards agreements and additional protocols, and calls for the
early and full implementation of that resolution;
12. Encourages the constructive role played by civil society in promoting
nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

S
M ONGOLIA ’ S INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND NUCLEAR-WEAPON -FREE STATUS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/77 D of 4 December 1998,
Recalling also the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
as well as the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, 59
Bearing in mind its resolution 49/31 of 9 December 1994 on the protection and
security of small States,
Proceeding from the fact that nuclear-weapon-free status is one of the means
of ensuring the national security of States,
Convinced that the internationally recognized status of Mongolia will
contribute to enhancing stability and confidence-building in the region as well as
promote Mongolia’s security by strengthening its independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, the inviolability of its borders and the preservation of its
ecological balance,
Welcoming the measures taken to implement resolution 53/77 D at the national
and international levels, 60
Recalling that in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held at
Headquarters from 24 April to 19 May 2000, the Conference welcomed the
declaration by Mongolia of its nuclear-weapon-free status and took note of the
adoption by the Mongolian parliament of legislation defining and regulating that
status, 61
Taking note of the efforts undertaken by the five nuclear-weapon States and
Mongolia to implement the provision of the resolution concerning Mongolia’s
nuclear-weapon-free status,
Taking note also of the joint statement of the five nuclear-weapon States made
on 5 October 2000 62 on security assurances in connection with Mongolia’s nuclearweapon-free status, including their commitment to Mongolia to cooperate in the
59

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
See A/55/166 and A/55/181.
61
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, art. VII, para. 8.
62
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, First Committee, 6th meeting, and
corrigendum.
60

30

A/RES/55/33

implementation of General Assembly resolution 53/77 D with respect to Mongolia’s
nuclear-weapon-free status, in accordance with the principles of the Charter,
Noting that the joint statement has been transmitted to the Security Council by
the five nuclear-weapon States, 63
Welcoming Mongolia’s active and positive role in developing peaceful,
friendly and mutually beneficial relations with the States of the region and other
States,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 53/77 D, 64
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 53/77 D entitled “Mongolia’s international security and nuclearweapon-free status”; 64
2.
Takes note also of the adoption by the Mongolian parliament of
legislation defining and regulating its nuclear-weapon-free status as a concrete step
towards promoting the aims of nuclear non-proliferation;
3.
Welcomes the joint statement of the five nuclear-weapon States62
providing security assurances to Mongolia in connection with its nuclear-weaponfree status as a contribution to implementing resolution 53/77 D;
4.
Endorses and supports Mongolia’s good-neighbourly and balanced
relationship with its neighbours as an important element of strengthening regional
peace, security and stability;
5.
Invites Member States to continue to cooperate with Mongolia in taking
the necessary measures to consolidate and strengthen Mongolia’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, the inviolability of its borders, its economic
security, its ecological balance and its nuclear-weapon-free status, as well as its
independent foreign policy;
6.
Appeals to the Member States of the Asia and Pacific region to support
Mongolia’s efforts to join the relevant regional security and economic arrangements;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General and relevant United Nations bodies to
continue to provide assistance to Mongolia in taking the necessary measures
mentioned in paragraph 5 above;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-seventh session on the implementation of the present resolution;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-seventh session
the item entitled “Mongolia’s international security and nuclear-weapon-free status”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

63
64

A/55/530-S/2000/1052, annex.
A/55/166.

31

A/RES/55/33

T
N UCLEAR DISARMAMENT
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 49/75 E of 15 December 1994 on a step-by-step
reduction of the nuclear threat, and its resolutions 50/70 P of 12 December 1995,
51/45 O of 10 December 1996, 52/38 L of 9 December 1997, 53/77 X of
4 December 1998 and 54/54 P of 1 December 1999 on nuclear disarmament,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the goal of the
total elimination of nuclear weapons and the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
world,
Bearing in mind that the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction of 1972 65 and the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their
Destruction of 1993 29 have already established legal regimes on the complete
prohibition of biological and chemical weapons, respectively, and determined to
achieve a nuclear weapons convention on the prohibition of the development,
testing, production, stockpiling, loan, transfer, use and threat of use of nuclear
weapons and on their destruction, and to conclude such an international convention
at an early date,
Recognizing that there now exist conditions for the establishment of a world
free of nuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind paragraph 50 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 31 the first special session devoted to disarmament,
calling for the urgent negotiation of agreements for the cessation of the qualitative
improvement and development of nuclear-weapon systems, and for a comprehensive
and phased programme with agreed time-frames, wherever feasible, for the
progressive and balanced reduction of nuclear weapons and their means of delivery,
leading to their ultimate and complete elimination at the earliest possible time,
Noting the reiteration by the States parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons3 of their conviction that the Treaty is a
cornerstone of nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament and the
reaffirmation by the States parties of the importance of the decision on strengthening
the review process for the Treaty, 66 the decision on principles and objectives for
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament,66 the decision on the extension of the
Treaty66 and the resolution on the Middle East, 66 adopted by the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons,
Reiterating the highest priority accorded to nuclear disarmament in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly and by the
international community,

65

Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.
1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I)), annex.
66

32

A/RES/55/33

Recognizing that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty10 and any
proposed treaty on fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive
devices must constitute disarmament measures, and not only non-proliferation
measures,
Welcoming the entry into force of the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation
of Strategic Offensive Arms (START I), 67 to which Belarus, Kazakhstan, the Russian
Federation, Ukraine and the United States of America are States parties,
Welcoming also the ratification of the Treaty on Further Reduction and
Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (START II) 5 by the Russian Federation, and
looking forward to its early entry into force and its full implementation and to an
early commencement of START III negotiations,
Noting with appreciation the unilateral measures by the nuclear-weapon States
for nuclear arms limitation, and encouraging them to take further such measures,
Recognizing the complementarity of bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral
negotiations on nuclear disarmament, and that bilateral negotiations can never
replace multilateral negotiations in this respect,
Noting the support expressed in the Conference on Disarmament and in the
General Assembly for the elaboration of an international convention to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, and the
multilateral efforts in the Conference on Disarmament to reach agreement on such
an international convention at an early date,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued on 8 July 1996, 4 and
welcoming the unanimous reaffirmation by all Judges of the Court that there exists
an obligation for all States to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion
negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and
effective international control,
Mindful of paragraph 114 and other relevant recommendations in the Final
Document of the Twelfth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Durban, South Africa, from 29 August to 3 September
1998, 42 calling upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish, on a priority
basis, an ad hoc committee to commence negotiations in 1998 on a phased
programme of nuclear disarmament and for the eventual elimination of nuclear
weapons with a specified framework of time,
Recalling paragraph 72 of the final document of the Thirteenth Ministerial
Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Cartagena,
Colombia, on 8 and 9 April 2000,43
1.
Recognizes that, in view of recent political developments, the time is now
opportune for all the nuclear-weapon States to take effective disarmament measures
with a view to the elimination of these weapons;
2.
Also recognizes that there is a genuine need to diminish the role of
nuclear weapons in security policies to minimize the risk that these weapons will
ever be used and to facilitate the process of their total elimination;
67
The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 16: 1991 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.92.IX.1), appendix II.

33

A/RES/55/33

3.
Urges the nuclear-weapon States to stop immediately the qualitative
improvement, development, production and stockpiling of nuclear warheads and
their delivery systems;
4.
Also urges the nuclear-weapon States, as an interim measure, to de-alert
and deactivate immediately their nuclear weapons and to take other concrete
measures to reduce further the operational status of their nuclear weapon systems;
5.
Reiterates its call upon the nuclear-weapon States to undertake the stepby-step reduction of the nuclear threat and to carry out effective nuclear
disarmament measures with a view to the total elimination of these weapons;
6.
Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States, pending the achievement of the
total elimination of nuclear weapons, to agree on an internationally and legally
binding instrument on the joint undertaking not to be the first to use nuclear
weapons, and calls upon all States to conclude an internationally and legally binding
instrument on security assurances of non-use and non-threat of use of nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States;
7.
Urges the nuclear-weapon States to commence plurilateral negotiations
among themselves at an appropriate stage on further deep reductions of nuclear
weapons as an effective measure of nuclear disarmament;
8.
Underlines the importance of applying the principle of irreversibility to
the process of nuclear disarmament, nuclear and other related arms control and
reduction measures;
9.
Welcomes the positive outcome of the 2000 Review Conference of the s
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States, in the Final Document of the
Review Conference, to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals
leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all States parties are committed under
article VI of the Treaty, 8 and the reaffirmation by the States parties that the total
elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons,13 and calls for the full and effective
implementation of the steps set out in the Final Document;
10. Calls for the immediate commencement of negotiations in the
Conference on Disarmament, on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and
internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile
material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices on the basis of the
report of the Special Coordinator11 and the mandate contained therein;
11. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to agree on a programme of work
which includes the immediate commencement of negotiations on such a treaty with
a view to their conclusion within five years;
12. Calls for the conclusion of an international legal instrument or
instruments on adequate security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States;
13. Calls also for the early entry into force and strict observance of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty;10
14. Expresses its regret that the Conference on Disarmament was unable to
establish an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament at its 2000 session, as called
for in General Assembly resolution 54/54 P;

34

A/RES/55/33

15. Reiterates its call upon the Conference on Disarmament to establish, on a
priority basis, an ad hoc committee to deal with nuclear disarmament early in 2001
and to commence negotiations on a phased programme of nuclear disarmament
leading to the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons;
16. Calls for the convening of an international conference on nuclear
disarmament in all its aspects at an early date to identify and deal with concrete
measures of nuclear disarmament;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-sixth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Nuclear disarmament”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

U
T RANSPARENCY IN ARMAMENTS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 46/36 L of 9 December 1991, 47/52 L of
15 December 1992, 48/75 E of 16 December 1993, 49/75 C of 15 December 1994,
50/70 D of 12 December 1995, 51/45 H of 10 December 1996, 52/38 R of
9 December 1997, 53/77 V of 4 December 1998 and 54/54 O of 1 December 1999
entitled “Transparency in armaments”,
Continuing to take the view that an enhanced level of transparency in
armaments contributes greatly to confidence-building and security among States and
that the establishment of the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms 68
constitutes an important step forward in the promotion of transparency in military
matters,
Welcoming the consolidated report of the Secretary-General on the Register,69
which includes the returns of Member States for 1999,
Welcoming also the response of Member States to the request contained in
paragraphs 9 and 10 of resolution 46/36 L to provide data on their imports and
exports of arms, as well as available background information regarding their
military holdings, procurement through national production and relevant policies,
Welcoming further the report of the Secretary-General on the continuing
operation of the Register and its further development, 70
Stressing that the continuing operation of the Register and its further
development should be reviewed in order to secure a Register that is capable of
attracting the widest possible participation,

68

See resolution 46/36 L.
A/55/299 and Add.1-3.
70
See A/55/281.
69

35

A/RES/55/33

1.
Reaffirms its determination to ensure the effective operation of the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms,68 as provided for in paragraphs 7 to 10 of
resolution 46/36 L;
2.
Endorses the report of the Secretary-General on the continuing operation
of the Register and its further development and the recommendations contained
therein;70
3.
Calls upon Member States, with a view to achieving universal
participation, to provide the Secretary-General by 31 May annually with the
requested data and information for the Register, including nil reports if appropriate,
on the basis of resolutions 46/36 L and 47/52 L, the recommendations contained in
paragraph 64 of the 1997 report of the Secretary-General on the continuing
operation of the Register and its further development 71 and the recommendations
contained in paragraph 94 of the 2000 report of the Secretary-General and the
appendices and annexes thereto; 70
4.
Invites Member States in a position to do so, pending further
development of the Register, to provide additional information on procurement from
national production and military holdings and to make use of the “Remarks” column
in the standardized reporting form to provide additional information such as types or
models;
5.
Reaffirms its decision, with a view to further development of the
Register, to keep the scope of and participation in the Register under review and, to
that end:
(a) Recalls its request to Member States to provide the Secretary-General
with their views on the continuing operation of the Register and its further
development and on transparency measures related to weapons of mass destruction;
(b) Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of a group of
governmental experts to be convened in 2003, on the basis of equitable geographical
representation, to prepare a report on the continuing operation of the Register and its
further development, taking into account the work of the Conference on
Disarmament, the views expressed by Member States and the reports of the
Secretary-General on the continuing operation of the Register and its further
development, with a view to a decision at its fifty-eighth session;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to implement the recommendations in his
2000 report on the continuing operation of the Register and its further development
and to ensure that sufficient resources are made available for the Secretariat to
operate and maintain the Register;
7.
Invites the Conference on Disarmament to consider continuing its work
undertaken in the field of transparency in armaments;
8.
Reiterates its call upon all Member States to cooperate at the regional
and subregional levels, taking fully into account the specific conditions prevailing in
the region or subregion, with a view to enhancing and coordinating international
efforts aimed at increased openness and transparency in armaments;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-sixth session on progress made in implementing the present resolution;
71

36

A/52/316 and Corr.2.

A/RES/55/33

10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Transparency in armaments”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

V
I MPLEMENTATION OF THE C ONVENTION ON THE P ROHIBITION OF THE U SE,
S TOCKPILING, P RODUCTION AND T RANSFER OF ANTI- PERSONNEL M INES
AND ON T HEIR D ESTRUCTION
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/54 B of 1 December 1999,
Reaffirming its determination to put an end to the suffering and casualties
caused by anti-personnel mines, which kill or maim hundreds of people every week,
mostly innocent and defenceless civilians and especially children, obstruct economic
development and reconstruction, inhibit the repatriation of refugees and internally
displaced persons, and have other severe consequences for years after emplacement,
Believing it necessary to do the utmost to contribute in an efficient and
coordinated manner to facing the challenge of removing anti-personnel mines placed
throughout the world, and to assure their destruction,
Wishing to do the utmost in ensuring assistance for the care and rehabilitation,
including the social and economic reintegration, of mine victims,
Welcoming the entry into force on 1 March 1999 of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction, 72 and noting with satisfaction the work undertaken
to implement the Convention and the substantial progress made towards addressing
the global landmine problem,
Recalling the First Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention, held at
Maputo from 3 to 7 May 1999, and the reaffirmation made in the Maputo
Declaration 73 of a commitment to the total eradication of anti-personnel mines,
Recalling also the Second Meeting of States Parties to the Convention, held at
Geneva from 11 to 15 September 2000, and the Declaration of the Second Meeting
of States Parties reaffirming the commitment to implement completely and fully all
provisions of the Convention, 74
Noting with satisfaction that additional States have ratified or acceded to the
Convention, bringing the total number of States that have formally accepted the
obligations of the Convention to one hundred and eight,
Emphasizing the desirability of attracting the adherence of all States to the
Convention, and determined to work strenuously towards the promotion of its
universalization,

72

See CD/1478.
APLC/MSP.1/1999/1, part II.
74
APLC/MSP/2/2000/1, part II.
73

37

A/RES/55/33

Noting with regret that anti-personnel mines continue to be used in conflicts
around the world, causing human suffering and impeding post-conflict development,
1.
Invites all States that have not signed the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on
Their Destruction 72 to accede to it without delay;
2.
Urges all States that have signed but not ratified the Convention to ratify
it without delay;
3.
Stresses the importance of the full and effective implementation of, and
compliance with, the Convention;
4.
Urges all States parties to provide the Secretary-General with complete
and timely information, as required in article 7 of the Convention, in order to
promote transparency and compliance with the Convention;
5.
Invites all States that have not ratified the Convention or acceded to it to
provide, on a voluntary basis, information to make global mine action efforts more
effective;
6.
Renews its call upon all States and other relevant parties to work together
to promote, support and advance the care, rehabilitation and social and economic
reintegration of mine victims, mine awareness programmes, and the removal of antipersonnel mines placed throughout the world and the assurance of their destruction;
7.
Invites and encourages all interested States, the United Nations, other
relevant international organizations or institutions, regional organizations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and relevant non-governmental
organizations to participate in the programme of inter-sessional work established at
the First Meeting of States Parties to the Convention and further developed at the
Second Meeting of States Parties to the Convention;
8.
Welcomes the generous offer of the Government of Nicaragua to host the
Third Meeting of States Parties to the Convention;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with article 11,
paragraph 2, of the Convention, to undertake the preparations necessary to convene
the Third Meeting of States Parties to the Convention at Managua, from 18 to
21 September 2001, and, on behalf of States parties and in accordance with article
11, paragraph 4, of the Convention, to invite States not parties to the Convention, as
well as the United Nations, other relevant international organizations or institutions,
regional organizations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and relevant
non-governmental organizations to attend the Meeting as observers;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

38

A/RES/55/33

W
E STABLISHMENT OF A NUCLEAR-WEAPON -FREE ZONE IN CENTRAL ASIA
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 52/38 S of 9 December 1997 and 53/77 A of
4 December 1998 and its decision 54/417 of 1 December 1999,
Recalling also paragraphs 60, 61, 62 and 64 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly31 and the provisions of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 3 and recalling further the relevant
paragraphs of the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons17 and of the report of its
Main Committee II 75 related to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
Central Asia,
Convinced that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones is conducive to
the achievement of general and complete disarmament,
Emphasizing the importance of internationally recognized agreements on the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in various parts of the world and on the
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime,
Welcoming the adoption by the Disarmament Commission at its 1999
substantive session of principles and guidelines for the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States
of the region concerned, 30
Believing that the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia
on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region 76 and
bearing in mind the specific characteristics of the region, can enhance the security of
the States involved and strengthen global and regional peace and security,
Recalling the Almaty Declaration of the heads of State of the Central Asian
States of 28 February 1997 77 on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
Central Asia, the statement issued at Tashkent on 15 September 1997 by the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan
and Uzbekistan on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central
Asia 78 and the Communiqué of the Consultative Meeting of Experts of the Central
Asian Countries, the Nuclear-Weapon States and the United Nations, held at
Bishkek on 9 and 10 July 1998, 79 on the elaboration of acceptable ways and means
of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia,
Reaffirming the universally recognized role of the United Nations in the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones,
1.
Notes with appreciation the support of all States for the initiative to
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia;
75

2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Final Document., vol. II (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Part III)), sect. 6, document NPT/CONF.2000/MC.II/1.
76
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
77
A/52/112, annex.
78
A/52/390, annex.
79
A/53/183, annex.

39

A/RES/55/33

2.
Welcomes the desire of all five States of the Central Asian region to
finalize work on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia
and the concrete steps that they have taken to that end to prepare the legal
groundwork for the initiative and the progress that they have achieved in this regard;
3.
Calls upon all five Central Asian States to continue their dialogue with
the five nuclear-weapon States on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in Central Asia;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to continue to
provide assistance to the Central Asian States in the elaboration of an agreement on
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia;
5.
Decides to continue its consideration of the question of the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia at its fifty-sixth session under the
agenda item entitled “General and complete disarmament”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

X
F OLLOW- UP TO THE ADVISORY OPINION OF THE I NTERNATIONAL COURT OF J USTICE
ON THE L EGALITY OF THE T HREAT OR U SE OF N UCLEAR WEAPONS
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/75 K of 15 December 1994, 51/45 M of
10 December 1996, 52/38 O of 9 December 1997, 53/77 W of 4 December 1998 and
54/54 Q of 1 December 1999,
Convinced that the continuing existence of nuclear weapons poses a threat to
all humanity and that their use would have catastrophic consequences for all life on
Earth, and recognizing that the only defence against a nuclear catastrophe is the total
elimination of nuclear weapons and the certainty that they will never be produced
again,
Reaffirming the commitment of the international community to the goal of the
total elimination of nuclear weapons and the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free
world,
Mindful of the solemn obligations of States parties, undertaken in article VI of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 3 particularly to pursue
negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear
arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament,
Recalling the principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament adopted at the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,9
Welcoming the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to
accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear
disarmament,

40

A/RES/55/33

Recalling the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in its
resolution 50/245 of 10 September 1996, and expressing its satisfaction at the
increasing number of States that have signed and ratified the Treaty,
Recognizing with satisfaction that the Antarctic Treaty36 and the treaties of
Tlatelolco,32 Rarotonga,33 Bangkok 34 and Pelindaba 35 are gradually freeing the entire
southern hemisphere and adjacent areas covered by those treaties from nuclear
weapons,
Noting the efforts by the States possessing the largest inventories of nuclear
weapons to reduce their stockpiles of such weapons through bilateral agreements or
arrangements and unilateral decisions, and calling for the intensification of such
efforts to accelerate the significant reduction of nuclear-weapon arsenals,
Recognizing the need for a multilaterally negotiated and legally binding
instrument to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the threat or use of nuclear
weapons,
Reaffirming the central role of the Conference on Disarmament as the single
multilateral disarmament negotiating forum, and regretting the lack of progress in
disarmament negotiations, particularly nuclear disarmament, in the Conference on
Disarmament during its 2000 session,
Emphasizing the need for the Conference on Disarmament to commence
negotiations on a phased programme for the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons with a specified framework of time,
Desiring to achieve the objective of a legally binding prohibition of the
development, production, testing, deployment, stockpiling, threat or use of nuclear
weapons and their destruction under effective international control,
Recalling the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued on 8 July 1996,4
Taking note of the relevant portions of the note by the Secretary-General 80
relating to the implementation of resolution 54/54 Q,
1.
Underlines once again the unanimous conclusion of the International
Court of Justice that there exists an obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a
conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict
and effective international control;
2.
Calls once again upon all States immediately to fulfil that obligation by
commencing multilateral negotiations in 2001 leading to an early conclusion of a
convention prohibiting the development, production, testing, deployment,
stockpiling, transfer, threat or use of nuclear weapons and providing for their
elimination;
3.
Requests all States to inform the Secretary-General of the efforts and
measures they have taken on the implementation of the present resolution and
nuclear disarmament, and requests the Secretary-General to apprise the General
Assembly of that information at its fifty-sixth session;

80

A/55/131 and Add.1.

41

A/RES/55/33

4.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the
item entitled “Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons”.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

Y
T HE C ONFERENCE ON D ISARMAMENT DECISION (CD/1547) OF 11 AUGUST 1998 TO
ESTABLISH , UNDER ITEM 1 OF ITS AGENDA ENTITLED “C ESSATION OF THE NUCLEAR
ARMS RACE AND NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT ”, AN AD HOC COMMITTEE TO NEGOTIATE ,
ON THE BASIS OF THE REPORT OF THE S PECIAL C OORDINATOR (CD/1299) AND
THE MANDATE CONTAINED THEREIN , A NON-DISCRIMINATORY, MULTILATERAL
AND INTERNATIONALLY AND EFFECTIVELY VERIFIABLE TREATY BANNING THE
PRODUCTION OF FISSILE MATERIAL FOR NUCLEAR WEAPONS OR OTHER
NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVE DEVICES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/75 L of 16 December 1993 and 53/77 I of
4 December 1998,
Convinced that a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and
effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices would be a significant contribution to
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation,
Recalling the 1998 report of the Conference on Disarmament, in which, inter
alia, the Conference records that, in proceeding to take a decision on this matter, that
decision is without prejudice to any further decisions on the establishment of further
subsidiary bodies under agenda item 1 and that intensive consultations will be
pursued to seek the views of the members of the Conference on Disarmament on
appropriate methods and approaches for dealing with agenda item 1, taking into
consideration all proposals and views in that respect, 81
1.
Recalls the decision by the Conference on Disarmament81 to establish,
under item 1 of its agenda entitled “Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear
disarmament”, an ad hoc committee which shall negotiate, on the basis of the report
of the Special Coordinator 11 and the mandate contained therein, a nondiscriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty
banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices;
2.
Urges the Conference on Disarmament to agree on a programme of work
that includes the immediate commencement of negotiations on such a treaty.
69th plenary meeting
20 November 2000

81
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/53/27),
para. 10.

42
