A/RES/74/15

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 December 2019

Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 21 (b)
Groups of countries in special situations: follow-up to the
second United Nations Conference on Landlocked
Developing Countries

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 5 December 2019
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/74/L.7)]

74/15.

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on
the Implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action for
Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024
The General Assembly
Adopts the following political declaration:

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on
the Implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action for
Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024
Preamble
1.
We, Heads of State and Government, Ministers and High Representatives,
gathered at the United Nations on 5 and 6 December 2019 to review the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014–2024, 1 reaffirm our commitment to the overarching
goal of the Vienna Programme of Action to address the special development needs
and challenges of landlocked developing countries arising from landlockedness,
remoteness and geographical constraints in a more coherent manner and we
collectively commit to strengthened cooperation in the context of sustainable
development for landlocked developing countries.
2.
We reaffirm our commitment to the full, effective and timely implementation of
the Vienna Programme of Action, which is integral to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
__________________
1

19-20986 (E)

Resolution 69/137, annex II.

121219

*1920986*

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the Implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024

A/RES/74/15

Development 2 and which is in line with the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, 3 the Paris Agreement 4 and
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, 5 as well as with other
international frameworks, such as the New Urban Agenda. 6 Effective implementation
of the Vienna Programme of Action and the 2030 Agenda are mutually reinforcing
and crucial for the attainment of the Sustainable Developme nt Goals.
3.
We emphasize that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including
extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement
for sustainable development.
4.
We are committed in our endeavour to help to turn landlocked developing
countries into land-linked countries; for this we must come together in durable,
transparent, accountable and effective partnerships between landlocked developing
countries and transit countries and their development partners, as well as with a range
of stakeholders, including civil society, the private sector, academia and youth. We
further reaffirm that gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls will
make a crucial contribution to the achievement of the Vienna Pro gramme of Action.
5.
We recognize the importance of unfettered, efficient and cost -effective access
for landlocked developing countries to and from the sea, on the basis of freedom of
transit and other related matters, in accordance with the applicable rul es of
international law.
Review and assessment of progress, gaps and challenges
6.
We take note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the Vienna Programme of Action 7 and recognize the many efforts at all levels made
by landlocked developing countries and transit countries, with the support of
development partners, and the progress achieved since 2014, building on the Almaty
Programme of Action. 8 At the same time, we remain concerned that the progress made
is not enough for landlocked developing countries to achieve the Vienna Programme
of Action targets and sustainable development. We note with concern that one third
of the population of landlocked developing countries is still living in extreme poverty,
the prevalence of moderate to severe food insecurity persists, the average human
development index of landlocked developing countries lags behind the world average
and economic growth of landlocked developing countries has declined during the
review period.
7.
We commend those landlocked developing countries that have met the criteria
for graduation from least developed country status.
8.
We recognize that a key challenge faced by landlocked developing countries is
the lack of reliable and regular data to inform policy and ensure follow -up, including
on some of the specific objectives of the Vienna Programme of Action.
__________________

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.
4
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
5
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
6
Resolution 71/256, annex.
7
A/74/113.
8
Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked Developing
Countries within a New Global Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for Landlocked
and Transit Developing Countries (Report of the International Ministerial Conference of
Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial
and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28 and
29 August 2003 (A/CONF.202/3), annex I).
2
3

2/9

19-20986

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the Implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024

A/RES/74/15

9.
We recognize the progress that has been made by landlocked developing
countries and transit developing countries in ratifying the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade Facilitation, the revised Kyoto Convention, 9 the TIR
Convention 10 and other relevant international conventions. We note, however, that
there is a need for landlocked developing countries and transit countries to effectively
implement their obligations under these conventions and agreements.
10. We welcome the recent developments among landlocked develop ing countries
and their transit neighbours in building transit transport and economic corridors.
Progress has been made in reducing travel time and corresponding costs along
corridors, significantly reducing the time spent at borders and at intermodal poin ts.
11. Progress has been made in landlocked developing countries and transit
developing countries towards the expansion and upgrading of railways, roads, ports,
air transport and inland waterways. Some missing links have been closed , and
regional integration has been strengthened, but limited connectivity of landlocked
developing countries remains one of the main obstacles to their enhanced trade
integration.
12. We note that infrastructure in landlocked developing countries for the
production, supply, transmission and distribution of modern and renewable energy
services has been expanded and upgraded. However, more than 40 per cent of the
population of landlocked developing countries still does not have access to electricity,
and the rural-urban gap remains significant. The pace of completion of power projects
is too slow.
13. We recognize that access to information and communications technologies in
landlocked developing countries has increased. However, we note that landlocked
developing countries continue to face major constraints that include infrastructural
gaps and the relatively high cost of information and communications technology
services, in particular accessing submarine cables.
14. The major challenges in infrastructure development include limited financial
resources to close the significant infrastructure financing gaps, lack of capacity to
develop bankable infrastructure projects, limited technologies and lack of resilient
infrastructure.
15. We welcome efforts made by landlocked developing countries to enhance their
participation in global trade, including through mainstreaming trade into their
national strategies and updating their trade-related policies. However, we note that
landlocked developing countries continue to face greater difficulties than coastal
countries in expanding international trade. The competitiveness of landlocked
developing countries remains limited owing to the high cost of trade, which is double
that of transit developing countries. In that regard, we note with concern that the share
of landlocked developing countries in global trade has declined and their share of
global merchandise exports has decreased, while the total value of merchandise
imports has increased.
16. We are concerned that most of the exports of landlo cked developing countries
remain highly concentrated on a few primary commodities and that service exports
are still dominated by the tourism sector. The lack of diversification of exports of
landlocked developing countries exacerbates their vulnerability to excessive price
volatility and exogenous economic and environmental shocks.
__________________

Protocol of Amendment to the International Convention on the Simplification and Harmonization
of Customs Procedures (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2370, No. 13561).
10
Customs Convention on the International Transport of Goods under Cover of TIR Car nets
(United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1079, No. 16510).
9

19-20986

3/9

A/RES/74/15

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the Implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024

17. We note the lack of availability of trade finance in landlocked developing
countries. We reaffirm that international trade is an engine for inclusive economic
growth and poverty reduction and contributes to the promotion of sustainable
development.
18. We note with concern the lack of access to capital for micro-, small and mediumsized enterprises, including women- and youth-owned enterprises, which affects
overall private sector development and economic growth in landlocked developing
countries. We are further concerned that landlocked developing countries still fall
behind in their electronic commerce (e-commerce) readiness.
19. We recognize that the participation of landlocked developing countries in
regional and subregional trade, transport and transit facilitation agreements and
initiatives aimed at deepening regional integration, enhancing infrastructure
connectivity and facilitating the movement of cargo across border s has increased.
Landlocked developing countries have entered into bilateral and plurilateral trade,
transport and transit-related agreements with their neighbours. In this regard, we take
note of the entry into force of the agreement establishing the Afri can Continental Free
Trade Area.
20. We are encouraged by signs that broader cooperation in areas such as
investment, research and development and policies supportive of regional industrial
development and regional connectivity is taking place both among landlocked
developing countries and between landlocked developing countries and their
neighbours.
21. Since 2014, many landlocked developing countries have placed structural
economic transformation at the centre of their national development plans and
adopted strategies for diversification and upgrading of their economies,
industrialization, export promotion and private sector development, but landlocked
developing countries have made limited advancement towards achieving structural
transformation, still have limited manufacturing and industrial capacity to create high
value added products, some landlocked developing countries even showing signs of
de-industrialization of their economies.
22. We acknowledge the efforts by landlocked developing countries to s upport
private sector development and emphasize that an enabling legal and regulatory
environment for the local private sector is one of the most important requirements for
promoting sustainable, inclusive and sustained economic growth, developing an
industrial base, attracting investment and bringing about structural transformation.
23. We express concern at the limited technological capabilities, low technology
intensity and acquisition and low investments in research and development in
landlocked developing countries.
24. Landlocked developing countries are highly vulnerable to the adverse impact of
climate change and remain heavily affected by desertification, land degradation,
biodiversity loss, drought and receding glaciers. We are concerned about the
economic, social and environmental impacts of sudden- and slow-onset disasters in
landlocked developing countries, as well as the impacts of disasters in transit
countries on the economies of landlocked developing countries.
25. We note that lack of adequate financial resources and capacity constraints are
some of the biggest challenges that landlocked developing countries face in their
efforts to implement the Vienna Programme of Action and achieve sustained growth
and sustainable development.
26. We recognize that landlocked developing countries and their transit country
neighbours need to effectively mobilize adequate domestic and external resources,
4/9

19-20986

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the Implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024

A/RES/74/15

both public and private, for the effective implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action. We acknowledge the importance of cohesive, nationally owned sustainable
development strategies, supported by integrated national financing frameworks. We
note that the average tax revenue in landlocked developing countries is not sufficient
to meet development needs. We express concern that illicit financial flows have an
adverse impact on domestic resource mobilization and on the sustainability of public
finances in landlocked developing countries.
27. We commend the greater international attention that has been give n to
landlocked developing countries since the adoption of the Vienna Programme of
Action, including increased official development assistance and aid for trade and
South-South and triangular cooperation. We reaffirm the need for renewed and
strengthened partnerships for the landlocked developing countries’ development. We
welcome that official development assistance flows to landlocked developing
countries have increased in real terms. At the same time, we note that much of the
official development assistance continues to be concentrated in a few landlocked
developing countries. We also express concern over the continued decline in foreign
direct investment flows to landlocked developing countries, which is an impediment
to their economic growth.
Call for action to accelerate the implementation of the Vienna Programme
of Action
28. Having noted the progress made and challenges encountered by landlocked
developing countries in the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action,
which is integral to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we call for action
in the following key areas.
29. We underscore the need to capture data to monitor the specific objectives of the
Vienna Programme of Action and commit to providing landlocked developing
countries with capacity-building support to strengthen their national statistical
systems.
30. We commit to targeted and accelerated action to remove all legal, social and
economic barriers to achieve gender equality and the empowerment of all women and
girls, and the realization and enjoyment of their human rights.
31. We underscore the importance of mobilizing adequate resources to accelerate
the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action and to support the landlocked
developing countries in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and targets by
2030.
32. We call upon landlocked developing countries and transit countries to
effectively implement their obligations under all relevant international, regional and
bilateral agreements to improve transit in a manner consistent with their trade and
development objectives.
33. Landlocked developing countries and transit countries should consider
promoting a corridor approach to improve trade and transit transport. We call upon
landlocked developing countries and transit countries to make additional efforts to
reduce travel time along the corridors and to adopt an integrated and sustainable
approach to the management of international transport corridors in order to avoid the
duplication of efforts, to promote regional connectivity and to maximize the
associated economic opportunities.
34. We call upon the United Nations system and other relevant international and
regional organizations to provide, within their mandates, policy, analytical and
technical support towards the development, functioning and management of
corridors.
19-20986

5/9

A/RES/74/15

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the Implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024

35. We encourage landlocked developing countries and transit countries to integrate
the development, upgrading and maintenance of national and transboundary transport
infrastructure into their national development strategies.
36. We call upon landlocked developing countries and transit countries, with the
support of their development and trade partners, to develop regionally integrated,
sustainable, climate- and disaster-resilient transport infrastructure and to close
missing links in order to reduce the cost of doing business and increase intraregional
trade.
37. We encourage landlocked developing countries and transit countries to create
an enabling environment for public and private sustainable investment and
infrastructure operations.
38. We encourage landlocked developing countries and transit countries to expand
and upgrade supply, transmission and distribution infrastructure for electricity,
including off-grid solutions, to accelerate the preparation of power projects,
especially renewables, while acknowledging the role of all energy sources and
technologies in the energy mix, to scale up projects on cross -border interconnectors
and to improve transformational energy access and ensure access to affordable,
reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all.
39. We invite landlocked developing countries and transit countries to collaborate
to establish information and communications technology infrastructure, applications
and services with the support of Governments, the private sector, development
partners, multilateral financial and development institutions and regional banks. The
substantial digital divides between landlocked developing countries and the
developed countries need to be addressed.
40. We call upon development partners, the United Nations system, international
financial institutions and international and regional organizations to provide technical
support to landlocked developing countries for the formulation and implementation
of bankable infrastructure and transport development projects.
41. We encourage landlocked developing countries to continue to formulate policies
and strategies aimed at diversifying their export structure and adding value to their
exports in order to expand their participation in sustainable regional and global value
chains.
42. We encourage landlocked developing countries, with the support of their
development and trade partners, to reduce “before the border” trade costs by
improving transport networks and customs procedures, as well as by the application
of technology-driven and information and communications technology solutions to
expedite international trade.
43. We reaffirm the importance of the World Trade Organization Agreement on
Trade Facilitation in addressing high trade and transit costs and call for full and timely
implementation of the Agreement by all the members of the World Trade
Organization. Landlocked developing countries should promptly notify their
technical assistance needs. We also invite development partners and relevant
organizations to enhance support to landlocked developing countries to implement
their World Trade Organization commitments.
44. We call upon all Member States to enhance market access for exports from
landlocked developing countries, except for arms and armaments. We also call upon
development partners to support efforts by landlocked developing countries to
diversify their exports, including through supporting their national export strategies
and trade policies.

6/9

19-20986

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the Implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024

A/RES/74/15

45. We call upon development partners and multilateral development banks to
support landlocked developing countries in strengthening trade financing for micro -,
small and medium-sized enterprises and promoting trade finance facilitation
programmes.
46. We underscore the potential for landlocked developing countries to facilitate
their integration into regional and global value chains and to expand their trade
capabilities and connectivity by strengthening productive linkages, supporting the
development of supply chains within the region and improving the quality and the
effective implementation of regional integration agreements.
47. We call upon the United Nations system, regional and international development
partners and other international organizations to support landlocked developing
countries and transit countries in leveraging the opportunities provided by regional
initiatives and integration.
48. We encourage landlocked developing countries to promote innovative solutions
in sectors such as agriculture, transport, information and communications, finance,
energy, health, water and sanitation and education, and effective public -private
partnerships through investments in education and skills development, including
technical, vocational and tertiary education and training, while ensuring gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls at all levels. We recognize that
these investments are required to reduce economic volatility, enable landlocked
developing countries to reap the demographic dividend, a nd achieve lifelong learning
and broader human development.
49. We call upon landlocked developing countries to encourage private sector
development by enhancing private sector capabilities, as well as improving economic
governance and business regulations.
50. We are determined to build economies and societies in landlocked developing
countries that are resilient to external economic shocks, disasters and the adverse
impact of climate change and environmental degradation. We urge development
partners, the United Nations system and other international and regional organizations
to support landlocked developing countries’ efforts to develop and implement
nationally determined contributions and national long-term climate change strategies
in line with the goals of the Paris Agreement and to develop tools to prevent and
combat desertification, land degradation, biodiversity loss, drought and receding
glaciers, as well as to strengthen integrated water resources management, disaster risk
prevention, preparedness and response, and early warning and early action systems.
51. We encourage development partners to support landlocked developing countries
in building institutional and human capacities.
52. We call upon the United Nations system to provide assistance t o countries
graduating from the least developed country category in the implementation of their
national transition strategies and to consider country-specific support for graduated
countries for a fixed period of time and in a predictable manner, and call upon
development partners to support smooth transition.
53. We encourage landlocked developing countries to strengthen their services
sector and enhance their efforts to integrate into e-commerce. In this regard, we
encourage international partners to provide capacity-building to assist landlocked
developing countries in addressing gaps in legal and regulatory frameworks and
developing digital skills.
54. We encourage landlocked developing countries to develop national science,
technology and innovation policies and to create enabling science, technology and
innovation infrastructure. We invite development partners and international
19-20986

7/9

A/RES/74/15

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the Implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024

organizations to support efforts by landlocked developing countries to establish or
strengthen national and regional centres for science, technology and innovation
development.
55. We welcome existing technology and research funds established by
development partners and international and regional financial institutions, and
encourage similar initiatives to support landlocked developing countries for a greater
use and adaptation of technology.
56. We encourage landlocked developing countries to continue to make improvements
in the regulatory environment for business, in particular for micro -, small and mediumsized enterprises. We also urge enhanced international and domestic investments in
research and development in landlocked developing countries.
57. We encourage landlocked developing countries to strengthen their efforts in
raising domestic resources, including through carrying out reforms in tax
administration, broadening the tax base and strengthening domestic capital markets,
and call upon the international community to assist these efforts in line with national
priorities.
58. We call upon development partners to strengthen support to landlocked
developing countries, taking into account all sources. At the same time, we encourage
landlocked developing countries to better leverage official development assistance
for attracting further finance from other sources, such as foreign direct investment,
public-private sector partnerships and other sources of finance.
59. We encourage Member States to facilitate foreign direct invest ment flows to
landlocked developing countries and call upon landlocked and transit developing
countries to promote an enabling environment to attract foreign direct investment and
private sector involvement.
60. We call upon development partners to continue to provide aid for trade to
landlocked developing countries, consistent with World Trade Organization
guidelines.
61. We call upon the developing and developed countries to continue to support
landlocked developing countries through South-South and triangular cooperation in
line with the respective modalities of cooperation.
62. We welcome the establishment of the International Think Tank for Landlocked
Developing Countries and call upon all landlocked developing countries that have not
done so to ratify or accede to the multilateral agreement for its establishment. We
invite Member States and other relevant stakeholders to consider making voluntary
contributions to the Think Tank budget.
63. We call upon the United Nations system, including the regional economic
commissions, as well as all relevant international and regional organizations, to
continue to provide the support necessary to accelerate the implementation of the
Vienna Programme of Action.
64. We call upon the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States to
continue to ensure the coordinated follow-up to, effective monitoring of and reporting
on the implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action.
65. We call upon the Secretary-General to continue to mobilize the resources
necessary to enable the Landlocked Developing Countries Unit of the Office of the
High Representative to fulfil its mandate in support of the landlocked developing
countries.

8/9

19-20986

Political Declaration of the High-level Midterm Review on the Implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024

A/RES/74/15

Third United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries
66. We invite the General Assembly to consider holding the third United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries in 2024.
39th plenary meeting
5 December 2019

19-20986

9/9
