United Nations

A/RES/70/294

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 August 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda item 23 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 25 July 2016
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/70/L.56)]

70/294. Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level
Midterm Review of the Implementation of the Istanbul
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the Decade 2011–2020
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 69/231 of 19 December 2014, in which it decided to
conduct a comprehensive high-level midterm review of the implementation of the
Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2011–2020, 1 as well as its resolutions 70/216 of 22 December 2015 and 70/261 of
15 April 2016,
1.
Endorses the Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level
Midterm Review of the Implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action for the
Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020, adopted by the
Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review, which is contained in the annex to the
present resolution;
2.
Expresses its profound gratitude to the Government and the people of
Turkey for hosting the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review from 27 to
29 May 2016 and for providing all the necessary support.
112th plenary meeting
25 July 2016

Annex
Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm
Review of the Implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020
1.
We, the Heads of State and Government and High Representatives
participating in the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the
_______________
1

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey,
9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.

15-17048 (E)

*1517048*

Please recycle

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

Implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2011–2020, are gathered here in Antalya, Turkey, from
27 to 29 May 2016 to undertake a comprehensive review of the implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action, 2 to share best practices and lessons learned and
identify obstacles and constraints encountered and actions and initiatives needed to
overcome them, as well as new challenges and emerging issues, to reaffirm the
global commitment to address the special needs of the least developed countries
made in Istanbul, Turkey, and to further strengthen the global partnership for
development for the least developed countries in all priority areas of the Istanbul
Programme of Action in order to ensure the timely, effective and full
implementation of the Programme of Action during the remainder of the decade, in
the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 3 the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development, 4 which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda, supports a nd
complements it and helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with
concrete policies and actions, the Paris Agreement, 5 adopted by parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 6 and the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030. 7
2.
We recognize the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review as an
opportunity to highlight the concrete measures, initiatives, partnerships and actions
that various stakeholders have undertaken to date to support the implemen tation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action and to launch other concrete measures, initiatives
and partnerships, individually or collectively, that have the potential to further
progress the implementation of the Programme of Action, building on the
momentum of recent and relevant United Nations meetings, agendas and
conferences and the decisions adopted therein.
3.
We recognize that over the past few decades the world has witnessed
remarkable socioeconomic progress, with most of the Millennium Development
Goals and targets achieved globally. However, not all countries have fully shared in
this global progress. Performances among the least developed countries were mixed.
The majority of the least developed countries, which constitute the poorest and most
vulnerable group of countries, were not able to achieve most of the Millennium
Development Goals. Nevertheless, many of the least developed countries have
adopted stronger policies, strengthened governance and achieved substantial gains
in reducing the prevalence of extreme poverty and improved health and education
outcomes. Progress towards the Millennium Development Goals and other
internationally agreed development goals was slowest in the least developed
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations; those countries require contextspecific approaches, including targeted national policies and international support.
4.
We recognize that, despite the many challenges and constraints, the least
developed countries represent an enormous human and natural r esource potential for
world economic growth, welfare, prosperity and food and energy security.
_______________
2

Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey,
9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
3
Resolution 70/1.
4
Resolution 69/313, annex.
5
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
6
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
7
Resolution 69/283, annex II.

2/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

Therefore, a strengthened global partnership that effectively addresses the special
needs of the least developed countries, including children, young people and
women, will contribute to the cause of peace, prosperity, poverty eradication and
sustainable development for all.
5.
We reaffirm our commitment to the full, effective and timely implementation
of the Istanbul Programme of Action. We also reaffirm our com mitment to the full
and timely implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
our support for mainstreaming it into the national development policies and
programmes of the least developed countries. We also reaffirm our determination to
mobilize the means required to implement this Agenda through a revitalized global
partnership for sustainable development, in a spirit of global solidarity, focused in
particular on the eradication of poverty and promotion of inclusive growth and the
implementation of social protection systems, particularly for the poorest and most
vulnerable.
I.

State of progress and lessons learned in the implementation of the Istanbul
Programme of Action

6.
We note that many of the least developed countries have made co nsiderable
progress in achieving positive and sustainable development outcomes, in spite of
significant challenges and constraints. For many of them, growth performance and
prospects have been good on a sustained basis. Most of the least developed countrie s
have significantly increased domestic resource mobilization and use for sustainable
development. National ownership and leadership at the country level is essential for
sustained progress in all priority areas of the Istanbul Programme of Action.
7.
We are concerned that, in the context of the overall slowdown in the
international economy, the least developed countries as a group are experiencing a
slowdown of their economies, with growth rates falling from 5.1 per cent in 2014 to
an estimated 4.5 per cent in 2015, 8 which is significantly lower than the growth rate
achieved during 2001–2010 and falls far short of the Sustainable Development Goal
target of at least 7 per cent gross domestic product (GDP) growth per annum in the
near term, and those that are highly dependent on commodity exports have seen a
pronounced decline in their export earnings and GDP growth.
8.
We recognize that many of the least developed countries continue to face
multiple structural challenges and constraints, including narrow pro duction and
export bases, stagnant trade and investment flows, diminishing productivity growth,
weak land and natural resource governance, and widespread poverty, hunger and
malnutrition. These long-standing challenges are compounded by new and emerging
challenges, such as climate change, increased incidences of natural disasters and
public health emergencies, conflicts, declining commodity prices and rising capital
outflows. Without a structural transformation that tackles institutional and capacity
constraints, the least developed countries will remain vulnerable to various
economic, social and environmental shocks.
9.
Continued robust external support, including through official development
assistance (ODA), is necessary to complement domestic resources and national
policies and programmes to effectively assist each of the least developed countries
in addressing these important issues. We recognize the important contribution of the
existing preferences extended to the least developed countries.
_______________
8

World Economic Situation and Prospects 2016 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.16.II.C.2).

3/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

10. We recognize that swift action in areas related to productive capacity,
infrastructure and energy, agriculture, food security and nutrition and rural
development, economy, trade and investment, good governance at all levels, human
development, gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, financing
for development, science, technology and innovation, migration and remittances, and
resilience-building are necessary to realize the Istanbul Programme of Action and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development promise of leaving no one behind.
General objectives, goals and targets
11. We recognize that, while the least developed countries have made significant
efforts towards achieving the objectives, goals and targets of the Istanbul
Programme of Action, a lot still remains to be done by them and their development
partners. There is a need to foster progress across all sectors. We reaffirm our
commitment to give special attention to the least developed countries in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Graduation
12. We congratulate those countries that have graduated from least developed
country status and welcome the fact that many of the least developed countries are
meeting the criteria for graduation and many others have expressed their aspirations
to graduate. We note with concern that, since the least developed country category
was established in 1971, only four countries have officially graduated. Based on
current trends, concerted and revitalized efforts will be required to enable half of the
least developed countries to meet the criteria for graduation by 2020, as foreseen in
the Istanbul Programme of Action. Particular attention should be given to the
smooth transition of countries graduating from least developed country status,
consistent with their transition strategy, taking into account each c ountry’s particular
development situation.
Productive capacity
13. We recognize that increasing productive capacity leads to inclusive economic
growth and social development and is vital to the achievement of sustainable
development and for building resilience. During the past five years, limited progress
was achieved in production diversification and value addition as well as in the
effective participation of the least developed countries in regional and global value
chains, which are critical for those countries in reversing their marginalization,
building productive capacities, accelerating structural transformation and generating
full and productive employment and decent work for all with quick impact on
poverty eradication. This situation requires strategic policy interventions at the
subnational, national, regional and international levels, as well as at the sectoral
level. In this regard, regional cooperation and integration can play a catalytic role.
Infrastructure and energy
14. We stress that the development of sustainable and resilient physical
infrastructure, the promotion of sustainable industrialization and fostering
innovation are important prerequisites for sustained economic growth and
sustainable development. A significant amount of investment and technology
development is essential, including through public-private partnerships, innovative
financing and regional integration, supported by appropriate and transparent
national policies, practices, institutions and regulations that foster a strong
investment climate. Enhanced financial and technical support by development
4/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

partners for infrastructure development and management in the least developed
countries, as well as continued support for those countries’ efforts to strengthen the
underlying investment climate, promote science, technology and innovati on and
facilitate the transfer of relevant skills, knowledge and technology for the
development of infrastructure under mutually agreed terms, also remain crucial for
infrastructure development in the least developed countries.
15. We emphasize that the acute energy gap faced by the least developed countries
is a severe constraint on their structural transformation. Access to energy is often
not provided because of lack of finance, technology, infrastructure for the
generation and supply of energy, appropriate regulation and economic and technical
skills. Skill development and improvement of the capacity of local enterprise to
deliver good-quality products and services on an economically sustainable basis are
also important to establish inclusive energy systems that also reach rural areas and
the poorest part of the population. Addressing these issues will be crucial in
providing access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all by
2030. Such access is a key development enabler and multiplier, which can foster
private sector development, strengthen productive capacity-building, expand trade
and promote access to better social services and food security. Ensuring
technological progress is also key to finding lasting solutions to both economic and
environmental challenges, such as providing productive employment and decent
work for all and promoting energy efficiency.
Agriculture, food security and nutrition and rural development
16. We acknowledge that progress in the development of the agricultural sector
and related industries, which employs more than half of the population in most of
the least developed countries, is critical for sustainable development.
17. We recognize that low agricultural productivity and the availability and
affordability of safe food remain major challenges in many of the least developed
countries. Some 210 million people in the least developed countries, predominantly
in rural areas, do not have access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food. Moreover,
the least developed countries are urbanizing rapidly, and the proportion of urban
residents who experience hunger and malnutrition is growing. The agriculture sector
in the least developed countries continues to be affected by structural factors such as
insufficient public and private investment in physical infrastructure and in research
and agricultural extension services, limited access to markets, lack of secure land
tenure, particularly for smallholder farmers and women, limited capacity-building,
slow progress in regulatory and policy reforms and in scientific and technological
development, lack of access to financial services, including insurance, poor
investment climate, inadequate support to enhance the situation of women in rural
areas, trade restrictions and distortions in world agricultural markets, and public
stockholding in a manner that adversely affects food security, as well as periodic
economic shocks such as price fluctuations. We note that less than 7 per cent of
total ODA going to the least developed countries is allocated to agriculture.
Furthermore, agriculture development has been suffering from the adverse impacts
of climate change and extreme weather events, less predictable weather patterns,
soil degradation, salinity intrusion, sea-level rise and coastal erosion, declining
water availability and degrading water quality due to the increasing frequency of
droughts and floods, and soil and water contamination. We reaffirm our commitme nt
to work together to address these challenges in the least developed countries. We also
note that integrated water resource management and intersectoral approaches among
water, food and energy to increase synergies and manage trade -offs are essential.

5/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

Economy, trade and investment
18. We are concerned that the growth rates of the least developed countries have
fallen since 2011, and we emphasize the importance of reversing this trend. As
identified in the Istanbul Programme of Action, trade and investm ent are major
drivers of economic growth, employment generation and structural transformation.
The challenge is also one of fostering inclusive growth, including through the
empowerment of all women and girls and achieving gender equality, while
promoting sustainable development, as the pace of reduction of poverty has not been
commensurate with the economic growth rate.
19. We note some improvement in market access for products of the least
developed countries in some developing countries during the past five years. We
express our concern that the least developed countries’ exports remained highly
concentrated in a few primary products vulnerable to commodity price volatility and
to exogenous economic and environmental shocks. The share of the least develo ped
countries in world exports remained stagnant, standing in 2014 at 1.1 per cent and
dropping to 0.97 per cent in 2015, a level that is far behind the objective of doubling
their share of global exports by 2020, mentioned in the Istanbul Programme of
Action. We acknowledge that a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and
equitable multilateral trading system is key to promoting export diversification,
trade and economic growth.
20. We are concerned that the share of the least developed countries in global
foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows remains virtually unchanged from 2013 at
1.9 per cent and that FDI in the least developed countries remains concentrated in a
small number of mineral-rich economies. We stress that economic diversification
and a positive enabling environment for investments at all levels, as well as stronger
and more focused policies and measures by the least developed countries, home
countries of FDI, international organizations and other stakeholders, can substan tially
increase FDI flows to the least developed countries in the coming years.
21. We recognize that full and productive employment and decent work for all
remains a central objective of macroeconomic and fiscal policies so that the benefits
of growth reach all people, especially the poor, with a focus on mutually supportive
strategies that lead to the rapid expansion of productive employment in the least
developed countries and optimize the contribution of women and young people to
economic growth and poverty reduction.
Good governance at all levels and human development
22. We recognize that the promotion and protection of human rights, good
governance, transparency, democratic participation, the rule of law at the national
and international levels, human development, gender equality and the empowerment
of women and girls are essential to achieving peace, prosperity and sustainable
development in the least developed countries. Since the adoption of the Istanbul
Programme of Action, the least developed countries have made some progress in
these areas, yet considerable efforts are still needed. Several of the least developed
countries have joined the Open Government Partnership, and we welcome their
commitments to making their Governments more open, accountable and responsive
to citizens. Forty-two of the least developed countries have become parties to the
United Nations Convention against Corruption. 9 Substantial progress towards
_______________
9

6/25

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, No. 42146.

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

achieving education for all at the primary level has been made, including gender
parity for one third of the least developed countries. Nearly 20 per cent of all
parliamentarians in the least developed countries are women. We also recognize that
the achievement of full human potential and of sustainable development is not
possible if women and girls continue to be denied the full realization of their human
rights and opportunities.
23. We recognize that qualified and skilled human resources can make important
contributions to sustainable development in the least developed countries. While
much progress has been made towards achieving education for all at the prim ary and
secondary levels, much more remains to be done to ensure that the over 24 million
children of primary school age not in school and the over 22 million out-of-school
adolescents of lower secondary school age in the least developed countries have
access to quality education. Strengthened efforts by the least developed countries
and their development partners are also needed to ensure that education is of good
quality and that it provides all learners with the skills needed to access employment
and decent work.
24. We note that greater efforts are also needed to better engage and empower
young people. They need opportunities to learn, work and participate in decision making processes and to contribute to building inclusive and peaceful societies that
are free from violence. Particular efforts are needed to ensure that all young people,
including girls, enjoy access to lifelong learning opportunities and equal access to
quality education at all levels: early childhood, primary, secondary and tertiary
education, as well as technical and vocational training. In this regard, we note with
concern the lack of progress in closing gender gaps in access to, retention in and
completion of secondary education.
Gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls
25. We recognize that further efforts are needed to remove the barriers that women
and girls face regarding gender-based violence, access to safe learning environments,
quality education, criminal justice systems, health-care services, including sexual
and reproductive health, safe drinking water and sanitation and equal rights with
men to economic opportunities such as employment, decent work, equal pay for
equal work or work of equal value, entrepreneurship, participation in trade, access
to and ownership of productive resources, including land and other forms of
property, credit, inheritance, natural resources and appropriate new technology.
Women and girls are also more vulnerable to climate change impacts. We must work
to strengthen our attention to the full and effective participation of women and girls
in decision-making at all levels as well as the elimination of discrimination, all
forms of violence and harmful practices against women and girls, including child,
early and forced marriage and female genital mutilation.
26. We reaffirm that achieving gender equality, empowering all women and girls,
and the full realization of the human rights of all people are essential to achieving
sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable development.
We reiterate the need for gender mainstreaming, including targeted actions and
investments in the formulation and implementation of all financial, economic,
environmental and social policies.
Financing for development
27. We recognize that significant additional domestic public resources, including
at the subnational level, supplemented by international assistance as appropriate,
will be critical to realizing sustainable development and achieving the Sustainable
7/25

A/RES/70/294

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

Development Goals. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda acknowledge the centrality of domestic resource mobilization
underscored by the principle of national ownership and the important contribution of
private investment, including FDI, for the achievement of sustainable development.
While the least developed countries have made considerable efforts to mobilize
domestic resources and attract private investment, further progress is needed.
28. We note that, as a result of cooperation between the United Nations, the Group
of 20, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund, there has been international progress in
identifying and addressing the base erosion and profit shifting challe nges for
developing countries and ensuring that all countries, including the least developed
countries, can take advantage of increases in tax transparency and exchange of
information, such as by implementing the new international standard of automatic
exchange of information.
29. We are also concerned by the impact that illicit financial flows have in draining
resources away from the least developed countries. Illicit financial flows have an
adverse impact on domestic resource mobilization and on the sustainability of public
finances. The activities that underlie illicit financial flows, such as corruption,
embezzlement, fraud, tax evasion, safe havens that create incentives for transfer of
stolen assets abroad, money-laundering and illegal exploitation of natural resources,
are also detrimental to development. We emphasize the importance of working
together, including through increased international cooperation to stem corruption and
identify, freeze and recover stolen assets and return them to their count ries of origin,
in a manner consistent with the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
30. We recognize that international public finance plays an important role in
complementing the efforts of countries to mobilize public resources domestically.
For the least developed countries as a group, ODA remains the largest source of
external financing. The decline in ODA going to the least developed countries
during the past years was a worrisome trend, and the level of 0.09 per cent of gross
national income (GNI) attained in 2014 remained below the relevant
0.15–0.20 per cent target to which many developed countries have committed. In
that context, we note the 4 per cent real-term increase in bilateral ODA to the least
developed countries in 2015 and the projection that the proportion of ODA to those
countries will continue to rise in 2016–2019, suggesting that developed countries
are reversing the decline in ODA to the least developed countries in line with the
commitment by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development at its
high-level meeting in 2014 to reverse the declining trend of ODA to the least
developed countries. We note with concern that FDI to those cou ntries has remained
constant as a share of global FDI and concentrated in a few countries and sectors.
We also note the growing importance of remittances.
31. We welcome the recent decision by the Executive Board of the International
Monetary Fund to increase access to its concessional resources by 50 per cent for
the poorest and most vulnerable countries.
32. We acknowledge the debt distress and sustainability challenges faced by some
of the least developed countries. We recognize that the long -term sustainability of
debt of those countries depends on, inter alia, economic growth, the mobilization of
domestic and international resources, the export prospects of debtor countries,
sustainable debt management, sound macroeconomic policies that also support j ob
creation, sound public financial management at all levels, transparent and effective
regulatory frameworks and overcoming structural development problems.

8/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

Science, technology and innovation
33. We recognize that the Istanbul Programme of Action recommends that the least
developed countries and development partners make concerted efforts to build
science, technology and innovation capacity so that those countries can find and
harness innovative solutions to sustainable development challenges and promot e
endogenous capacity for research and development to address the structural
impediments to achieving sustainable development that those countries face.
Despite the importance of science, technology and innovation for promoting
positive development outcomes, the least developed countries have not made
significant progress in this field since the adoption of the Programme of Action. We
are concerned that fewer than 7 per cent of households in the least developed
countries have access to the Internet, that ma ny of the least developed countries lack
affordable access to information and communications technologies and that, for the
majority of the poor, the promise of science, technology and innovation remains
unfulfilled, and we emphasize the need to effectivel y harness technology to bridge
the digital divide. In this regard, we stress the growing importance of science,
technology and innovation for promoting positive development outcomes, including
in the least developed countries.
Resilience-building
34. We are deeply concerned that, owing to significant capacity constraints, the
least developed countries are disproportionately affected by the adverse impacts of
climate change, including persistent drought and extreme weather events, sea -level
rise, coastal erosion, salinity intrusion, glacier lake outburst floods, ocean
acidification, and the rise in frequency as well as impacts of natural and man -made
disasters, which further threaten food security and efforts to eradicate poverty and
achieve sustainable development. We are deeply worried that an increase in global
temperature, sea-level rise, ocean acidification and other climate change impacts can
seriously affect coastal areas and low-lying coastal least developed countries. We
are concerned that women and girls are often disproportionately affected by the
impact of climate change and other environmental issues.
35. We note that the Istanbul Programme of Action highlights the vulnerability of
the least developed countries to a variety of shocks and disasters, as well as climate
change, and emphasize that these vulnerabilities threaten to undermine many of the
development gains that those countries have made over the past decade. The Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 has recognized the higher
vulnerability and risk levels of the least developed countries, which often exceed
their capacity to respond to and recover from disasters. We reiterate that such
vulnerability requires strengthened international cooperation and ensuring genuine,
durable regional and international partnerships to improve their resilience. We also
note the importance of adopting and implementing national and local disaster risk
reduction strategies and plans aimed at preventing the creation of risk, reducing
existing risk and strengthening economic, social, health and environmental
resilience. We welcome the fact that many of the least developed countries have
communicated intended nationally determined contributions and designed and
implemented national disaster risk reduction strategies embedded in national
development plans with a focus on preventive measures and a multi -stakeholder
approach. However, their efforts have had limited success so far, given their
capacity and resource constraints, including at the subnat ional level. Although most
of the least developed countries have developed some form of social protection
programme, coverage tends to be very limited.
9/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

36. In this regard, we acknowledge the importance of addressing these
vulnerabilities and are taking steps in various multilateral forums to build resilience
to many of the multiple crises and other emerging challenges described in the
Istanbul Programme of Action, such as the International Development Association
Crisis Response Window of the World Bank, which helps countries to respond to
natural disasters and other crises, the Least Developed Countries Fund, to which
donors announced contributions amounting to $248 million during the twenty-first
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, and initiatives of the International Monetary Fund, such as the
temporary waiver of interest rates on Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust loans and
the provision of grants for debt relief under the Catastrophe Con tainment and Relief
Trust, which also play an important role in building the resilience of the least
developed countries. Measures at both the national and international levels need to
be enhanced to mitigate and manage risks and address the vulnerability of the least
developed countries to various kinds of shocks and crises.
37. We recognize that the least developed countries in conflict and post -conflict
situations and those experiencing political instability, or unable to deliver basic
State services, have specific structural challenges and require context-specific
approaches, including targeted national policies and international support measures
to address these challenges and to support peacebuilding, State -building activities
and sustainable development. We take note of the principles set out in the New Deal
for Engagement in Fragile States by the Group of Seven Plus, countries that are, or
have been, affected by conflict.
38. We note the convening of the Ministerial Conference on New Partnerships for
Productive Capacity-Building in the Least Developed Countries, held in Cotonou,
Benin, from 28 to 31 July 2014, the Ministerial Meeting of the Asia-Pacific Least
Developed Countries on Graduation and the Post-2015 Development Agenda, held
in Kathmandu from 16 to 18 December 2014, and the Ministerial Meeting of the
African Least Developed Countries on Structural Transformation, Graduation and
the Post-2015 Development Agenda, held in Milan, Italy, from 8 to 10 June 2015.
II.

Looking forward and recommendations

General recommendations
39. Planning at both the national and international levels is necessary to realize the
concrete objectives contained in the Istanbul Programme of Action. We encourage
the least developed countries to continue to integrate the Programme of Action into
their national and sectoral development plans and their development partners to
continue to integrate the Programme of Action into their national cooperation policy
frameworks, programmes and activities, as appropriate.
40. We reiterate the principles that guide the implementation of the Istanbul
Programme of Action: country ownership and leadership; an integrated approach;
genuine partnerships; result orientation; peace and security, development and human
rights; equity; voice and representation; and the balanced role of the State and
market considerations.
41. We welcome the fact that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the Paris Agreement under the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015–2030 underscore that the most vulnerable countries, including
the least developed countries, deserve special attention and reflect the concerns and
aspirations of the least developed countries and we recall the decision contained in
10/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

the 2030 Agenda that effective linkages will be made with the follow -up and review
arrangements of all relevant United Nations conferences and processes, including on
the least developed countries. We underline the importance of strong synergy in the
implementation of the recently adopted agendas and the Istanbul Programme of
Action at the national and subnational levels and encourage coordination and
coherence in the follow-up of their implementation.
42. We also recognize that genuine, effective and durable multi-stakeholder
partnerships can play an important role in advancing sustainable development. We
will encourage knowledge-sharing and the promotion of cooperation and
partnerships between stakeholders, including between Governments, firms,
academia and civil society, in sectors contributing to the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals and in support of country-driven priorities and
strategies. At the same time, we commit to pursue an enabling environment for
sustainable development at all levels and by all actors to make the global
partnership for sustainable development more effective.
43. We encourage national statistical capacities in the least developed countries to
be strengthened, with the support and cooperation of the international community in
order to increase significantly the use and availability of high -quality, timely and
reliable data disaggregated by sex, age, geography, income, race, ethnicity,
migratory status, disability and other characteristics relevant in national contexts,
which are necessary for efficient policymaking and an effective follow -up and
review. We encourage the least developed countries to carry out a stocktaking
exercise to assess current statistics and data availability for implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals and the Istanbul Programme of Action at the
national and local levels, identify data gaps and build statistical capacity to ensure
that data for statistics and monitoring of the Goals are available and reliable.
Development partners and relevant international organizations should, and the
partnerships are encouraged to, provide international cooperation, including through
technical and financial support to the least developed countri es in this endeavour.
Productive capacity-building
44. We recognize the importance of building productive capacity as a critical
enabler for the development and graduation of the least developed countries and call
upon those countries and their development partners to ensure enhanced focus on
policies and means to address productive capacity-building. We further recognize
that private capital flows, in particular FDI, play a complementary and catalytic role
in building and strengthening productive capacity in the least developed countries.
We call upon the least developed countries to continue to strengthen the underlying
investment climate and upon development partners to continue to provide enhanced
financial and technical support to those countries to develop productive capacities,
including for enhancing the management capacity of the least developed countries.
We note that international financial institutions such as the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank provide capacity development to the least developed
countries through direct technical assistance and training for country authorities and
we invite them to further strengthen such support, responding to the demands and
needs of those countries, within the framework of existing commitments , in
accordance with their national development policies and strategies.
Graduation
45. We recall General Assembly resolutions 59/209 of 20 December 2004 and
67/221 of 21 December 2012 on a smooth transition for countries graduating from
the list of least developed countries. We underscore that the efforts of the least
11/25

A/RES/70/294

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

developed countries towards graduation are underpinned by their ownership and
leadership, as the primary responsibility for development lies with the countries
themselves, but they need to be supported by concrete and substantial international
partnership measures in a spirit of mutual accountability for development results.
46. We urge both the least developed countries and their development partners to
undertake more concerted and ambitious efforts to achieve the aim of the Istanbul
Programme of Action of enabling half of the least developed countries to meet the
criteria for graduation by 2020. It is also important that graduation be seen not as a
cut-off point, but as a resolute move towards better and sustained economic
development and virtuous and inclusive structural transformation. We emphasize
that a successful transition needs to be based on a national smooth transition
strategy, elaborated by each graduated country. We encourage development and
trading partners and the United Nations system to continue their support for the
implementation of transition strategies for the least developed countries, as well as
for smooth transition for graduated countries and to avoid any abrupt reductions in
either ODA or technical assistance provided to the graduated countries.
47. We invite development and trading partners to consider extending to the
graduated country trade preferences previously made available as a result of least
developed country status, or reducing them in a phased manner in order to avoid
their abrupt reduction, on a bilateral basis.
48. We recognize the importance of the reviews by the Committee for
Development Policy of the graduation criteria for the least developed countries. We
recommend that the reviews be comprehensive, taking into account all aspects of the
evolving international development context, including relevant agendas.
Infrastructure and energy
49. We recall the goal in the Istanbul Programme of Action to increase total
primary energy supply per capita in the least developed countries to the same level
as in other developing countries; significantly increase the share of electricity
generation through renewable energy sources by 2020; and enhance capacities in
energy production, trade and distribution with the aim of ensuring access to
affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all by 2030. We recognize
that financing for infrastructure and universal access to modern energy, including at
the subnational level, remains a major challenge for the least developed countries.
50. We also stress that special attention should be given to the l east developed
countries throughout the United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All
(2014–2024), as well as within the framework of the Secretary-General’s
Sustainable Energy for All initiative and the recently held Sustainable Energy for
All Forum and the Global Infrastructure Forum, with a view to ensuring the
realization of the objective of access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern
energy for all by 2030 and to addressing the infrastructure needs of the least
developed countries.
51. We call upon the development partners to continue to support efforts by the
least developed countries to develop the energy sector in generation, distribution
and energy efficiency, including in renewable energy, other clean energy sources
and natural gas, inter alia, through enhanced financial and technical assistance and
by facilitating private sector investment, in accordance with national priorities and
needs. We underline that increasing substantially the share of renewable energy in
the energy mix and increasing energy efficiency can support energy access in the
least developed countries. Supporting off-grid solutions for access to electricity is
12/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

an effective and efficient way to improve the energy access situation of the poor. We
will work to provide adequate support and facilitate access to clean energy research
and technology, expand infrastructure and upgrade technology for supplying modern
and sustainable energy services to the least developed countries.
52. We will embed resilient and quality infrastructure investment plans in our
national sustainable development strategies, while also strengthening domestic
enabling environments. We reaffirm our commitment to provide enhanced financial
and technical support for infrastructure development in lin e with the least developed
countries’ sectoral and development needs and priorities and use concessional funds,
where appropriate, to catalyse and leverage other sources of funding for
infrastructure development and management. We will provide technical an d
financial support for the least developed countries to translate plans into concrete
project pipelines, as well as for individual implementable projects, including for
feasibility studies, the negotiation of complex contracts and project management.
53. We recommend that all forms of finance, tools and mechanisms, including
domestic resources, private finance, ODA grants and other forms of international
development cooperation, public-private partnerships, concessional and
non-concessional loans, blended finance, special-purpose vehicles, non-recourse
project financing, risk mitigation instruments, pooled funding structures and other
innovative approaches, be utilized. We invite the development finance institutions
and the development partners to play a larger and more coordinated role in investing
in infrastructure projects in the least developed countries, mitigating and sharing
risks and ensuring guarantees.
Agriculture, food security and nutrition and rural development
54. We support the Secretary-General’s Zero Hunger Challenge and recommend
increasing sustainable and responsible investment, both domestic and international,
in sustainable agriculture and food security, the sustainable use of water resources,
including through international public and private cooperation in rural and urban
infrastructure, nutrition, secure land tenure, agricultural research and extension
services, access to markets and to finance, especially for smallholder farmers,
building irrigation facilities, technology developme nt and transfer on mutually
agreed terms, the promotion of resilient and sustainable agricultural practices and
reducing food loss and waste. We reaffirm the commitment to conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable d evelopment,
and to increase the economic benefits to the least developed countries that are small
island developing States and coastal countries from the sustainable use of marine
resources, including through the sustainable management of fisheries, aquacu lture
and tourism by 2030.
55. We furthermore commit to supporting strong economic, social and
environmental links between urban, peri-urban and rural areas by strengthening
national, regional and local development planning, including through an integrate d
approach to sustainable water management and strengthening efforts to protect and
safeguard the world’s cultural and natural heritage. We will also endeavour to
increase investments for effective actions to improve people’s diets and nutrition,
including in emergency situations, with particular emphasis on supporting access to
safe drinking water and sanitation services.
56. We recall our commitment to empower women in agriculture, including
through women’s access to and control over land and other prod uctive assets.

13/25

A/RES/70/294

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

57. We reaffirm the need to undertake necessary measures at the national and
international levels to increase the agricultural productivity of the least developed
countries. We take note of the existing regional frameworks on emergency food
reserve mechanisms and recognize the importance of food security in emergency
situations and the need for building resilience. In this regard, we invite the
international community to consider enhancing such cooperation at the regional
level, particularly for the least developed countries. We will continue to explore
ways to improve the effectiveness of food reserve mechanisms for dealing with
humanitarian food emergencies or as a means to limit price volatility in those
countries. We recognize that commodity diversification and value addition as well
as the effective participation of the least developed countries in regional and global
value chains and in international trade in agricultural products is a critical aspect of
the efforts of those countries in reversing their marginalization, building productive
capacities, accelerating structural transformation and generating full and productive
employment and decent work for all with quick and sustainable impact on poverty
eradication.
58. We reiterate our commitment to protect, restore and sustainably use terrestrial
and water-related ecosystems, including forests, halting biodiversity loss, and
tackling land and soil degradation and desertification. This would generate multiple
benefits, including food security, improving the living conditions of affected
populations, eradicating poverty and contributing to peace and security while
enabling the least developed countries to effectively mitigate and adapt to the
impact of climate change. We will also promote sustainable consumption and
production patterns, including efforts to reduce food losses along production and
supply chains, including post-harvest losses.
Trade and investment
59. We reaffirm the pre-eminence of the World Trade Organization as the global
forum for the setting and governance of trade rules. We acknowledge the
contribution that the rules-based multilateral trading system has made to the strength
and stability of the global economy. We reaffirm the value of the World Trade
Organization’s consistent practice of taking decisions through a transparent,
inclusive, consensus-based, member-driven process.
60. We take note of the pledge by the members of the World Trade Organization to
strengthen the multilateral trading system so that it provides a strong impetus to
inclusive prosperity and welfare for all members and responds to the specific
development needs of developing country members, in particular the least
developed country members.
61. We reaffirm our commitment to significantly increase the share of least
developed countries’ trade in global trade with the aim of doubling the share of least
developed countries’ exports in global exports by 2020, including by broadening
least developed countries’ export base.
62. In that regard, we urge the least developed countries and their development
partners to make use of existing initiatives and programmes, such as the relevant
ministerial decisions of the World Trade Organization on duty-free and quota-free
market access for the least developed countries and on preferential rules of origin
for those countries, as well as aid for trade. We will increase aid for trade support, in
particular for the least developed countries; and we will strive to al locate an
increasing proportion of aid for trade to the least developed countries, provided
according to development cooperation effectiveness principles. We also welcome
14/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

additional cooperation among developing countries to this end. We encourage the
least developed countries to mainstream trade in their national development plans.
With this in mind, we welcome the extension of the Enhanced Integrated Framework
for Trade-related Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries into phase two
and, as the Enhanced Integrated Framework implements the reforms, agreed as
necessary for its continuation, we urge members to contribute to the timely
replenishment of the Enhanced Integrated Framework Trust Fund, for the effective
implementation, without any disruption, of the Framework between 2016 and 2023.
63. We urge World Trade Organization members to continue their efforts to
accelerate the accession of all the least developed countries engaged in negotiations
for World Trade Organization membership and welcome the 2012 guidelines for the
accession of the least developed countries to the Organization.
64. We call upon all partners who are World Trade Organization members to
implement all of the ministerial decisions, especially those that are of benefit to the
least developed countries. We also call upon development partners to continue to
provide concrete support to the least developed countries for the diversification of
their export base, including into dynamic sectors of world trade, and in meeting the
requirements of the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary
Measures and the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade of the World Trade
Organization to assist them in increasing their share in world trade and enhancing
domestic value added for exports.
65. We reaffirm our joint commitment to promote strategic and regulatory
frameworks for FDI and other resource flows to the least developed countries that
include vital policy areas such as infrastructure development, trade and trade
facilitation, research and development and the transfer of technology on mutually
agreed terms.
66. To further investment promotion, we also recommend establishing national
regulatory and policy frameworks that allow businesses to innovate, invest and
transform technology into employment and inclusive economic growth. We also call
for greater commitment from the least developed countries and scaled-up
international support for regional integration in order to expand markets, to promote
trade facilitation by implementing the Agreement on Trade Facilitation of the World
Trade Organization, cross-border infrastructure development, regional value chains
and regional cooperation, all of which will contribute to regional stability and
progress. Effective partnerships between and among Governments, the private
sector and civil society are particularly useful in a ddressing complex and
interrelated challenges.
67. We recall the decision contained in the Istanbul Programme of Action and
reaffirmed in General Assembly resolution 67/220 of 21 December 2012 to adopt,
expand and implement investment promotion regimes for the least developed
countries. We welcome the decision contained in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda to
adopt and implement investment promotion regimes for the least developed
countries and the offer to provide financial and technical support for project
preparation and contract negotiation, advisory support in investment -related dispute
resolution, access to information on investment facilities and risk insurance and
guarantees such as through the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency.
68. We recognize that stronger and more focused policies, activities and strategies
by the least developed countries, the home countries of FDI, international
organizations and other stakeholders, as appropriate, can help to substantially
increase FDI flows to the least developed countries. We encourage the least
15/25

A/RES/70/294

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

developed countries to continue to strengthen the underlying investment climate and
to establish and maintain national investment promotion facilities, and we
encourage development partners to continue to support capacity-building in the least
developed countries aimed at improving their abilities to attract FDI.
69. In that regard, we invite the Secretary-General, in his capacity as the Chair of
the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, t o include the
issue of investment promotion regimes for the least developed countries in the
agenda of the Board, with a view to enhancing the overall effectiveness of United
Nations system support that can contribute to enhancing the flow of FDI to the
least developed countries and the ability of those countries to attract such
investment. We further invite the Economic and Social Council, at its next annual
forum on financing for development follow-up, to discuss adopting and
implementing investment promotion regimes for the least developed countries,
pursuant to the relevant resolutions on the matter, including General Assembly
resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the
mandate of the annual forum on financing for developme nt follow-up set out
therein. We recall that the forum’s intergovernmentally agreed conclusions and
recommendations will be fed into the overall follow-up and review of the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in the high-level
political forum on sustainable development.
70. We call upon the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
continue to help the least developed countries attract and benefit from FDI,
including through its Investment Policy Framework for Sustaina ble Development,
its investment policy reviews, investment guides and other investment promotion
activities. We encourage the least developed countries to make more use of those
programmes and call upon development partners to continue to fund them on a
voluntary basis. We also invite other relevant United Nations entities and
international organizations to continue their support to the least developed
countries in the area of investment promotion, as appropriate and in line with their
respective mandates.
71. The least developed countries are also encouraged to utilize existing trade and
investment support mechanisms. The World Bank, the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development offer several such programmes that address risk insurance and
guarantees as well as technical and advisory support for investment -related
negotiations and dispute resolution.
Good governance at all levels
72. We recall the objective of the Istanbul Programme of Action of enhancing
good governance at all levels, by strengthening democratic processes, institutions
and the rule of law; increasing efficiency, coherence, transparency and participation;
protecting and promoting human rights; and reducing corruption, and strengthening
least developed country Governments’ capacity to play an effective role in their
economic and social development. Furthering participation, empowering civil
society, youth and women, and strengthening collective action will contribute to the
eradication of poverty and achieving sustainable development. In that context, we
encourage broad participation by the least developed countries in partnerships and
other international conventions and initiatives, as appropriate, su ch as the United
Nations Convention against Corruption and the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative. We also take note of the work of the Open Government Partnership. We
further call upon the least developed countries that have not yet done so to make
16/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

domestic legislation consistent with their particular obligations as members of or
States parties to all relevant international agreements.
73. We recognize that sustainable development cannot be realized without peace
and security, and that peace and security will be at risk without sustainable
development. In this regard, we acknowledge that the development challenges posed
by conflict not only impede, but can reverse decades of development gains. We thus
call upon the least developed countries, with the support of development partners, as
appropriate, to build the resilience necessary to address the root causes of conflict in
their countries and regions. We call upon the international community to support
least developed countries in conflict and post-conflict situations and in particular
those suffering from internal and cross-border violence, especially the threat of violent
extremism and international terrorism, with the view of achieving the realization of
peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development. We will also take
measures to ensure that women have a role in peacebuilding and State -building.
Human and social development, children and youth
74. We acknowledge that high-quality education and skills development provide
the foundation for lifelong learning and broader human development. We therefore
support the global commitment to provide high-quality education to all in the least
developed countries, including the poorest and most vulnerable, to the end of
secondary school, and reaffirm the commitment to enhance technical, vocational and
tertiary education and training, ensuring gender equality in access. We also reaffirm
that investment in human resources and institutional capacities are required to
ensure a diversified and resilient economy, based on a wide range of sectors, to
reduce the economic volatility of countries and enable countries to reap the
demographic dividend. Technical, vocational and skills development programmes
need to take into account the needs of local firms and generate skilled human
resources, which can also help firms to invest in the necessary technologies for
advancing in the value chain. We will continue our efforts to make further progress
in ensuring gender balance in enrolment in and completion of secondary and tertiary
education. In this regard, we reiterate our call to development partners to continue
to provide and encourage, as appropriate, higher education institutes to allocate
scholarships and placements for students and trainees from the le ast developed
countries, in particular in the fields of science, technology, business management
and economics.
75. We recognize that today’s generation of people under the age of 25 is the
largest ever in history. Girls and boys, young women and young me n are key agents
of change in creating a better future and, when empowered, they have great
potential to advocate on behalf of themselves and their communities. We will
promote and protect the rights of children and youth, ensure more opportunities for
their meaningful participation and work towards ending all forms of violence and
abuse against children and youth, including exploitation, trafficking, torture and
other harmful practices such as female genital mutilation and child, early and forced
marriage. We call upon all countries to promote the engagement of children and
youth as active members of the global community, now and later in life, and to
ensure that no one is left behind. We call upon the least developed countries to
develop policies and programmes for supporting youth access to secondary and
higher education, vocational training and productive employment and health -care
services, especially for young women and girls. We call upon development partners
to provide financial and technical assistance to support formal and non-formal
education systems, policies and programmes in the least developed countries that
17/25

A/RES/70/294

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

provide economic opportunities and productive employment to youth, and to
promote youth exchange programmes, including through virtual camp uses and other
networking mechanisms.
76. To enable all people to benefit from growth, we will include full and
productive employment and decent work for all as a central objective in our national
development strategies.
Gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls
77. We reaffirm the essential role of gender equality, the empowerment of women
and girls and the realization of their human rights, and of full and productive
employment and decent work in achieving sustainable development. Women a nd
girls must enjoy equal access to high-quality education, health, including sexual
and reproductive health, access to finance and economic opportunities and
resources and political participation, as well as equal opportunities with men and
boys for employment and decent work, leadership and decision-making at all
levels. We will work for a significant increase in the investments to close the
gender gap and strengthen support for institutions, including criminal and civil
justice systems, in relation to gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls at all levels. We will continue to support the elimination of all forms of
discrimination and violence against women and girls, including through the
engagement of men and boys.
Financing for development
78. We recognize the efforts of the least developed countries to enhance domestic
resource generation, and we commit to supporting efforts by the least developed
countries to enhance their revenue mobilization, economic growth, product
diversification and domestic value addition; to broadening the tax base and
continuing efforts to integrate the informal sector into the formal economy in line
with country circumstances; and to enhancing revenue administration through
modernized, progressive tax systems, improved tax policy and more efficient tax
collection and administration. We are committed to reducing corruption and
increasing transparency at all levels. We reaffirm our commitment to work to
substantially reduce illicit financial flows by 2030 in order to help the least
developed countries to mobilize resources.
79. We reiterate that an important use of international public finance, including
ODA, is to catalyse additional resource mobilization from other sources, public and
private. In this regard, we take note of such efforts as the Addis Tax Initiative. We
also take note of the platform for collaboration on tax prepared by the International
Monetary Fund, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the
United Nations and the World Bank Group.
80. We welcome the work of the Committee of Experts on International
Cooperation in Tax Matters, including its subcommittees.
81. We recognize that private business activity, investment and innovation are
major drivers of productivity, inclusive economic growth and job creation, and that
private international capital flows, particularly FDI, along with a stable international
financial system, are vital complements to national development efforts.
82. We reiterate that the fulfilment of all ODA commitments remains crucial. ODA
providers reaffirm their respective ODA commitments, including the commitment
by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of GNI for ODA
and 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of GNI for ODA to the least developed countries. We are
18/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

encouraged by those few countries that have met or surpassed their commitment to
0.7 per cent of GNI for ODA and the target of 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of GNI for ODA
to the least developed countries. We urge all others to step up efforts to increase
their ODA and to make additional concrete efforts towards the ODA targets. We
welcome the decision by the European Union which reaffirms its collective
commitment to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of GNI for ODA within the time
frame of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and undertakes to meet
collectively the target of 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of GNI for ODA to the least
developed countries in the short term and to reach 0.20 per cent of GNI for ODA to
the least developed countries within the time frame of the 2030 Agenda. We
encourage ODA providers to consider setting a target to provide at least
0.20 per cent of GNI for ODA to the least developed countries.
83. We are encouraged by those who are allocating at least 50 per cent of their
ODA to the least developed countries.
84. We stress the need for the international community to remain vigilant in
monitoring the debt situation of the least developed countries and to continue to take
effective measures, preferably within existing frameworks, when applicable, to
address the debt problem of those countries, including through coordinated policies
aimed at fostering debt financing, debt relief, debt restructuring and sound debt
management, as appropriate, for the multilateral and bilateral debt owed by the least
developed countries to creditors, both public and private. We reiterate our
commitment to work through existing initiatives, such as the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative. We reaffirm the importance of transparency in debt management.
85. We recognize the significant potential of multilateral development banks and
other international development banks in financing sustainable development and
providing know-how.
86. We encourage the least developed countries, with support from the
international community, to develop their capacities to track financial transactions,
administer taxation, facilitate customs services and investigate and prosecute
offences to contribute to the success of efforts to deal with illicit financial flows. We
also encourage international cooperation on tax matters.
87. We encourage the use of and improved access to innovative tools, such as
mobile banking, payment platforms and digitalized payments, as appropriate,
including by women and micro-businesses, and we recognize the role that this can
play in promoting financial inclusion, as well as in reducing costs, increasing
transparency, improving the speed and security of payments and opening up new
markets.
88. We call for support for those partnerships and global alliances, such as the
Better Than Cash Alliance and its institutional secretariat, the United Nations
Capital Development Fund, that expand the reach and adoption of such tools in
support of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Istanbul
Programme of Action.
89. We welcome continued efforts to improve the quality, impact and effectiveness
of development cooperation and other international efforts in public finance,
including adherence to agreed development cooperation effectiveness principles. We
will align activities with national priorities, including by reducing fragmentation,
accelerating the untying of aid, particularly for the least developed countries and
countries most in need. We will promote country ownership and results orientation
and strengthen country systems, use programme-based approaches where appropriate,
19/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

strengthen partnerships for development, reduce transaction costs and increase
transparency and mutual accountability. We will make development more effective
and predictable by providing the least developed countries with regular and timely
indicative information on planned support in the medium term.
90. We commit to pursuing policy coherence and an enabling environment for
sustainable development at all levels and by all actors in support of these actions.
South-South and triangular cooperation
91. We recall that South-South cooperation plays an important role in the
development of the least developed countries through its contribution to the
implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action.
92. South-South cooperation is an important element of international cooperation
for development as a complement to, not a substitute for, North-South cooperation.
We recognize its increased importance, different history and particularities and
stress that South-South cooperation should be seen as an expression of solidarity
among peoples and countries of the South, based on their shared experiences and
objectives. It should continue to be guided by the principles of respect for national
sovereignty, national ownership and independence, equality, non -conditionality,
non-interference in domestic affairs and mutual benefit.
93. We welcome the increased contributions of South-South cooperation to poverty
eradication and sustainable development. We encourage developing countries to
voluntarily step up their efforts to strengthen South-South cooperation and to further
improve its development effectiveness in accordance with the provisions of the
Nairobi outcome document of the High-level United Nations Conference on SouthSouth Cooperation. 10 We also commit to strengthening triangular cooperation as a
means of bringing relevant experience and expertise to bear in development
cooperation.
Migration and remittances
94. We recognize the positive contribution of migrants for inclusive growth and
sustainable development. We also recognize that international migration i s a
multidimensional reality of major relevance for the development of countries of
origin, transit and destination, which requires coherent and comprehensive
responses. We will cooperate internationally to ensure safe, orderly and regular
migration involving full respect for human rights and the humane treatment of
migrants regardless of migration status, of refugees and of displaced persons. Such
cooperation should also strengthen the resilience of communities hosting refugees,
particularly in developing countries. We underline the right of migrants to return to
their country of citizenship, and recall that States must ensure that their returning
nationals are duly received.
95. We will work towards reducing the average transaction cost of migrant
remittances by 2030 to less than 3 per cent of the amount transferred. We are
particularly concerned with the cost of remittances in certain low-volume and highcost corridors. We will work to ensure that no remittance corridor requires charges
higher than 5 per cent by 2030, mindful of the need to maintain adequate service
coverage, especially for those most in need.

_______________
10

20/25

Resolution 64/222, annex.

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

96. We recognize that remittances from migrant workers are typically wages
transferred to families, primarily to meet part of the needs of the recip ient
households, and cannot be equated to other international financial flows. We will
work to ensure that adequate and affordable financial services are available to
migrants and their families in both home and host countries. Combining remittance
receipts with broader access to other financial services can increase the impact of
remittances on growth by facilitating savings and investments. We will take
measures to promote the productive investment of remittances, such as in micr o-,
small and medium-sized enterprises, and ensure that women and men are engaged as
equal partners and beneficiaries.
97. We will support national authorities to address the most significant obstacles
to the continued flow of remittances, such as the trend of banks withdrawing
services, to work towards access to remittance transfer services across borders. We
will increase coordination among national regulatory authorities to remove obstacles
to non-bank remittance service providers accessing payment system infrastructure
and promote conditions for cheaper, faster and safer transfer of remittances in both
source and recipient countries, including by promoting competitive and transparent
market conditions.
Science, technology and innovation
98. We reaffirm our commitment to support efforts by the least developed
countries to improve their capacity to develop, access and utilize critical
technologies. We acknowledge that an enabling environment and relevant legal
frameworks can give firms confidence to invest in advanced technologies and
establish research partnerships in the least developed countries and to provide
incentives for local firms to develop or adapt their own technologies. We encourage
the least developed countries, with support from the international community, to
enhance investment in science, technology, engineering and mathematics education
and enhance technical, vocational and tertiary education and training and to ensure
equal access for women and girls and encourage their participation therein. We also
encourage development partners to enhance support for efforts by the least
developed countries to create a successful environment for developing, attracting
and utilizing new technologies and building domestic capacity and a knowled ge
base, including through financial and technical assistance and the transfer of
technology on mutually agreed terms.
99. We reaffirm our commitment to fully operationalize the technology bank for
the least developed countries, in view of its potential t o foster productive capacity,
structural transformation, poverty eradication and sustainable development. In this
regard, we take note of General Assembly resolution 70/216 of 22 December 2015,
in which the Assembly outlined the steps necessary to launch a nd operationalize the
technology bank, funded by voluntary contributions, by 2017, and to ensure
continued support for the technology bank from all relevant stakeholders. We will
avoid duplication and promote synergies between the technology bank and the
Technology Facilitation Mechanism established in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
and close cooperation on both technical and administrative matters with the United
Nations inter-agency task team on science, technology and innovation for the
Sustainable Development Goals. We welcome the appointment by the SecretaryGeneral of the members of the governing council of the technology bank and the
establishment of a trust fund with the flexibility necessary to attract voluntary
funding from Member States and other stakeholders. We emphasize that additional
details about, inter alia, the specific activities the technology bank will undertake
21/25

A/RES/70/294

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

and how those activities will be evaluated will help to mobilize voluntary assistance.
We invite the governing council, with the assistance of appropriate technical experts,
as needed, and in consultation with Member States, as appropriate, to draft a legal
charter to be adopted by the General Assembly before the end of 2016 and to
elaborate other detailed operational and policy documents necessary for the
operationalization and sustainable functioning of the technology bank.
100. We stress that generous and sustained support will be crucial to ensure the
success of the technology bank for the least developed countries. We welcome the
fact that Turkey will host the technology bank in Gebze, and we call upon the
Government of Turkey to continue its support for the technology bank. We urge
developed and developing country partners, as well as international organizations,
foundations and the private sector, to provide voluntary financial and technical
assistance to the technology bank to ensure its effective operation.
101. We recognize the importance of ensuring access for poor and excluded
households and localities to adapted technologies that can facilitate entry to new
markets and provide renewable energy sources, waste management and clean water.
Resilience-building
102. We emphasize that building resilience at the national level, as well as the
subnational, community and individual levels, is critical to sustaining hard-won
development gains and accelerating progress towards achieving the development
aspirations set in the Istanbul Programme of Action. More investment in the
capacities and institutions of local authorities, the building of livelihoods, inclusive
and rapid growth, disaster preparedness, the application of information and
communications technologies and science and technology, social protection and
good governance will contribute to strengthening resilience in an e ffective manner.
103. We welcome the Paris Agreement, in which parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change established the global goal on
adaptation of enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing
vulnerability to climate change and recognized that adaptation is a global challenge
faced by all, taking into account the urgent and immediate needs of those
developing country parties to the Framework Convention that are particularly
vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.
104. We welcome the fact that the Paris Agreement can play an important role in
the transformation to low greenhouse gas emissions and climate -resilient societies
and help to build resilience and reduce vulnerability to the adverse effects of climate
change, taking into account the urgent and immediate needs of those de veloping
country parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.
105. We call for effective delivery on climate change commitments and access for
the least developed countries to all relevant climate change -related funds, as
applicable.
106. We welcome the decisions of the Board of the Green Climate Fund to aim for a
50:50 balance between mitigation and adaptation over time on a grant -equivalent
basis and a floor of 50 per cent of the adaptation allocation for particularly
vulnerable countries, including the least developed countries. We welcome the
recent pledges to the Least Developed Countries Fund at the twenty-first session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, and call upon the developed countries to continue to provide
22/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

support to vulnerable countries, including the least developed countries, to address
their adaptation needs. We encourage other parties to the Framework Convention to
provide or continue to provide such support voluntarily.
107. We stress the importance of developing and implementing holistic disaste r risk
reduction strategies integrated at all levels in line with the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 and of supporting national and local capacity for
disaster prevention, preparedness, mitigation, response, recovery and rehabilitat ion.
In this regard, we call for the continuation of the work in relevant institutions to
support efforts by the least developed countries to build their national capacity to
respond to various kinds of shocks, including through funds and other tools.
108. We urge both development partners and the least developed countries to make
full use of various context-specific programmes and instruments that are already in
place. In some instances, resilience programmes may require country -level pooled
funding mechanisms that provide assistance and reduce transaction costs for a
particular least developed country.
109. We underline the need to reduce the vulnerability of the least developed
countries to economic, natural and environmental shocks and disasters, as well as
climate change, and to enhance their ability to meet these and other challenges by
strengthening their resilience, and in this regard stress that it is important that all
countries and other actors work together to further develop and implement concrete
measures on an urgent basis at the national and international levels so as to build the
resilience of the least developed countries to withstand economic shocks and
mitigate their adverse effects, to withstand and overcome the adverse effects of
climate change, to enhance sustainable growth and protect biodiversity and to
withstand natural hazards in order to reduce the risk of disasters, as agreed upon in
the Istanbul Programme of Action.
110. We renew our resolve to fulfil our commitments to further implement the
Istanbul Programme of Action, and we underscore the urgency of finding additional
solutions to the major challenges facing the least developed countries in a concerted
manner. We recognize that the way forward for crisis mitigation and resilience building requires that coordinated, balanced and integrated actions be taken at all
levels, including through the strengthening of existing initiatives, with the aim of
building the resilience of the least developed countries in overcoming their
vulnerabilities.
111. We decide to undertake an in-depth analysis on crisis mitigation and resiliencebuilding for the least developed countries, at the national and international levels,
with a view to building and further strengthening crisis mitigation and resilience in
the least developed countries, and we request the General Assembly to determine the
parameters of this analysis at its seventy-first session.
112. We stress the importance of working on conflict prevention and peacebuilding
to promote social cohesion and of empowering the least developed countries to
become inclusive and resilient to external and internal shocks that could result in
new cycles of violence. Conflict prevention measures with adequate early warning
and risk assessment tools can assist in avoiding or at least mitigating adverse
impacts of shocks. We express our commitment to take earl y action to prevent
extreme violence and armed conflict by supporting and strengthening core
governance institutions, strengthening national capacities for conflict prevention and
management of ongoing tensions with civil society and marginalized communiti es,
including women and youth, facilitating dialogue and consensus -building, and
mainstreaming conflict prevention and early warning in development within the
United Nations system through conflict analysis and assessment.
23/25

A/RES/70/294

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

113. We note that women and girls, especially those belonging to the poorest
segments of society, are among those who are affected disproportionately during and
in the aftermath of crises and disasters. We reaffirm our commitment to put in place
gender-responsive policies and actions to address crises and disasters, including by
ensuring women’s full, equal and effective participation and leadership in decisionmaking, building their capacity for preparedness and resilient livelihoods.
United Nations system support
114. We reiterate that the Office of the High Representative for the Least
Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States should continue to fulfil its functions to assist the Secretary General in the effective follow-up and monitoring of the implementation of the
Istanbul Programme of Action and the full mobilization and coordination of all parts
of the United Nations system, with a view to facilitating the coordinated
implementation of and coherence in the follow-up and monitoring of the Programme
of Action at the country, regional and global levels, and should continue to assist in
mobilizing international support and resources for the implementation of the
Programme of Action. To this end, it should continue its awareness -raising and
advocacy work in favour of the least developed countries, in partnership with the
relevant parts of the United Nations system, as well as with parliaments, civil
society, the media, academia and foundations, and should continue to provide
appropriate support to group consultations of least developed countries.
115. We reiterate our request to the Secretary-General to ensure the full
mobilization and coordination of all parts of the United Nations system to facilitate
coordinated implementation and coherence in the follow-up and monitoring of the
Istanbul Programme of Action at the national, subregional, regional and global
levels. The coordination mechanisms available, such as the United Nations System
Chief Executives Board for Coordination and the United Nations Development
Group, should be broadly utilized and the inter-agency consultative group should be
kept active in this regard.
116. We reiterate the importance of effective linkages in the follow -up and review
arrangements of all relevant United Nations conferences and processes, including on
the least developed countries, small island developing States and landlocked
developing countries.
117. We reiterate our invitation to the governing bodies of the United Nations
funds and programmes and other multilateral organizations and international
financial institutions to contribute to implementing the Istanbul Programme of
Action and to integrate it into their work programmes, as appropriate and in
accordance with their respective mandates. These organiz ations are invited to
participate fully in reviews of the Programme of Action at the national,
subregional, regional and global levels. We are concerned that the share of
expenditure for the operational activities for development of the United Nations
system in the least developed countries is declining. We invite the governing bodies
of the organizations of the United Nations development system and other
multilateral organizations to prioritize allocations to the least developed countries,
as appropriate and in accordance with their respective mandates.
118. We reiterate that treating the least developed countries as a group on the basis
of their low per capita income, human asset development and economic
vulnerability remains the fundamental premise for special measures in their favour,
and that wider recognition of least developed country status could stimulate and
24/25

Political Declaration of the Comprehensive High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation of
the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020

A/RES/70/294

facilitate better integration of the Istanbul Programme of Action into development
policies. We invite the Committee for Development Policy to look into the reasons
and consequences of the non-application of the least developed country category by
some United Nations development system organizations and to include its findings
on this matter in its annual report to the Economic and Social Counci l.
119. We recommit to the broadening and strengthening of the voice and
participation of developing countries in international economic decision -making and
norm-setting and in global economic governance. We invite the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision and the other main international regulatory standard-setting
bodies to continue efforts to increase the voice of developing countries in norm setting processes to ensure that their concerns are taken into consideration. We
reiterate that more effective representation of the least developed countries in
decision-making at the global level could improve the international environment for
the development of the least developed countries. We also reiterate that the
international economic system and architecture should be inclusive and responsive
to the special development needs of the least developed countries, ensuring their
effective participation, voice and representation at all levels.
Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
120. We encourage the General Assembly to consider holding the Fifth United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries in 2021.

25/25
