S/PV.7633

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7633rd meeting

Friday, 26 February 2016, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ramírez Carreño. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-05217 (E)
*1605217*

S/PV.7633

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like to
begin its intervention by publicly thanking all Council
members and their delegations for their support during
our presidency for the month of February. We would
also like to publicly thank all members of the staff of
the secretariat of the Security Council, in particular
Mr. Movses Abelian, as well as the interpreters,
technicians and other support staff for their full
cooperation during our presidency.
The month of February has been one of intense
work. We are ready to hand over the presidency on
29 February at midnight, as is the custom, to our
brother, the representative of Angola. Over the month,
we promoted our work in a constructive and transparent
fashion, holding more than 21 meetings of different
formats. That number includes three debates, two of
which were open to all Members of the United Nations.
Twenty consultations were held, and six resolutions,
seven press statements and one note by the President
were adopted. In addition, within the framework of
consultations, we considered 14 updates under the item
“Other business”.
With regard to the debates held this month, we
would like to begin with the debate held on 11 February
(see S/PV.7620) on the working methods of the
subsidiary organs of the Security Council, in particular
those of the sanctions committees. That was a very
valuable meeting on the dynamics of the Security
Council. It allowed us, for the first time, to hear those
countries that are currently or have been subject to
United Nations sanctions regimes, and to the Chairs
and former Chairs of subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council, in particular the sanctions committees, as well
as those countries that participated in the 2015 highlevel review of United Nations sanctions.
2/24

26/02/2016

The outcome of that debate was the adoption of
a note (S/2016/170) by the President of the Security
Council on the work of the subsidiary organs of
the Security Council, which was distributed on
22 February. In that note, Council members committed
to the implementation of a number of measures.
The first is to improve the transparency of the
subsidiary organs of the Security Council, including by
encouraging all Chairs to provide non-members of the
Council with interactive briefings, as appropriate, and
to consider any other possibilities for non-members to
provide input to their work. It also includes encouraging
all Chairs to continue to brief the Council in open
meetings, including on relevant reports, as appropriate;
and encouraging them, as appropriate, to provide an
agreed brief summary of the relevant meetings of the
subsidiary organs of the Council to non-members of the
Council, including through press releases. Moreover,
it includes requesting the Secretariat to announce all
meetings and provisional agendas of the subsidiary
organs of the Council to the public in the Journal of the
United Nations and on the websites of the subsidiary
organs, and encouraging all Chairs to seek the views
of affected or concerned Member States and to foster
early and periodic engagement and dialogue between
them and the relevant sanctions monitoring teams,
groups and panels of experts throughout the course of
their mandate. It includes, furthermore, encouraging
all Chairs to continue to travel periodically to regions
applicable to their work to seek the views of, and
engage with, affected or concerned States and explain
and promote the objectives of the subsidiary organ’s
mandate. The Secretariat will be encouraged to
maintain the translation of all United Nations sanctions
lists into all of the official languages of the United
Nations, and to continue to ensure that the information
on the websites of the subsidiary organs of the Council
is accurate and updated in all of the official languages
of the United Nations, including the reports of sanctions
monitoring teams, groups and panels.
The second measure is to improve the process of
the selection of Chairs by, inter alia, undertaking an
informal process with the participation of all Council
members with regard to appointing the Chairs of
the subsidiary organs in a balanced, transparent,
efficient and inclusive way. The measure also includes
encouraging the early appointment of Chairs of
subsidiary bodies. To that end, members of the Council
will start the informal process of consultations referred
16-05217

26/02/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

to in the note (S/2012/937) by the President of the
Security Council of 17 December 2012 as early as
possible after each election of members of the Council.
Thirdly, improvement will also be made to
preparing the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies. To that
end, the note recognizes the support the Secretariat
provides to the incoming Chairs and asks it to consider
adopting other measures to provide incoming Chairs
and their staff with additional substantive information,
including on methodology, on the work of the relevant
subsidiary body. Outgoing chairs would be encouraged
to provide information to incoming Chairs, in writing
and orally, on the work carried out during their
chairmanship. The note also encourages the holding of
timely consultations between the incoming Chairs and
the teams, expert groups and related groups responsible
for overseeing sanctions.
Fourthly, the note encourages improving the
interaction and coordination among the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council and between the
subsidiary bodies and the Council as a whole. That
includes, among other things, that all Chairs will
be encouraged, in particular those presiding over
subsidiary bodies covering similar themes and
geographic areas, to meet regularly to discuss common
problems, improve best practices and enhance mutual
cooperation, and to request the Secretariat to provide
support to those meetings. Moreover, members of the
Security Council will be encouraged to promote greater
coordination between the Council as a whole and its
subsidiary bodies when thematic issues or situations
involving specific countries are considered.
Fifthly, Council members are encouraged to
continue to consider how to improve the work of its
subsididary bodies.
Venezuela expresses its satisfaction at having
promoted that particular debate aimed at improving
the work of the Council’s subsidiary bodies in terms of
transparency, coordination and democracy.
We would also like to mention the open debate
(see S/PV.7621) on the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations as a basic element for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
At that meeting, held on 15 February, more than
70 representatives of Member and Observer States
participaed, with our Minister for Foreign Affairs
presiding. Member and Observer States expressed
their opinions with regard to the observance and

S/PV.7633

respect of the purposes and principles of the Charter.
They stated that in order to ensure international peace
and security, greater efforts needed to be exerted to
promote the purposes and principles of the Charter,
including respect for its provisions. The purposes and
principles — including sovereignty, the equality of
States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States
and refraining from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity and independence of other
countries — are the basic and essential elements to
ensure the full application of the Charter of the United
Nations. And they are essential elements for peaceably
resolving conflicts, thus becoming the path to ensuring
international peace and security.
In similar fashion, we were unambiguous in
emphasizing that attacks on the sovereignty of States,
interference in the internal affairs of States, the
promotion and resort to war as a tool of foreing policy,
among other actions, constituted a threat to the peaceful
coexistence of nations. Many of the statements delivered
underscored the importance of resort to the measures set
out in Article 33 of the Charter and the need for States
abstain from applying coercive measures to conflict
situations that did not represent a threat to international
peace and security. Also emphasized was the role of
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. Participants also called
for developing synergies between such organizations
and the United Nations to that end.
The second open debate (see S/PV.7629) held during
our presidency focused on post-conflict peacebuilding
and the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. We believe that the statements and
observations made during the meeting will inform the
ongoing discussions at the United Nations on how to
improve the response of the Organization to preventing
conflicts, rebuilding States and ensuring lasting peace.
Some of the main conclusions of the debate included
the need to bear in mind the fact that peacekeeping
activities, aimed at ensuring the outbreak, re-emergence
and continuation of war, require medium- and longterm measures to help societies immersed in conflict or
emerging from one.
Participants reiterated that peacebuilding required
the sustained political and financial support of the
United Nations over a prolonged period, even after
peacekeeping operations are no longer deployed. In that
regard, it is crucial to overcome social and economic
problems, provide people with a way to make a living

16-052173/24

S/PV.7633

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

and lay the foundation for broad-based and inclusive
economic growth — the latter being a fundamental
element of any peacebuilding process.
We also noted that the review of the peacebuilding
architecture currently taking place in the Security
Council and the General Assembly required that we
looked at peacebuilding with a broader perspective
and greater determination. What we need now is a new
mindset, not just with regard to the architecture itself
but also the entire focus of peacebuilding as carried
out by the United Nations. Participants also focused on
the need to make greater progress on cooperation on
peacebuilding between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.
Furthermore, with regard to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, it is important to point
out that on 7 February Council members held closed
consultations on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s launch of a missile carrying a ground
observation satellite. That launch entailed the use of
ballistic missile technology, in violation of existing
sanctions. Council members unanimously condemned
that event via a press release, which underscored that the
launch, as well as any other carried out by that country
using ballistic missile technology, was a violation of
resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009), 2087 (2013) and
2094 (2013). Council members reiterated their intention
to develop significant additional measures through a
draft resolution in response to the missile launch and
the nuclear test conducted by North Korea on 6 January.
In addition, during our presidency of the Council we
also paid particular attention to the issue of Palestine.
We did so based on the demand by the majority of the
international community that the Council, consistent
with the its responsibilities under the Charter with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security, play a proactive role to address the question of
Palestine with determination and a sense of justice. In
that regard, we held three rounds of consultations under
the tiem “Other matters” to discuss that issue. The lack
of political will on the part of some actors to resolve
the question of Palestine in the Security Council has to
date prevented the reaching of a definitive solution to
the more than 60-year-old conflict. We regret that the
calls by the Security Council to put an end to the illegal
occupation and the violations of human rights law and
international law by the occupying Power against the
inhabitants of the occupied Palestinian territories,
as well as for the parties to go to the negotiating
4/24

26/02/2016

table, have not led to concrete actions to resolve that
complex situation.
On 25 February, we considered in consultations
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories — the West Bank and Gaza — with
particular emphasis on the children who are victims of
that tragic reality. That was the first time that UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien,
addressed that issue at the Council, during which he
spoke of the lack of basic services, medicines, food and
freedoms — all the result of the economic blockade,
siege, policy of expanding illegal settlements and,
especially, the military aggression by the occupying
Power, which has led to the deaths of so many civilians
in recent decades.
With regard to the conflict in Yemen, the Security
Council considered the situation on two occasions, on
16 and 17 February (see S/PV.7622 and S/PV.7625).
The dire reality being endured by this Arab country
ever since the conflict started in March last year
clearly demonstrates that conflicts cannot be settled
with weapons but with a peaceful, negotiated political
settlement. In that regard, we continue to call for an end
to the fighting, including aerial bombings that have led
to loss of civilian life and a speedy deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in this brother country.
That is why we believe that it is critical to honour
the agreements made during the talks held in December
2015 in Switzerland, in particular with regard to the
establishment of a climate of mutual trust to defuse
tensions and thereby ensure better results in talks on a
peace agreement. The meeting held on 16 February on
the humanitarian situation in Yemen was an opportunity
for Under-Secretary-General Stephen O’Brien to deliver
a briefing on the humanitarian situation in the country.
Mr. O’Brien’s detailed briefing was particularly useful
for updating Council members on the humanitarian
dimension of the conflict in Yemen, which, according
to information given during the meeting, regrettably
shows that the situation is far from encouraging.
In conclusion, the situation in Syria was addressed
seven times by the Security Council during this month
and covered the political environment, chemical
weapons and the humanitarian situation. In that regard,
the Council continued to closely monitor the peace
talks, paying special attention to the outcome of the
Munich conference on 11 February, during which major
16-05217

26/02/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

agreements were reached on the ceasefire to start on
27 February, Damascus time. We hope that the Council
will lend its strong support to the initiative. In that
regard, we are awaiting the adoption of a draft resolution
to be submitted to the Council for consideration in the
next few hours, and will assist in finding a peaceful
political solution to the armed conflict. It requires
effort, dedication and determination from the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, in such an important mission.
We are leaving the presidency of the Council with
the belief that we have made our best effort to promote
the cause of justice and international peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to you, Sir, and the Venezuelan
delegation for the skilful and effective way in which you
have fulfilled presidential functions in February. This
month was extremely busy because of the heavy work
programme proposed by the presidency and because
of events developing quickly around the world. The
Security Council must still hold some key meetings.
Therefore, today’s wrap-up session can only be interim
in nature.
We would like to point out in particular the meeting
(see S/PV.7621) presided over by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Venezuela, Ms. Delcy Eloína Rodríguez
Gómez. At a time when a clear understanding of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
its inviolable nature are often lacking, we consider
it necessary to clearly reconfirm our common
commitment to such provisions, to which there is no
alternative. We cannot close our eyes to what is taking
place today as a result of the flagrant interference in
the internal affairs of many States, through supporting
illegal regime change or the violent implanting of
alien cultural or social norms. The Council is aware of
such examples, and we dwelt on this subject in detail
during the meeting on 15 February. Discussions on the
principles of the Charter are directly related to all issues
discussed within these walls and, on the basis of the
Charter, we must agree on the ways in which we will
implement joint risk management in the context of evermore difficult international relations. Without respect
for the founding principles, this will not be successful.

S/PV.7633

It was a particularly difficult time with regard to
many issues in the Security Council this month. To a
large extent, that was related to the challenging tasks we
faced and the difficult political nature of the issues we
have been considering. However, we would like to point
out some issues in which compromise was not reached
because of the unwillingness of many delegations to
sacrifice their narrow national ambitions for the sake of
the common good. For example, for the second time we
have not been able to agree on a press statement on the
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia. Despite the fact that, generally, there is no doubt
in anyone’s mind regarding the importance of United
Nations cooperation with regional organizations, on
several occasions some delegations have refused to
recognize the cooperation of the Regional Centre with
organizations that are making a genuine contribution to
peace and stability in the region. The Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization are clear examples of the double standards
we regrettably encounter in the Security Council.
The discussion on extending sanctions in Darfur
cannot be deemed productive either. The authors
of the resolution abused their position and tried
unceremoniously to impose their national priorities
on the text, attempting to restrict entire sectors of that
country’s economy. By hiding behind good intentions to
establish peace in Darfur and arbitrarily interpreting the
recommendations of the sanctions experts, the authors
have tried to put pressure on Khartoum, depriving it of
its main source of income. However, they fully ignored
the views of other delegations on this matter. Such a
tactic undermines the unity in the Security Council.
As a result, we had to have a particularly technical
extension of the sanctions resolution, putting to a vote
last year’s text.
The document that was adopted did not include
extremely important wording, including as proposed
by the Russian delegation, to condemn violations of the
arms embargo by illegal armed groups, the recruitment
of child soldiers by rebels and attacks on peacekeepers,
or an appeal for the complete, as opposed to a selective,
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. We hope that this negative experience will
be taken into account when we vote on other draft
resolutions in the Security Council.
At the centre of global politics and the Council’s
work programme in February was the situation in the
Middle East, and first and foremost in Syria. It is not

16-052175/24

S/PV.7633

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

surprising given the number of significant agreements
that were reached this month, and we worked intensively
with the Council keeping its finger on the pulse. The
new trend, if it is exploited responsibly, will make it
possible to hope for an early resumption of inter-Syrian
negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations,
as they were forced to come to an artificial pause at the
beginning of the month because of the unwillingness
on the part of the Syrian opposition to take part in
constructive talks. We hope that the grave blunder that
such groups were allowed to make by putting forward
preconditions will not be repeated.
Close attention was paid to the humanitarian
situation prevailing for a number of years because
of the conflict and the terrorist movements that have
struck that country. We firmly repeat that humanitarian
issues must be considered in a comprehensive way
without unnecessary politicization, which does not help
the Syrians who are suffering. The situation continues
to be difficult, but we did bring this month to a close
with promising progress in that area, which became
possible, including because of Russia’s efforts. On
two occasions at the Security Council, our delegation
raised the issue of the continuing violations of Syrian
sovereignty by Turkey, which are fraught with the risk
of an escalation of that conflict. We hope that that signal
will be received and understood by those to whom it
is addressed and by those who sponsor them. The
publication of the first report of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism to investigate the use of
chemical weapons was another important moment. In
our view, in the light of new facts regarding the use
by terrorists of poisonous substances in Syria and Iraq
and evidence of the free movement of such chemicals
in the region, the importance of the mechanism will
increase and the geographical scope of its mechanism
will broaden.
In conclusion, we would like to wish the Venezuelan
presidency a successful completion of its work
this month. In a couple of hours, we will meet to discuss
a draft resolution that is crucial to a settlement in Syria
on the adoption of a joint statement by the co-Chairs of
the International Syria Support Group on the cessation
of hostilities. On Monday, we will discuss cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, as well as the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
6/24

26/02/2016

Right now, however, I would like to take this
opportunity to wish the incoming Angolan presidency
every success in carrying out its important functions.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): I would first like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Venezuela, on the way in which you have conducted the
work of the Council in February. It has been a very busy
and productive month. You have already discussed the
Council’s activities this month in detail, Mr. President,
so my statement will be short and focused.
We commend the coherence of Venezuela’s
programme of work through its promotion of debates
on crucial issues of fundamental relevance to the
Security Council’s work, such as general issues
related to sanctions and the working methods of the
Council’s subsidiary bodies; respect for the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
and the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. I intend to highlight those thematic issues,
considering their importance within both the general
and the specific areas of work of the Council.
The debate (see S/PV.7620) on working methods
and general issues related to sanctions was an important
contribution to efforts to further clarify that very
sensitive issue. We commend the determination and
perseverance of the Venezuelan delegation in issuing
its concept note (S/2016/102, annex) on the subject, to
which you referred at length, Mr. President, and which
included pertinent and useful provisions regarding
improvements on, among other things, transparency;
selecting and preparing the Chairs of the subsidiary
bodies; and the interaction and coordination between
those bodies and the Council itself. Considering that
the Security Council makes extensive use of sanctions
regimes as an important tool in its attempts to restrict,
impose specific changes in behaviour or deter individuals
or entities in certain States who are regarded as threats
to international peace and security, the sanctions
committees will continue to play a substantive role
as a strong political tool for the Council. Such powers
involve the ability to enforce sanctions regimes and a
constant need to ensure their improvement, particularly
in their decision-making processes, adoption, targeting
and enforcement and also in their lifting.
Another important moment in this month’s
programme was the debate (see S/PV.7621) on respect
for the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, which represented an opportunity for the
16-05217

26/02/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

entire membership of the United Nations to reiterate
its attachment to them. In expressing the principled
commitment of the Organization to maintaining
international peace and security, developing friendly
relations among nations, achieving international
cooperation in solving international problems and
becoming a centre for harmonizing the actions taken
by countries, the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter have become pillars of international
law, establishing a system of collective security that,
despite setbacks, has made the United Nations the main
front in the struggle over the past 70 years to achieve a
more peaceful world, based on respect for international
law, human rights and cooperation among all peoples
and nations, with the ultimate aim of strengthening
universal peace.
The founding of the United Nations and the adoption
of its Charter were remarkable achievements for the
international community. The Charter’s principles
on the sovereign equality of all States and their duty
to fulfil their obligations in good faith; the peaceful
settlement of disputes; non-interference in other
countries’ internal affairs; refraining from the use or
threat of use of force; and solidarity with preventive or
enforcement action directed at any State by the United
Nations have become pillars of international relations
and common wisdom. However, the reality is far from
rosy, and we continue to witness violations of those
principles that constitute a major threat to international
peace and security.
The third debate (see S/PV.7629) held this
month discussed the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture currently under way. It gave
Member States an opportunity to express their views
on this crucial issue at a time when negotiations are
being conducted on a draft resolution on the subject, its
links to conflict prevention and the need for the United
Nations to strengthen its capacity in the area.
The report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture points out that, on the peace agenda,
peacebuilding is seen as a logical follow-up to
peacekeeping and peacemaking, with the main
objective of preventing relapses into conflict once
peace settlements have been secured. Based on that
assumption, two aspects mentioned in the report are
particularly relevant — the need for a change in the
mindset on the role of peacebuilding in the United
Nations system, based on the concept of sustaining

S/PV.7633

peace, and the vision that peacebuilding must aim to
prevent the outbreak, recurrence or continuation of
armed conflict, and must therefore encompass a wide
range of political, development, humanitarian and
human-rights programmes and mechanisms. Sustaining
peace, according to the report, is a permanent task,
before, during and after conflict, and requires that we
adjust our approaches to peacebuilding.
With regard to the responsibilities of the United
Nations system, and based on the objectives I have just
outlined, peacebuilding covers the Organization’s three
pillars and main organs, whose activity must be better
coordinated and harmonized, and more fully devoted
to the prevention of armed conflict and maintenance of
peace through the promotion of the values and principles
enshrined in the Charter. Since, as such, peacebuilding
cuts across all United Nations activities, it must be
understood as an evolving concept based on the need
to constantly adapt to the realities on the ground and to
the time frames needed for political transitions in the
wake of violent conflict.
We would like to underscore that what is at stake
in the current review of the peacebuilding architecture
is the entire strategy of the United Nations system
for addressing conflict prevention, the root causes
of conflict and the creation of sustainably peaceful
societies in a context of diversity, challenges and
continuing threats to international peace and security.
Finally we would like to once again congratulate
Venezuela on its excellent presidency.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin, Mr. President, by thanking you and your team
for your presidency of the Security Council for what has
been a very busy month of February. I expect that the
two biggest events of the month, in terms of products
that we can agree on, are still ahead of us, and I hope
that we will be coming back together to unanimously
adopt the very important draft resolution mentioned
by the representative of the Russian Federation, which
welcomes the cessation of hostilities due to come into
effect in Syria and points the way towards the political
transition there that is so important for the people of
the country and the region. Secondly, I hope we will
also be able to come together before the end of the
month to agree on a draft resolution on sanctions for
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which we
discussed in consultations yesterday.

16-052177/24

S/PV.7633

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

What I thought I might do in today’s meeting is to
talk about how we work rather than what we work on
and, as we have done before, to use the wrap-up session
to exchange views on our working methods, all of it
with the aim of trying to improve the Council’s overall
efficiency and effectiveness. Back in November,
when we held the presidency, I said there were three
adjectives we wanted to have in mind — “interactive”,
“transparent” and “action-oriented” — and I would like
to say a little bit about what we mean by each of those
three, in order to see if they can help to improve the
Council’s overall efficiency and effectiveness.
Starting off on the topic of interactivity, I note
that, first of all, that there are two different ways of
doing these wrap-up sessions; either we do it formally
here, which has the benefit of being a formal meeting
of the Council but has the disadvantage of there being
no interactivity with the people listening and watching,
or we do it in another Chamber, which has the benefit
of genuine interactivity. I think that I can say that
people are voting with their feet. I counted, I think,
17 people in the red seats. They are all very welcome,
and it is great that they are all still awake, just about,
but when we did the session informally in one of the
other Chambers, we had the vast majority of the 193
members of the General Assembly present, many of
them at the Permanent-Representative level. I think that
perhaps there is a message there for how we do these
wrap-up sessions and increase the overall interactivity
between the Council and the rest of the United Nations
membership.
But there is also a message about interactivity in
terms of how we work with each other, about getting
high-quality briefers, about genuinely listening and
engaging with them, and about genuinely engaging with
each other on the contents of what we are discussing.
There is a clear link between the level of engagement or
interactivity, on the one hand, and the products that can
come out, on the other.
To take a couple of examples from this month, we
very much welcome the discussion that the Venezuelan
presidency organized on the workings of the subsidiary
bodies on 11 February (see S/PV.7620). There was
a very thoughtful concept note, which informed the
exchange of views (S/2016/102, annex). The United
Kingdom did not agree with everything in it, but we
thought that it was very well thought through, and it
led to an interesting exchange of views. And following
the discussion, the Venezuelan presidency worked
8/24

26/02/2016

on a presidential note (S/2016/170), which, again, we
welcome very much, to capture the areas of agreement.
As a result of the interactivity, the Council was able
to agree on this note last week, and we now have a
series of specific, concrete, practical suggestions that
will, I hope, improve the transparency and outreach of
the committees, encourage Chairs to share experience
between incoming and outgoing Chairs and across
different committees. It was a useful exchange of
views; there was some interaction following it and a
positive outcome.
On the other hand, we had, as others have mentioned
already, an open debate about respecting the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
(see S/PV. 7621), which is an admirable topic for a
debate. I naturally strongly agree with those who say
that we must uphold the purposes and principles of the
Charter. I would just question whether a whole series
of 70 statements by 70 different countries over a whole
day is actually going to change anyone’s mind about
such an important issue. It was clear from that debate
that it is an interesting issue and that people want to
talk about it, but there was absolutely zero interactivity
at any point in that debate. I am therefore pretty sure,
as a result, that nothing really is going to change, which
is a shame because it is an important topic and it was
a whole day out of the short month of February. I am
not criticizing the topic of the debate. I am just saying
that we need to think further about how we build some
interactivity into our debates to drive up the level of
engagement, which in turn will drive up the usefulness
of the product or products that come out of the meetings.
That is a little bit about interactivity.
On transparency, everything we do in the Chamber
is of course transparent because the cameras are on
us, but there are times when need to meet privately.
It is very important that we be able to do so, in the
Consultations Room. It is incumbent upon us to
be transparent in terms of telling the rest of the
membership, and indeed the public through the media,
that we have had discussions, and broadly speaking what
the discussions were about it, what we agreed on, what
were the areas of disagreement, what are going to do
next. That level of transparency each and every time we
have a meeting in the Consultations Room, whether its
formal consultations or any other business or anything
else, I think that we should try to increase the level of
transparency between us and the outside world, as a
result of those discussions. If not, then particularly if
16-05217

26/02/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

our debates in this Chamber are very stilted and formal,
with no engagement, then people will rightly assume
that the real action is happening elsewhere, and I think
they need to know a little bit more than they currently
do about what that real action looks like.
Thirdly, and finally, I would like to say a little
bit about action-oriented debates, consultations and
meetings. I am very keen that we do not just have a
discussion for the sake of having a discussion. From
the statistics that the President mentioned, it is clear
that on a couple of topics we have had a very large
number of discussions one way or another. Were we
really making sure that each and every one of those
was action-oriented so that something would actually
happen as a result that was different? I am not sure that
we can say that, honestly.
We have five “any other business” items. Yesterday,
one of them was extremely action-oriented — the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea — because
the United States and China came forward with a draft
resolution, which is extremely welcome. On one of the
others — on the Sudan and South Sudan — we had
some action in terms of an agreed press element, which
the presidency was able to tell the media about, but on
the others, as far as I can see, there is actually no action
resulting at all, and it seems to me that might something
worthy looking at if we are trying improve our overall
efficiency and effectiveness.
Those are the three points I wanted to make — the
Council needs to be more interactive, transparent and
action-oriented. I think these concepts are all linked, in
a way, and we can get a better action coming out if we
are interactive and transparent. But I hope that people
will accept my suggestions in the spirit in which they
are intended, which is to be positive and constructive
and to improve the overall effectiveness of the Council.
Finally, to wrap up, I just want to thank the President
and his team again for a very full and productive month
of February. I wish all the very best to the whole of
the Angolan delegation and to Movses, who might
have left the Chamber — maybe he has had enough
already — but I thank him very much on behalf of the
Security Council for his work in the role of leading
the Secretariat.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank and congratulate the President and his
team for their able leadership of the Security Council
during the month of February. Our programme of work

S/PV.7633

during the month was busy, with very important issues
and considerations. The consensus agreements on draft
resolutions regarding the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the cessation of hostilities in Syria were
the crowning achievement of all our efforts. We would
like to make the following observations on the different
issues before the Council this month.
First of all, we would like to comment on the open
debate on the working methods of the subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council (see S/PV.7620). We welcome
the positive results mentioned in the briefing and the
publication of the note by the President contained in
document S/2016/170 on 22 February. We express our
gratitude to the Venezuelan delegation for its initiative
in that regard. We stress the importance of this note
by the President and the need to have it implemented
in practical terms. This is a joint responsibility of the
leadership of the subsidiary bodies, their members
and their secretariats, particularly in terms of the
transparency of the work of these bodies and the need
for an objective vision of promoting sanctions regimes
as one of the methods available to the Security Council
that enhances its credibility and ability to realize the
purposes and principles of the Charter.
Secondly, in the open debate in respect of
the purposes and principles of the Charter (see
S/PV.7621), many countries and groups of countries
presented important ideas, particularly in terms of the
maintenance of international peace and security. We
would like to state the importance of the political will
to respect the Charter and its provisions and for the
United Nations to bear its responsibility to develop and
improve its ability to play its role. Otherwise, it will
have to withdraw from the international arena, with
reliance on it gradually decreasing.
Thirdly, the open debate on the comprehensive
review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
considered a number of important issues, most
importantly the prevention of conflict from a political,
social and development perspective. The Council thus
shouldered its responsibilities in this regard through
a commitment to the letter and the spirit of Chapters
VI and VIII of the Charter, giving precedence to
preventive diplomacy and cooperation with regional
organizations with a view to the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Egypt hopes that these positive ideas will
be reflected in the current negotiations on a draft joint
resolution of the Council and the General Assembly on
the review process.

16-052179/24

S/PV.7633

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Fourthly, as concerns Syria, the crisis there was
once again at the top of the Council’s priorities. The
developments we have witnessed recently have been
marked by the positive step of having reached an
understanding on the cessation of hostilities in Syria.
We call on all Syrian and non-Syrian parties to remain
committed to this agreement and to the continuation of
the Geneva talks, as well as to beginning negotiations
between the Syrian Government and the opposition,
under the auspices of the United Nations.
Furthermore, while military operations have
intensified, members of the Council have witnessed
positive developments in terms of access to humanitarian
assistance. We encourage all parties to continue to do
their utmost to alleviate the suffering of the civilian
population and stress once again that the Vienna
process for a political settlement, which resulted in the
International Support Group as well as the adoption of
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015), has opened a
new and historic window of opportunity for a peaceful
settlement in Syria that may not reappear for years.
The Security Council bears the responsibility of
guaranteeing the implementation of the plan of action
and preserving the consensus of the Council as reflected
in its resolution without selectivity or preconditions.
Negotiations over a transitional period and access to
humanitarian assistance, as well as fighting terrorism,
are all parallel tracks that should be approached without
delay, taking into account the importance of reaching a
political settlement of the crisis as the ideal way to put
an end to the suffering of the civilian population and to
fight terrorism.
Fifthly, February was also busy with consultations
on the question of Palestine, particularly concerning
the humanitarian suffering and the continued violations
of the rights of the Palestinian people. We would like to
reiterate that the question of Palestine is at an extremely
delicate stage, since Israeli settlement policies, the
confiscation of Palestinian lands and the destruction of
their homes have almost destroyed every prospect for a
political settlement based on the two-State solution. We
have two options: either the international community,
including the Security Council, takes action to defend
the rights of the Palestinian people and put forward a
two-State-based solution, or we should start seriously
considering how to deal with a policy of imposing the
reality of a one-State solution.
10/24

26/02/2016

Sixthly, on Burundi, February was also busy with
diplomatic efforts with regard to the political crisis
in Burundi, following the visit paid by the Council
to Bujumbura and Addis Ababa and the visits by the
Secretary-General and the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as the high-level
delegation of the African Union to Burundi, expressing
the concern of the international community and its
interest in putting a speedy end to the conflict. However,
we would warn against any attempts motivated by a
specific vision of the settlement of the crisis and the
means of its implementation, as well as of the role of
the United Nations and its nature, without consultation
with the Burundi Government and members of the
peaceful opposition, as well as civil society and the
other regional parties concerned.
We believe that the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Conflict Prevention, including in Burundi,
should be given the proper mandate to deal with this
crisis and to preserve the gains that we have achieved
since the Arusha Agreement entered into force. We call
on the Security Council to listen to the different views
of and assessments by the various parties that have
visited Burundi to arrive at a proper strategy to deal
with the crisis. We reiterate our readiness to effectively
contribute to our consideration of this crisis.
In conclusion, we wish you every success,
Mr. President, and we also wish success to the
next presidency.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the entire Senegalese delegation, it is my pleasure to
convey, through you, to the Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela our warmest congratulations on
a very rich and productive presidency of the Security
Council during this, the shortest month of the year,
February. It was rich and productive in terms of the
number of open meetings and closed consultations, the
diversity of the issues debated and the results achieved.
The positive report that you, Sir, have just presented
means that I shall not need to touch on a good number
of questions. I shall limit myself to recalling the
numerous presidential statements, elements to the press
and resolutions, which are testimony to our work under
your presidency.
Under the presidency of Venezuela, the Security
Council has been able to focus its attention on very
urgent matters such as the situations in Syria and Yemen
and the Korean nuclear issue, but above all we were able
16-05217

26/02/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

to cast light on long-standing but key conflicts such as
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the tragic situation
in Palestine.
Mr. President, through the skilful use of the
procedures and the agenda of the Security Council,
you were able to raise such important issues as the
question of the sanctions regime, the role of the Council
in improving the peacebuilding architecture and the
methods of work of the Security Council. African
issues also received attention: Somalia, the Sudan,
South Sudan, Mali and the Central African Republic,
as well as the situation in Guinea-Bissau, on which our
Council has just unanimously adopted resolution 2267
(2016).
Mr. President, you were able, through recourse
to the values and cultural wealth of your country, to
organize a concert by the Venezuelan philharmonic
orchestra, showing that the Security Council is made
up of States and peoples with shared values.
Coming back to the statement by our friend Matthew
of the United Kingdom on the issue of interactivity,
transparency and results-oriented actions, I believe
that the many other topics that were raised yesterday
when we discussed the North Korean nuclear issue
and the appointment of the prosecutor of the Residual
Mechanism are examples of transparency.
Senegal welcomes the reasserted commitment
of the Security Council to support the countries
neighbouring Senegal, including, Guinea Bissau, in
terms of reconstruction and peacebuilding.
The third lesson that I would like to underscore is
that the work we have undertaken this month shows the
importance of a strong and ongoing commitment by
the Security Council to taking bold initiatives in many
crises and encouraging positive momentum with a view
to resolving them. It is under your presidency, Sir, that
the Council decided to visit West Africa, which will
take place next week with a visit to Mali, a neighbouring
country of Senegalm to Guinea-Bissau and to Senegal
to take account of things with the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Office of the Secretary-General
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sahel.
Once again, on behalf of the delegation of Senegal,
I would like to reiterate our congratulations to you,
Mr. President, and take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the leadership that you, Sir, have demonstrated, and

S/PV.7633

which honours your country. I would like to take this
opportunity to also wish good luck to the delegation of
Angola, which will take the helm in March. I assure it
the full support of the Senegalese delegation.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank and congratulate the
Ambassador of Venezuela and his entire team for
the significant work they have carried out this month
and for a very productive presidency. With a smile,
you, Mr. President, have imposed on us an intensive
programme of work with a record number of items under
“Other matters”, including four that were discussed
yesterday. We thank you, Sir.
We had a busy agenda, but I will address some
issues of particular importance, among many others,
without mentioning other issues, such as that of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, for example,
which we discussed yesterday. I hope we will quickly
be able to move to a vote on that matter on the excellent
draft resolution that has been put forward.
With regard to Africa, I would like to make a few
comments on Burundi and the Central African Republic.
The Council’s visit at the end of January and the visit
of the Secretary-General to Bujumbura on 22 and
23 February helped to strengthen the international
community’s momentum to demand that the actors
in Burundi put an end to violence and begin a true
inter-Burundian dialogue without delay. We hope that
the high-level visit of the Heads of State of the African
Union yesterday and today will help secure concrete
commitments, especially from President Nkurunziza,
in that regard.
It is essential for us that the Council do everything
in its power to avoid a situation in which the Burundi
crisis becomes a civil war or worse. The deployment of
a United Nations police contingent is a key element in
that regard. We regret that an agreement still has not
been reached on our draft presidential statement on
that subject. We will continue to tirelessly push in that
direction with a spirit of responsibility and vigilance
to support the efforts of the African Union. Depending
on the results of the visit of the African Union Heads
of State, we will resume the initiative to support
their actions.
With regard to the Central African Republic, we
welcome the adoption, on 9 February of resolution
2264 (2016), which increased the number of
correctional officers deployed to the United Nations

16-0521711/24

S/PV.7633

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), will help
to strengthen our fight against impunity. The holding
of the presidential election is a real collective success
story for people of the Central African Republic, but
also for MINUSCA, Operation Sangaris and all those
who supported the country’s recovery. The electoral
process will reach its conclusion and should allow a
transition to take place on 31 March. Once the transition
is complete, the Security Council must remain seized of
the matter to support the Central African Republic to
ensure its stability and reconciliation.
I would also like to mention the pressing issue of
this day, the question of Syria. France supports a process
that will lead to tangible results for the Syrian people,
not a process for its own sake. We must only mention
the obvious, as recalled by the Secretary-General in
his letter of 17 February, that if Syrians do not see
any results in their daily lives, negotiations will not
be credible and they will remain an abstract — that is,
absurd — piece of theatre. That is the guiding principle
of our approach and that is why we have consistently
condemned attacks against civilians and called for
the immediate lifting of all sieges and for permanent,
secure and unconditional access for humanitarian
assistance to all persons in need.
We also welcomed the cessation of hostilities
agreement reached by the United States and Russia,
on 12 February, as a significant contribution to the
resolution of the Syrian conflict. France will fully
support the adoption this afternoon of the draft
resolution endorsing the parameters of that cessation
of hostilities agreement. However, if the role of the
Security Council is to support, without hesitation,
anything that can lead to a sustainable reduction in
violence, it must also involve an effort to ensure that
we have the collective means to fully implement such
an initiative.
We must also keep in mind that, although the
cessation of hostilities is welcome, it is only a first
step in reducing violence. The key will be the ability
to achieve, through the inter-Syrian negotiations
coordinated by the Special Envoy, the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex), as only a real transition will lay
the foundation for a real end to the crisis in Syrian.
With regard to the peace process, we hope, with our
initiative, to change the status quo — which is in fact
12/24

26/02/2016

a regression that increasingly weakens the two-State
solution and which threatens to lead to an explosion
on the ground. France is moving forward methodically
with its initiative by initially bringing together the
members of the International Syria Support Group and,
in time, the parties in the framework of an international
conference. While we do not believe that the conditions
exist for positive action by the Security Council, but we
remain determined to ensure that the Council can play
the role it should play when the time comes.
We will act in full transparency and in close
consultation with all the parties concerned. Our
approach is constructive and collective so that we
can find a way out of this very harmful situation. We
also will seek to build on the efforts of the different
partners, in particular the Quartet, whose statement
of 12 February is in accordance with our efforts. The
appointment of a special high-level envoy, Mr. Pierre
Vimont, our former Ambassador to the United States
and former Executive Secretary-General of the
European External Action Service, will allow us to
begin to hold extensive consultations. I will regularly
inform the Council of our progress on that front.
With regard to Libya, there have also been a number
of significant developments in February. Steps have
been taken towards the establishment of a government
of national unity. Members of the Presidential Council
reached an agreement on 15 February to propose a
second, narrower, consolidated list of members of the
Government. France, with other partners, welcomed
that announcement. While a majority of members in the
House of Representatives signed a statement endorsing
the Government, this is a decisive moment. The
endorsement of that list and the definitive establishment
of a Government of national unity are essential to
address the worrying humanitarian and economic
crises in the country and to confront the threat of
Da’esh. We fully supported the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Martin Kobler, in his efforts.
We will continue to fully support the political process
so that the Government of national unity can be set up
as soon as possible. The Security Council consultations
that will take place on 2 March are expected to reaffirm
our collective support for United Nations mediation and
the ongoing process.
Lastly, the briefing of the Council planned
for Monday with the participation of the German
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe presents the opportunity to
16-05217

26/02/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

recall the central role played by the United Nations in
the resolution of the crisis in Ukraine, as well as the need
for the full implementation of the Minsk agreements.
In that regard, France has regularly recalled that the
agreements are the only possible framework for a
negotiated solution.
I will conclude by again thanking the Venezuelan
presidency and by wishing Angola, which takes over in
a few days, the best of luck.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank and congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
for its efforts in the presidency this month. I would also
like to thank you, Sir, for your comprehensive report on
the activities of the Security Council during the month
of February.
(spoke in English)
Of the many difficult issues that the Council has
dealt with in February, I would like to concentrate on
three. They include two important crises on which
the Council will make important decisions today
and, hopefully, tomorrow. One is the nuclear test and
ballistic missile launched by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Another is Syria. The third issue
that I want to touch upon is the working methods of the
Council, on which the President reported at length.
First, on 6 February, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea launched a ballistic missile. After
the nuclear test in January, that launch is yet another
clear and flagrant violation by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. These are not just violations of Council
resolutions, but also totally unacceptable challenges
to the Charter of the United Nations. The combination
of nuclear and ballistic missile development pursued
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a
real threat to the national security of Japan. It also
seriously undermines the peace and stability of the
region and beyond. Yesterday, a draft resolution was
introduced by the United States. That draft resolution
is very comprehensive and robust. I would like to
express our sincere appreciation to Ambassador Power
and her team for taking the lead. My appreciation also
goes to China for its efforts. It is now crucial for all
of us in the Council to unite in order to adopt a draft
resolution as quickly as possible — tomorrow, to be
more precise — in order to send a strong message to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The adoption

S/PV.7633

of a new draft resolution is not an end, but a beginning.
Resolutions are effective only when fully implemented.
Implementation is therefore crucial to changing the
policy of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
with regard to its nuclear and missile development, and
to bringing it back to dialogue. I would like to take
this opportunity to emphasize the importance for all of
us to fully implement the obligations contained in the
relevant resolutions, including the draft resolution that
will be adopted very soon.
The second matter is Syria. With profound regret,
I have to point out that five long years have passed
since the outbreak of the crisis in Syria. According
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, more than a quarter of a million Syrians have
been killed, and 4.6 million fled their country during
in that time. It is clear that there is no way to end the
dire situation of Syrians without a comprehensive
political solution. Once again, let me underscore the
importance of the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), unanimously adopted on 18 December
2015. The Council is expected to adopt a new draft
resolution today endorsing the recent joint statement
of the United States and the Russian Federation on a
cessation of hostilities in Syria. The implementation of
that new draft resolution will be another responsibility
for all of us.
Thirdly, let me mention the working methods. In
my capacity as Chair of the Security Council Informal
Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural
Questions, I have the pleasure to announce that our first
meeting will be convened on 7 March. I am delighted
to inherit the significant achievements already made in
this field, including the work of Angola as former Chair
of the Working Group, the presidential statements
issued under the Spanish presidency last October and
the most recent presidential note, S/2016/170, issued
under the Venezuelan presidency this month.
Japan also took the lead in comparing presidential
note S/2010/507 when we last served on the Council. I
would like to make a concrete contribution in that area
during my chairmanship, building upon the significant
achievements to which I just referred. To that end, I
seek strong cooperation and support from the members
of the Security Council. It is also my intention to
continue to listen closely to the voices of the broader
membership of the United Nations. In that context, I
was very encouraged by the recent discussions held at
the intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council

16-0521713/24

S/PV.7633

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

reform. Many delegations expressed their strong
expectations that the Informal Working Group would
make further progress on transparency and closer
cooperation with the General Assembly. I was very
encouraged to hear from Ambassador Matthew Rycroft
of the United Kingdom — who is no longer here — who
said that the Security Council could benefit greatly
from listening to the voices coming from the General
Assembly. He did not say the often-quoted phrase
that the Security Council is the master of its rules of
procedure.
Before concluding my statement, though I do
not seem him in the Chamber, I wish to express my
profound gratitude to Movses Abelian for his invaluable
contribution as Director of the Security Council Affairs
Division, and congratulate him on his promotion. I
hope my appreciation will be conveyed to him. My
only regret is that Movses will be gone when I have the
honour to preside over the Council during the month
of July.
Finally, I would like to reiterate my appreciation to
you, Mr. President, and to the entire Venezuelan team
for your tireless work. There are only three days left.
I wish Ambassador Ismael Gaspar Martins — who is
also not present — and the Mission of Angola every
success in March.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I, too, want to
congratulate Venezuela for a very productive and busy
month. I will come back to that in a minute.
I want to talk a little about working methods and a
little bit about some of the key issues that we have dealt
with this month.
On working methods specifically, I want to thank
Venezuela for its initiative in convening the discussion
on the working methods of the subsidary bodies of the
Security Council (see S/PV.7620). We found that to be
one of the more interesting discussions we have had in
this Chamber. I am sure — in fact, I know from the
feedback I have received from other members of the
General Assembly — that they also found that exercise
to be very useful. What is clear from the debate and
the note we have now agreed on (S/2016/170) is that
there is room for improvement. We need to work
smarter and focus our efforts on discharging our
core responsibilities. For our part, New Zealand will
continue to strive for a behavioural change in the way
subsidiary bodies operate. Focusing on outcomes over
14/24

26/02/2016

adherence to formalistic process would give our work
greater meaning.
There are two initiatives in particular that we
will look to take forward. The first is to establish a
transparent and inclusive process for the appointment
of the Chairs of subsidiary bodies. The second one,
which I find is particularly relevant to the work to
the two Committees that I chair, is to achieve greater
coordination between the subsidiary bodies and the
wider Council agenda. On that point, I would note that
the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) is one of the most dangerous situations
we deal with in this organ. It is very important that the
Council’s consideration of that issue be informed by the
work of the Security Council Committee concerning
ISIL and Al-Qaida.
Therefore, I would encourage everybody who
takes part in our subsidiary bodies, whether they be
experts or the Ambassadors who chair them — and I
would encourage other Ambassadors to participate in
the proceedings occasionally, especially the Permanent
Members who do not have the privilege of chairing
those bodies — to carry forward the spirit of the note
we agreed upon in our day-to-day work. We do not need
a large overhaul of the system to ensure that our work is
effective, but we need to display some common sense.
Turning to the programme of work for
February — which, as others have noted, has been a
very busy month, one best exemplified by yesterday’s
marathon effort under “Any other business” — we are
a strong supporter of the use of that item as a means
of addressing important questions. However, I believe
there comes a point when we need to pause and
contemplate as how many isues we can cope with in
the course of a single meeting. With regard to working
methods more generally, I want to pay tribute to what
Matthew Rycroft said in his statement. I agreed with all
he said about the way we need to structure our work and
how we can do better in working together.
As others have also said, one of the most important
questions we have touched on this month was yesterday’s
discussion on sanctions against the Democratic People
Republic of Korea. We have been waiting for a product
on that for two months. It is to be acknowledged that
the working methods through which that product has
emerged does not square with our normal preference,
but we recognize that it is an unusual situation. We
want to pay tribute to the United States of America and
16-05217

26/02/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

China for the very important work they have done. It is
a very important draft resolution. It is different. It sends
the important signal that we want to be sending, and so
we too are among those who would like it adopted as
soon as possible.
On Syria, we can be pleased — perhaps the better
word is “relieved” — that some positive progress has
been made at long last. The adoption of the cessation of
hostilities now provides some hope that a proper peace
process can be put in place and that finally peace can
be achieved in that country. In the meantime, we are
relieved that humanitarian access now seems to be on a
sounder footing, and we would hope that the populations
in the besieged towns will no longer feel that they are
being held to ransom as part of the political struggle
that is going on in that country.
We also want to thank the Council members for the
strong support given to our suggestion that the Council
consider a product on the humanitarian situation in
Yemen. We think that is an issue that needs looking
into next month, and we look forward to working with
other Council members on that idea.
Lastly, I welcome the fact that we have been able
to agree on the trip to West Africa, in particular to
visit Guinea-Bissau. Over a number of months, we
have been among others that have suggested that it is
important that the Council show its close engagement
with that country.
Let me conclude by commending, you, Rafael,
and your team. Not only have you been very busy,
but extremely gracious in the way you have cajoled us
along the course of the difficult work we have all been
engaged in. I think you have shown great dignity and
professionalism, so I thank you for that. And I wish
Angola all the best for next month.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish
to express our utmost appreciation to Venezuela for
organizing this wrap-up session. Malaysia continues to
believe that such meetings provide an important platform
for delegations to place on record their impressions and
reflections on the Security Council’s work.
I join previous speakers, Mr. President, in
congratulating you and the entire Venezuelan delegation
for guiding the Council through what has proved to be
an extremely intense and productive month of February.
Under your presidency, the Council has covered a broad
range of issues and questions concerning specific

S/PV.7633

situations in countries and regions, as well as thematic
issues. The summing up of your presidency clearly
captured how skilfully you have steered the Council to
address those issues.
On that note, we appreciate Venezuela’s initiative
to convene a debate (see S/PV.7620) on working
methods with a focus on the work of the sanctions
committees. We believe that the outcome of the debate
in note S/2016/170, adopted by the Council under
your leadership, lays down important guidelines that
will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Council’s subsidiary bodies. In addition, the open
debate (see S/PV.7621) on respect for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations was an
important opportunity for the Council and the wider
membership to take stock of our collective performance,
in particular in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
We are also pleased to have participated in the open
debate (see S/PV.7629) last Tuesday on the review of
the peacebuilding architecture. We continue to believe
that the strength of the architecture is anchored in
the Peacebuilding Commission and its advocacy and
convening role, as well as in its proven capacity to act
relatively quickly and flexibly. Those are important
features that must be preserved and strengthened in the
review’s outcome.
I also appreciate your efforts, Sir, in organizing
informal discussions on the issue of the selection of the
Secretary-General. In that regard, I note and welcome
the President of the General Assembly’s proactive
initiative of organizing hearings for the aspiring
candidates beginning in mid-April. We are of the view
that the Council should support such initiatives, and
also contribute to making the process more transparent
and inclusive.
The Council and the wider membership remain
seized of numerous challenges and threats to
international peace and security. Throughout this
month, we discussed the work of a number of subsidiary
bodies, namely, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006); the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009), concerning Somalia and
Eritrea; the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the
Sudan; the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South

16-0521715/24

S/PV.7633

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Sudan; and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014).
My delegation welcomes the adoptions of resolution
2266 (2016), on Yemen sanctions. We reaffirm our full
support to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
and his efforts. We also urge the parties in conflict to
put aside their differences in order to achieve a new
ceasefire. Prolonged conflict will only exacerbate
the already dire humanitarian situation. Indeed, the
consequences of the security and political vacuum have
been exploited by the terrorist groups.
In addition to the monthly discussions on the
situation in Palestine, the Council benefited from
additional discussions, specifically on international
protection for the Palestinian people and on the situation
of children in the occupied Palestinian territories. In
that regard, my delegation welcomes and supports the
initiative undertaken by France to revive the Middle
East process. We believe that such an initiative,
aimed at contributing to the peaceful settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, is long overdue.
Later this afternoon, we will continue to respond to
the situation in Syria. It is my delegation’s fervent hope
that this time the cessation of hostilities will be adhered
to by all the parties to the conflict, and allow for some
meaningful respite from the fighting. We reiterate the
call on all the parties to engage constructively in the
United Nations-led dialogue and consultations with a
view to achieving a positive outcome, especially for the
Syrian civilians, women and children who have borne
the brunt of the hostilities.
The Council undertook a visit to Burundi last
month, and a few days ago the Secretary-General was in
the country. Since yesterday, a five-member high-level
African Union delegation has been in consultations with
the Government and other partners and stakeholders in
the country. In the light of such sustained attention and
offers of engagement and support from a wide range
of international actors, we would urge all Burundian
stakeholders to seize the opportunity and engage
constructively with all partners with a view to creating
the necessary conditions for dialogue and for the return
to peace, security and stability.
Very briefly, on Guinea-Bissau, Malaysia is
pleased that the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau has
been extended. We fully support the mission’s role
16/24

26/02/2016

and function in ensuring that the country stays the
course towards national reconciliation, strengthening
governance and achieving security and stability.
Before concluding, I would like to note that the
Council has before it a number of important issues still
to be discussed, and decisions to take, before we close
the chapter for this month. In that regard, I would like
to take this opportunity to stress how vital it is for the
Council to be united in addressing the plight of the
victims of conflict, terrorism and other challenges to
international peace and security around the world. As
such, we must draw deeply on our reserves of goodwill,
flexibility and a spirit of constructiveness so that the
Council as a whole can continue to effectively discharge
its responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security. We remain committed to doing our part.
Finally, I wish Ambassador Gaspar Martins of
Angola and his team the very best for their presidency
in March. We look forward to it.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the entire Venezuelan team,
for your hard, highly professional and effective work
in February. Despite the fact that today we are formally
summing up our work for the month, some important
and sensitive issues still require our attention in the
hours and days remaining, including one that has
particular importance for my country, that is, the
briefing on Monday by the Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. We commend your approach, Sir, in taking into
account requests from all delegations and doing your
best to try to accommodate them without prejudice
or discrimination.
Over the past few weeks, the Council has had to
address quite a range of issues, but our performance
has produced mixed feelings. I would cite as one of the
highlights the debate (see S/PV.7620) on the Security
Council’s working methods. It was heartening to see a
high level of convergence of views and an overall general
understanding on the areas where the Council can make
tangible improvements in the work of its subsidiary
bodies. In that regard, the issuance of a presidential
note on the work of the Council’s subsidiary bodies
(S/2016/170) is a welcome development and definitely
a step in the right direction, albeit a small one. We
therefore look forward to the first meeting next month
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions and stand ready to work
16-05217

26/02/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7633

closely with all Council members in order to further
improve our methods of work.

that the Council will not waste that precious window
of opportunity.

The open debate (see S/PV.7621) on respect for
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations in the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security was very useful.
The variety of views and approaches to the subject
demonstrated the lasting validity of the Charter’s
provisions. However, the discussion made one thing
clear, which is that any violation of any principles of the
Charter undermines the foundation of the Organization
and diminishes its legitimacy in the eyes of the world.
Dangerous precedents set by unscrupulous leaders with
no moral compass, preoccupied with visions of personal
grandeur and blinded by imperialist ambitions, may
tempt some into thinking that it may actually pay to
bend the rules here and there, interpret the Charter as
it suits one and lie persistently, brazenly and with a
straight face. The lack of concrete action on the part
of the United Nations designed to punish perpetrators,
correct wrongs and restore respect for the Charter’s
purposes and principles makes it only too apparent to
Member States that might makes right.

I would be remiss not to mention the issue of the
sanctions against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. After the January nuclear test, we expressed
our strong condemnation of the Pyongyang actions
threatening international peace and security. After the
February missile launch, we reiterated our position
that the Council must react robustly to such flagrant
violations of numerous Security Council resolutions.
While it is somewhat regrettable that it took so long for
a draft resolution to arrive on the Council’s table, we
are nonetheless satisfied with its comprehensive nature
and would like to express our appreciation for the
efforts of the United States and China, which drafted
the text. We consider the draft resolution’s upcoming
adoption to be a significant step on the part of the
international community in helping to strengthen the
global non-proliferation regime. We are realists, and
we do not expect Pyongyang’s behaviour to change
overnight. But our long-term hope is that the Korean
peninsula will eventually be transformed from one of
the world’s hotspots into a region of peace and stability.

Is that the world that our leaders wanted to build
70 years ago? Is that the world that we would like to
create now? Our answer is a resolute no. What we need
is a United Nations capable of efficiently and swiftly
responding to Charter violations and other challenges
of today.

Although today we are discussing what has
been done in the past month, I suggest that we take
a look further ahead to an issue of great interest
and importance to the general United Nations
membership — the appointment of the next SecretaryGeneral. In February there were some useful exchanges
among Council members on the selection process. With
seven candidates officially nominated so far and new
ones likely to emerge, I believe it is very important to
ensure that the Council start holding some preliminary
discussions on the issue right away, without postponing
it until July. In our opinion, it would be beneficial if the
Council were to convene at least once a month on the
subject in consultations format, under the “Any other
business” item, maybe towards the end of each month.

That brings me to the second part of my statement.
The Security Council has a special responsibility to
ensure that the Charter’s purposes and principles are
upheld and respected. Violations of the Charter quite
often result in armed conflicts that kill, maim and displace
huge numbers of people. When that happens, it means
that the Council has failed in its main responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. For the
Council to be effective, it must be united — and that
is something that is missing. Nowhere has that been
more pronounced and evident than in the context of the
Syrian conflict. Despite numerous discussions of the
Syrian issue in the Council, in practice very little has
been done to alleviate the Syrian people’s suffering,
put an end to the bloody conflict and focus energy and
resources on combating the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham, which is metastasizing into
other countries in the region. A glimmer of hope for the
Syrian people has recently appeared. We sincerely hope

In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like to wish
you a successful completion of your duties in the
next few days and to assure the incoming Angolan
presidency of our full support.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank you for convening today’s meeting,
Mr. President. The Council has been very busy this
month, and China greatly appreciates the fact that
Venezuela has presided over our work efficiently and

16-0521717/24

S/PV.7633

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

smoothly. I would like to focus on three issues relating
to the Council’s work this month.
First, on the Middle East, the Israeli-Palestinian
peace talks are currently at an impasse, the security
situation there is worsening and the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory is serious.
China is deeply concerned about that. Preserving the
legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people
is the collective responsibility of the international
community, which should take stronger measures to
reactivate the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks, push
Palestine and Israel to resume them as soon as possible
and meanwhile strengthen cooperation with Palestine
and economic assistance to it with a view to alleviating
the humanitarian situation. The Council should respond
positively to Palestine and the Arab States’ legitimate
aspirations and carefully study the issue of providing
international protection to Palestine, in order to play
a greater role in promoting the peace talks. China
welcomes all initiatives conducive to ameliorating the
situation and resuming peace negotiations.
Secondly, with regard to Syria, there has been good
progress recently in bringing in humanitarian assistance
and promoting a cessation of hostilities. Important
decisions were made at the ministerial meeting in Munich
of the International Syria Support Group regarding
expanding humanitarian aid and halting hostilities.
The Russian Federation and the United States reached
an agreement on ceasing hostilities, which China
welcomes. We call on the international community and
the countries of the region to continue to support the
mediation efforts of Special Envoy De Mistura and to
act together to push all the parties in Syria to accept
and implement the agreement as soon as possible, with
the aim of ceasing hostilities and resuming the Geneva
peace talks in order to create conditions conducive to
a rapid and appropriate settlement of the Syrian issue.
Thirdly, on South Sudan, good progress has
recently been made in implementing the agreement on
resolving the conflict in South Sudan. The Government
of South Sudan has declared that it is going to establish
a Government of national unity in the first week of
March. China highly appreciates the mediation efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD).
South Sudan has just started its peaceful
reconstruction, and there is a long and difficult journey
ahead. It therefore needs strong support from the
18/24

26/02/2016

international community. China hopes that the Council
and the international community at large will continue
to provide support to IGAD. Meanwhile, we actively
encourage all the parties in South Sudan to meet each
other half way and push for an early formation of a
transitional Government so as to restore peace, stability
and development in the country at an early date. China
will continue to play a constructive role in the political
settlement of the question of South Sudan.
Last but not least, I wish the delegation of Angola,
the incoming President of the Security Council, all the
best in the month of March.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
Security Council deals with diverse challenges, many
of which we struggle to find agreement and consensus
on. On one, however, the will of the Council, and
indeed of the membership of the Organization, could
not be clearer: North Korea. Over the past weeks, North
Korea’s dangerous actions and defiance of the Council’s
previous resolutions merit an unyielding response from
the body mandated by the Charter of the United Nations
to maintain international peace and security.
Let us be clear. North Korea’s nuclear tests and
missile launches are often described as “provocations”.
However, that euphemism does not do justice to what
the North Korean regime is doing. It is not merely
“provoking”, it is not merely acting in defiance of the
demands of the Security Council, and indeed the world.
No, North Korea, with each test, with each launch,
is steadily and practically advancing its operational
capacity to develop and deploy nuclear weapons. With
each test, with each so-called provocation, North Korea
is building its ability to endanger every nation of the
world. And with each act of defiance, our collective
resolve to stop it must become even stronger.
We cannot tolerate actions from a regime that on
a grotesque, widespread and systematic basis flouts
international law by abusing its own people and,
with similar precision and disregard, defies the will
of the Council by developing the most dangerous
weapons known to humankind. That is why yesterday,
after extensive and productive collaboration and
consultation with partners, the United States submitted
a draft Security Council resolution in response to
North Korea’s recent nuclear test and ballistic missile
launch. If adopted, the draft resolution would represent
the strongest set of sanctions imposed by the Security
Council in a generation. Those sanctions would send an
16-05217

26/02/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

unambiguous message to the regime of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea: “the world will not accept
your proliferation, there will be consequences for your
actions, and we will work relentlessly to stop your
nuclear programme”.
The sanctions are not punitive; they are practical
and will help our collective efforts to impede the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea programme
by making it harder for the country to raise the
funds, import the technology and acquire the knowhow to advance its illicit nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes. As long as North Korea continues to
undermine international security through its dangerous
pursuit of nuclear weapons, we must work together to
impede its ability to endanger our shared security and
to hold it accountable.
In Syria, efforts have intensified to ensure
unfettered humanitarian access while putting in place
a cessation of hostilities leading to the resumption of
political talks. The International Syria Support Group
and the parties in Syria are working together towards a
cessation of hostilities, set to go into effect at midnight
tonight in Damascus, thereby offering a possibility to
halt the horrific violence and relieve the suffering of
the Syrian people. We expect the implementation of the
cessation of hostilities to end the aerial bombardments
and the regime ground offensives, which have cost so
many lives and displaced more than 70,000 around
Aleppo in recent days.
Meanwhile, recent progress on humanitarian
access to a handful of besieged areas is welcome, but is
only the beginning. While we commend the work of the
International Syria Support Group’s humanitarian task
force, this is only the first step towards full, sustained
and unimpeded access throughout the country. We will
not be satisfied with one-off deliveries to a handful of
areas that should have had unimpeded assistance all
along, and which has been completely denied and, in
some cases, denied for years.
Over the last week and a half, convoys have
provided aid to less than 100,000 people — less than
one fourth of those living in serious besieged areas.
Millions still urgently require aid. The Syrian regime,
and all parties, needs to lift any and all obstacles to
assistance. Ultimately, the only way to end Syria’s
conflict is through a political process leading to a
political transition in accordance with the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).

S/PV.7633

The crisis in South Sudan continues. Leadership
from the opposing parties is desperately needed. We
heard a comprehensive set of briefings on South Sudan
last Friday, and yesterday’s briefing by the Chairperson
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
(JMEC), Festus Mogae, was particularly important.
The JMEC is essential to progress in South Sudan, and
we hope to continue to hear regular updates from the
JMEC Chairperson in order to appropriately support
his work in overseeing the implementation of the peace
agreement.
We continue to be alarmed by the human rights
abuses in South Sudan, and the briefing by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) described a scorched-earth strategy,
a strategy that manifests itself in civilians being
intentionally burned alive in their homes. As the United
Nations detailed in a recent report on Unity state, we are
now seeing coping strategies among the most severely
food-insecure households that include food-security
experts observing things being consumed in South
Sudan that they have never seen before, such as the
consumption of reconstituted dried goatskins, meaning
eating goatskin off of furniture, or eating inner sections
of palm tree trunks, meaning eating wood.
Given the seemingly unending and horrific nature
of the abuses unfolding in South Sudan, we must all
remain committed to supporting accountability for
the perpetrators, including through the mechanisms
outlined in the peace agreement, namely, the
establishment of a credible hybrid tribunal. The people
of South Sudan deserve security and peace, and they
also deserve justice.
In Burundi, while we welcome recent
announcements and reports of prisoner releases,
announcements must be followed by action. Credible
dialogue outside of Burundi with the opposition must
restart now. Unfortunately, the Government continues
to crackdown on civil society and political opposition.
And, also unfortunately, widespread human rights
violations are a daily occurrence. Necessarily, the
Council must continue to examine all options to ensure
that a credible political process proceeds and that
civilians are safe.
Last week, six activists in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo were arrested after calling on
President Kabila to step down. On Wednesday, they
were sentenced to two years in prison for incitement.

16-0521719/24

S/PV.7633

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Intimidation must stop, and the Security Council, in the
months ahead, must remain focused on ensuring timely
and credible elections.
Finally, we were pleased that the Council discussed
Burma’s political and human rights situation in
consultations yesterday afternoon. We particularly
welcomed OHCHR’s perspective and will continue to
encourage further high-level Council interaction with
that Office in future meetings.
A peaceful post-election period is crucial for
stability and maintaining the confidence of the people
of Burma in this transition. However, there remain
obvious and important impediments to the realization of
a fully democratic and civilian Government. Although
we have seen a number of key important steps in the
right direction, we remain concerned about significant
human rights problems on a variety of fronts, including,
but not limited to, the treatment of the Rohingya.
The situation in Rakhine state remains grim, and the
Government needs to take significant, sustained and
strategic steps to address the hatred and bigotry and
resolve the crisis.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation, for your leadership
during this past month. Our work this month is not yet
over.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to express our delegation’s gratitude to
you and your entire delegation, Mr. President, for the
excellent work you have done. I would say that yours
has been an active and activist presidency. It was active
in that we worked at a laudable pace, and it was also
activist in that it brought to the Security Council and
the membership issues that, although of interest to all
of us, were of particular importance for Venezuela to
highlight.
Venezuela as President rightly pushed us to work
on these issues in the same manner as other members
of the Security Council who have the same rights, using
the mechanism “Other matters” to bring together all of
the points that are of concern to us because they were
considered relevant to deal with at this stage.
I am not going to touch on the various issues
that we covered, since you, Mr. President, in your
exhaustive summary, covered almost all of them, and
my colleagues have also made reference to the entire
list of subjects. What I would like to do is reflect on
20/24

26/02/2016

things given the 57 days that my delegation has been
here in the Security Council, and highlight some themes
merely because I am new in the Security Council, and
they stand out for me. But I would like to stress that
we have had a busy agenda, heavy with horrors: the
humanitarian situations in the Middle East and the
Horn of Africa, which are truly depressing. But here
it is important to highlight and pay tribute to the role
being played by humanitarian bodies both in the United
Nations system and in the many non-governmental
organizations that are on the ground risking their lives.
Unfortunately we have seen reports about dozens of
humanitarian workers who have lost their lives in all of
these conflicts.
At the same time, I wish to highlight the sacrifice
being made by the troops and the forces deployed in
the many peacekeeping operations, who have also lost
many lives carrying out the tasks that have been given
them by the Security Council. So this leads me to say
that on the ground we have a large number of people
who are not just carrying the flag but also paying for it
with their very lives.
I should also like to highlight the role being played
in many forums by the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General. In many of the situations where they
are playing a role — I do not want to list any names so
as not to forget anyone, that would be unfair — we see
their perseverance, determination, efforts, dedication
and impartiality and objectivity. We deem that there
has been a positive balance in that which we have seen
over the 57 days that we have been in the Council.
I would also perhaps analyse how we have worked
over these 57 days. I am concerned that we have had
more than 75 meetings in 57 days; that is more than
one meeting per calendar day, so we have had many
meetings. But when I look at the outcome, there have
been very few results indeed. So far we have had six
resolutions, including five that are basically procedural,
“rollovers” as they say in English. One was that on
Colombia; it is really outside the scope of the Security
Council. Yes, excellent work was undertaken by the
Colombians themselves; they were well supported by
Cuba, Norway, Chile and Venezuela, but the origin
of the resolution was the result of work done outside
the Security Council. The Council did a good thing in
approving the resolution.
Other outcomes were numerous press statements. I
counted 21, eight of which are statements condemning
16-05217

26/02/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

terrorist attacks, so they had to be issued, because we
are all against terrorism and repudiate it. So they are
almost a knee-jerk reaction. Then we had 13 press
statements of some substance. The problem is that in
one way or another we are responding to horrendous
situations on the ground with press statements.
On the other hand, there have been good
developments. I think it was Gerald who said that said
that we are maybe not pleased but relieved, with respect
to Syria, for instance. I would say that the progress
we have seen in Syria also is external to the Council
Chamber, if not to members of the Council. If they have
played an important role, then we welcome them and
support them. The Security Council should support all
those activities and developments that could lead to
pacifying the situation and preparing the ground for
forward movement.
The negotiation process has taken place outside of
the Security Council. Perhaps that is the best it could
have been. But for me, as a new arrival in the Security
Council, I would point out as something of interest
that issues of this scale are dealt with more profitably
outside the Security Council rather than inside it.
Let me come back to something that we pointed
out our wrap-up; we make a distinction between
meetings and consultations. There is a difference
between plenary meetings and consultations. It makes
me think of the title of a poem by a Uruguyan poet,
Mario Benedetti, “Let us demystify the Milky Way”.
It is a very lovely poem; I will not recite it here. But
the idea of demystification is so important; let us try
to demystify consultations. Frankly, in consultations,
no member of the Security Council, as far as I can see,
has said anything that could not have been said here in
this very Chamber, in front of the entire membership.
We could have done it here, but no. We go into that
little room over there, and we agree on certain things in
a narrower context, but having listened to things over
there in that little room. But the truth is that there was
nothing said there that could not have been said here. I
think this is the culture of the Security Council.
Speaking of the Council, I wish to pay tribute in
the following respect. The presidency is not the person
responsible for achieving all the outcomes, such as for
Syria and Yemen. It does not depend on the presidency.
But the Venezuelan presidency raised the issue of the
working methods of subsidiary bodies, particularly
the sanctions committees. It had an idea, made a

S/PV.7633

proposal and issued a presidential note — useful to the
Security Council, well elaborated by the presidency
and a concrete achievement by Venezuela that made a
contribution to our body of work.
Therefore, in line with what I have just said, I
would like once again to thank you, Rafael, and your
entire delegation. Next Tuesday we will welcome our
colleagues from Angola, to whom we wish the best of
luck.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Rafael, and your team for your outstanding
presidency. It is quite clear to me that we would be
nothing without our teams. I would also like to wish
every success to the presidency of Angola.
I shall concentrate on two aspects. As Elbio Rosselli
always says, it is difficult for the last speaker to say
something new. But I will try to do so.
First, I would like to refer to a practice that we have
seen this month, which is that of discussing matters
under the item “Any other business”. My team has been
working intensively and, according to our calculations,
you, Sir, convened 12 such meetings — although, you,
Sir, say the number is 14. This practice seems to me to
be necessary and advisable because, in fact, that is the
work of the Security Council. The Council cannot limit
itself to meeting only when the schedules are set in
accordance with the reporting system. We have to meet
when there is a situation that demands the attention of
the Security Council. However, despite all the fondness
and trust that I have for you, Mr. President, 14 meetings
seem perhaps a bit too many. You, Mr. President, have
the great distinction of having created a new trend
or doctrine. However, in the light of the upcoming
presidencies — those of Angola, China and Egypt — I
would like to say to all members that we need to find
a balance between quality and quantity. The item “Any
other business” is good, but we need to reserve it for
true emergency situations. If we look to the past, we see
that previously this item was used in very exceptional
cases, but this month it has become frequent. That is
fine. You, Sir, have created a new school of thought, but
I call for prudence.
Secondly, Spain is a great defender of transparency,
which means that what we do in the Security Council
can be shared to some extent with the General Assembly.
I am very proud that during our presidency our team
decided to end the month with a wrap-up session — later
known as a Toledo style wrap-up — that allowed for

16-0521721/24

S/PV.7633

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

interaction between members of the Security Council
and members of the General Assembly.
I am a bit disappointed today at seeing the small
number of people who are listening to us. Why does
that trouble me? Because they cannot talk to us. We
are in this magnificent Chamber talking about what
we do in the Security Council, while they have to limit
themselves to simply listening and cannot ask any
questions. My request, and that of Spain’s, is that, if it
is agreeable to them, the three upcoming presidencies I
mentioned, as well as other subsequent ones, agree that
the wrap-up session be held in the the Toledo format
—that is, to allow members of the General Assembly
to ask us questions. I will not go into any more details
on that point.
What I found very interesting in Ambassador
Rosselli’s intervention was his mention of the
proliferation of meetings and, at the same time, the
lack of resolutions. I would add something else, which
is what most concerns me. It is true that we meet a lot
and produce little. However, I would change the words
a bit. I believe we talk too much and do not implement
enough: there is too much talk in Security Council
meetings. And while some resolutions are indeed
adopted, where we really fall short is on implementing
resolutions and presidential statements.
The second issue I want to mention is humanitarian
affairs. I believe that this is one of the greatest hallmarks
of the Venezuelan presidency, which I applaud.
There have been countless meetings on humanitarian
issues — on Syria, Yemen, South Sudan and other
places. At the end of the day, however, we are talking
about people in need. When we focus on humanitarian
concerns, Council meetings allow us to do three things:
first, to establish early-warning mechanisms; secondly,
to facilitate humanitarian access; and, thirdly, and most
important, to promote respect for humanitarian law.
To conclude, let me touch on two very timely issues
related to threats to international peace and security.
First, with regard to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, I would like to fully align myself
with the statement delivered by the Ambassador of
Japan. I believe that it is absolutely essential that the
Security Council adopt a draft resolution that marks a
qualitative leap forward in terms of sanctions against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Why?
First, because previous resolutions have proved to be
insufficient; secondly — and I trust there will be support
22/24

26/02/2016

from the 15 members of the Council for this — because
there is a need to send a signal of unity and a single
message; and, thirdly, because I think it is urgent to do
so, for we cannot allow there to be any delay on the part
of the members of the Council in the face of threats to
international peace and security.
With regard to Syria, I will be very brief: I trust
that we will adopt a draft resolution this afternoon. I
will therefore save my statement for the meeting that
will start some time after 3 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should once
again like to make a statement in my national capacity.
It seems to me that this has been a very interesting
meeting. I should first like to clarify that we have sent
out an invitation to an open Toledo format wrap-up
session, to be held on Monday at 4 p.m., in line with the
commitment we made at the first such meeting, held
under Spain’s presidency. And we have continued to
insist on that ever since. As members know better than
I do — given that they have had much more time on the
Council, especially the permanent members, such as the
United Kingdom — this meeting is being held in order
for an official record to be prepared. Everything we are
saying here is recorded, and I can hear the reporters
preparing the records. There is thereby accountability
for the Council.
Whether or not the Security Council is losing
some of its prestige or legitimacy at the United
Nations — those are not matters that will be resolved
in a month. There are some issues, however, such as
the lack of resolutions adopted in the Security Council,
that make the General Assembly view the Council as
an entity that already taken its decisions in advance.
Regardless, the first thing I wanted to mention here is,
as I have just said, the meeting to be held at 4 p.m.
next Monday. We have tried to honour all the requests
that have been made for the agenda of that meeting.
The German Foreign Minister will be with us on
Monday morning, while at the afternoon meeting on
Kosovo we will have with us the Foreign Minister of
Serbia and the representative of Kosovo. But we will
indeed end Monday with a meeting in which we hope
that all the members of the General Assembly can voice
their opinions on the subject of today’s meeting. I am
inviting a number of Ambassadors to join us so that we
can address these matters.
On another matter, when we saw the Council’s
original programme of work — established in
16-05217

26/02/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

accordance with the periodic reports we consider — we
found it somewhat sad given all the problems in the
world. While the Secretariat does in fact do excellent
work in supporting the Council, there are nevertheless
other issues that are both timely and pending. The only
way to take up those issues has been under the item
“Any other business”. We do not expect that a resolution
will be the outcome of every discussion under that
agenda item. As is well known, however, especially by
the permanent members, the Security Council often
serves as a sounding board and provides for a process
to later build consensus around a particular issue, such
as we have seen in the case of Syria. I do not know how
many resolutions have been adopted and meetings have
been held on Syria. We now hope that at last today we
can sign a ceasefire, which is just the beginning of a
process. The same goes for the issue of Ukraine over
the past year — we have already been on the Council
for a year. I am talking about recurring issues that elicit
a great deal of interest. When the issue of the nuclear
tests arose, we met on a Sunday. That is how it ought
to be, and I thank Elbio for what he said — as South
Americans, we understand each other well.
We cannot allow talking about Western Sahara to
be forbidden, for example. Nobody talks about Western
Sahara, and there is no way to talk about the last colony
in Africa in a public format. There is no way because
they block it. It is possible that at some point conflict
may once again erupt — the Polisario Front may break
the ceasefire or there may be a return to war — and
then we will see it as an emergency situation.
It is the same for the issue of Palestine. We really
do not expect anything, because the Security Council
is unable even to produce elements to the press with
regard to issue of Palestine. However, children continue
to die. The situation grows ever-more complicated, and
at some point we will find ourselves with a conflict in
Palestine. Then we will hold emergency meetings. We
will have humanitarian meetings.
In this way the Security Council is more reactive
than preventive. Therefore, the use of “Any other
business” seems to us the only way we can talk about
issues that we think should not continue to go ignored.
That is why we took this decision in our presidency.
By the way, I should clarify — Davey, Ambassador
Pressman, mentioned that our work this month was
not yet over, and he is concerned about our meeting
tomorrow — that we will meet tomorrow, as we will
on Monday, until we address all the issues before us.

S/PV.7633

Hopefully, we will be able to decide on all the pending
draft resolutions — on North Korea and Syria — and
take care of everything we have to do. This meeting is
not the end, but this time slot was the only available for
the wrap-up session.
As I was saying, it is difficult to measure the
effectiveness of a body by the number of resolutions
adopted. It is a political discussion. This is a political
discussion, and the purpose is to create awareness and
to reach consensus. However, in the end each country
must consult with its capital and see what to do. But
the Security Council is just that: a sounding board for
issues.
Returning to the point made by Matthew,
Ambassador Rycroft — and I regret that he has left; he
must be working on one of the draft resolutions — with
regard to transparency and the issue of interaction, it
seems to us very important that more than 70 countries
took the floor in the open debate (see S/PV.7621) on
respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations as a key element for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Had no delegation
attended, then we would have reason to be worried; for
it would have meant that the purposes and principles no
longer held any importance for Member States. Again,
I do not expect the members of the General Assembly
to change their view of the Security Council, but I think
that meeting offered a way for the Assembly to say to
the Council that the subject was important, as in some
situations the purposes and principles are being, or are
on the verge of being, violated.
The other issue I wanted to highlight — and I
appreciate all the comments in this respect — is that this
month we were able for the first time here to hear from
countries subject to sanctions. That goes to the issue
of transparency. There is nothing worse, or as opaque,
as a sanctions committee. It is horrible. No one knows
what goes on. And far less transparent are the decisions
taken in the committees. Obviously, this is a political
organ. There are no technical experts here, and no one
sitting here is a technical expert in anything. We all
work in the political realm and hold political positions,
and we must be prepared to debate. In our country we
are used to democratic debate: there is no veto; there is
an open, democratic debate, and the majority decides.
That is what we would like to introduce.
I thank everyone present for their comments and
for their expressions of friendship and sympathy with

16-0521723/24

S/PV.7633

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

our country. We have tried to provide a small example
of the nature of Venezuela. We will continue to do so
and to build closer relationships with all the countries
of the international community, all the while showing
who we are: a people of peace with a clear position and
very clear principles, and always trying to strengthen
and help the rest of the international community.

24/24

26/02/2016

The representative of Spain has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I simply wanted to wrap-up Toledo style by noting what
you have just said, Mr. President, for which I commend
you.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

16-05217
