UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

MEETING:

24701”

NEW

YEAR

2 SEPTEMBER 1983

iJ,q fllZ~~,Aay
-’

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2470)

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*...........

Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda:
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of the
United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Observer for the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Canada to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15949);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Australia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15951) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WPV.2470

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
&.tarterly Suppliments of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2470th MEETING
Held

in New York on Friday,

President: Mr. Noel G. SINCLAIR

2 September

S/15948, respectively. I would propose that this letter be
included in the agenda for the present meeting and that
the agenda be revised accordingly.

(Guyana).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

It was so decided.
The agenda was adopted.

2.

1

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting Perma_ nent Representative of the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the President .of the
Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Observer for the Republic of Korea to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Counco (S/15949);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15950);
Letter dated 2 September 1983 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Australia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15951)

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2470)
1. Adoption

1983, at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda

Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Acting
Permanent -Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15947);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Observer for the Republic of Korea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15948);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Canada
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15949);
Letter dated 1 September 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15950)

3:’ ,The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Australia, Canada, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Japan and New Zealand, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to .invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the provisions of Article
31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like at the outset of this
meeting to express on behalf of the Council deep appreciation to the President of the Council for the month of
August, Mr. Luc de La Barre de Nanteuil, Representative
of France, for the great diplomatic skill with which he
conducted the Council’s business in the course of last
month.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pelletier (Canada)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Joseph (Australia),
Mr. Jelonek (Federa) Republic of Germany), Mr. Kuroda
(Japan), and Mr. Harland (New Zealand) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Adoption of the agenda
2. The PRESIDENT:
The provisional agenda for this
meeting is before the Council [S/Agenda/247@
In this
connection, I should like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/l 595 1, which contains the text of a letter dated 2 September from the representative of Australia to the President of the Council,
in which the Government of Australia associates itself
with the requests contained in documents S/15947 and

4. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the attention
of members of the Council to the final paragraph of the
letter dated 1 September from the observer for the Republic of Korea to the President of the Council [S/25948], in
which he requests that the representative of the Govern1

ment of the Reuublic of Korea be invited bv the Council
to participate in the discussion in accordance with Article
32 of the Charter. I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the observer for the Government of the
Republic of Korea to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with the provisions of
Article 32 of the Charter.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kim (Republic of
Korea) took a place at the Council table.
5. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the observer
for the Republic of Korea on whom I now call.
6. Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea): Mr. President, I wish
to thank you and the members of the Council for having
kindly invited my delegation to participate in the discussions of the Council. Allow me also to extend to you, Sir,
our congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
for the month of September. We are certain that your
outstanding leadership will ensure impartial and efficient
conduct of the deliberations of the Council. We wish you
every success in the fulfilment of your heavy responsibilities.
7. Five times a week, at 2350 hours, a Korean Air Lines
Boeing 747 taxies down the runway at John F. Kennedy
International Airport in New York, takes off, and begins
its regularly-scheduled flight to its home airport of Kimpo
in the Repubic of Korea. Like so many flights of other
airlines, it follows internationally demarcated routes and
long-established international procedures. It carries its
crew, passengers, and their authorized baggage and
freight only.
8. But on 31 August, as the entire world now knows,
Korean Air Lines flight 007 did not reach home safely,
Today, we presume that all its passengers and crew are
dead, the victims of an incomprehensible act of deliberate
and premeditated violence.
9. Before I proceed further, I should like to say, first of
all, that our Government shares the immense sense of loss
of the families of each passenger and crew member who
were on that fateful flight. Our sympathy goes out to each
family. We share their grief.
-.. .
.-.
:.
:.

10. According to the information available to us, the
Korean Air Lines plane which was shot down by the
Soviet Union departed Anchorage, Alaska at 1400 hours,
Greenwich mean time, Wednesday, 31 August, with 240
passengers and 29 crew members on board. The passengers included nationals from many different countries,
among them 47 Americans, 44 Chinese, 28 Japanese, 15
Filipinos, 6 Thais, 4 Australians, one Swede, one Indian,
one Canadian and one whose nationality is not clear at
this point.
II.
Apparently about two hours after its take-off from
Anchorage, Soviet military authorities began to track the
Korean jetliner. Shortly after it made a last radio contact
with Japanese.air controllers at Narita International Air-

port at 1823 hours at the altitude of 30,000 feet south-east
of Hokkaido, Japan, no more contacts were possible with
the Korean aeroplane.
12. We presume that it was at this time that the Korean
aeroplane was hit by missiles fired from the Soviet fighters
and destroyed with its 240 innocent passengers and the 29
crew aboard. If such an event were to occur on land, the
result of guns fired at innocent people, the world would
surely call it murder. What happened to the passengers of
the Korean Air Lines flight 007 and crew is really no
different. The men who pushed the buttons and gave the
orders that sent the missiles into the unarmed civilian
aeroplane surely knew that death was the inevitable
result: the death of 269 totally innocent men and women
from many countries.
13. There was no possibility of Soviet military authorities confusing the Korean Air Lines aircraft with anything
other than a civilian passenger aeroplane. It was clearly
marked as a Korean Air Lines plane. And the whole
world knows that Korean Air Lines Boeing 747s fly regularly from New York, through Anchorage to Seoul. What
Soviet military forces did to a civilian Korean aeroplane
was clearly a criminal act in violation of all the legal
norms and standards of international civil aviation.
14. I must point out to my colleagues from other
nations that if this sort of thing can happen to one
nation’s civilian aeroplanes, it might happen to any
nation’s planes. If this can happen on one internationallyrecognized and demarcated route, it might happen on
other routes that come near the territory of the Soviet
Union. My Government deeply appreciates the expressions of sympathy and support that it has received from
around the world. They are especially welcome, because if
this sort of international outlaw behaviour is allowed to
proceed unpunished, nobody can be sure where it is going
to stop. Whose planes, we must ask, will ultimately be
safe?
15. The rules of international air safety have been carefully designed to ensure the safety of all civil aeroplanes. If
they are respected, there will be no tragic incidents such as
the one which has required this meeting today. There is
no provision in international law that justifies the use of
force against an unarmed civilian airliner under any circumstances. The action by Soviet military authorities
against the Korean Air Lines aircraft was clearly in violation of the legal norms and generally accepted standards
of international civil aviation. It is an action which threatens the very foundation of international order in civil
aviation.
16. I cannot stress too much the seriousness of the tragic
incident which has just been caused by the barbarous
action of Soviet military authorities. It is clear that by
shooting down a Korean civilian aeroplane the Soviet
Union has posed a threat to the safety of all civil airliners
of all nations. The very future of internationa1 civil aviation is now at stake. To resolve this crisis and to ensure
the future safety of all civilian aeroplanes of all nations,
the Government of the Republic of Korea believes that

the Soviet Union
steps.

must take at least the following

five

17. First, the Soviet Union must offer a full and detailed
account of exactly what has happened. Soviet statements
that have been offered so far are clearly inadequate and
unsatisfactory.
18. Secondly, the Soviet Union must offer full apology
and complete compensation for the loss of the aircraft as
well as‘ to the families of the passengers and crew
members who have been killed. That is not only in accordance with standard international practice in such circumstances but also a matter of common sense and decent
human conscience.
19. Thirdly, the Soviet Union must adequately punish all
those who are directly responsible for this most reprehensible and inhuman violence committed against a completely defenceless aeroplane carrying civilian passengers.
20. Fourthly, the Soviet Union must guarantee unimpeded access to the crash site to the representatives of
impartial international organizations such as the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) as well as of
Korean Air Lines and the Government of the Republic of
Korea. The Soviet Union must also return any remains or
debris that may be found.
21. Finally, the Soviet Union must give credible guarantees against the recurrence of such violent actions
against unarmed civilian aeroplanes anywhere in the
world. Such guarantees must be specific, concrete and
effective.
22. Before closing my statement, I should like to reiterate to the Council that the Government of the Republic of
Korea has consistently sought peace and stability in the
tense and historically troubled region of northeastern
Asia. That is why my Government is all the more deeply
concerned at what happened on the night of 31 August,
because what happened on that tragic night was so incompatible with the goal of peace and reduction of tension
that the Republic of Korea seeks.
.23. I wish to assure the members of the Council that the
Republic of Korea remains ready and willing to examine
and explore all possible means to reduce tensions in the
area. It is the sincere hope of the Government and people
of my country that other nations in the region will equally
share our desire for peace and abhorrence of war and
violence.
24. Finally, I should like to conclude my remarks by
quoting from the statement issued by President Chun
Doo Hwan of my country on 2 September in Seoul:
“Together with all Koreans and other peace-loving
peoples of the world, I am deeply grieved and angered at
the shocking incident of Soviet war planes shooting
down a Korean Air Lines (KAL) Boeing 747 passenger
plane on September 1, 1983, killing all the 269 passengers and crew.

“It is an over-riding principle of international law
that the safety of civil aircraft be safeguarded under all
circumstances. Moreover, the Soviet Union, as is
indeed our country, is a member of the International
Civil Aviation Organization and thus obliged to cooperate fully and to endeavor to ensure the safe passage of civil aircraft. Nevertheless, they attacked an
unarmed civil airplane which had not committed any
hostile act, killing all of the 269 persons on board. This
is an utterly inhuman act which can never be tolerated
for any reason whatsoever-an
act which cannot
escape the condemnation of all peaceiloving peoples of
the world.
“As I nrav for the nassengers and crew who were
victimized in this incident, I extend my heartfelt sympathy to their bereaved families and I express my deep
regret to the countrymen and Governments of-the foreigners involved.‘*
25. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): It
is a pleasure, Sir, even on an occasion that I fear holds
little pleasure as to substance, to greet you as you accede
to the presidency. We welcome you as a friend, as a near
neighbour and as a respected colleague. We fear that all of
your talents-and
they are many-will
be amply tested
this month. We know that you will meet the test as admirably, indeed as superbly, as did your predecessor, the representative of France, who served all of us and the United
Nations last month during 31 most difIicult days.
26. I wish at the outset to read out the statement issued
today by the President of the United States as he left
California on his return to Washington, where, at 1830
hours, he convened an extraordinary meeting of his
National Security Council. It reads as follows:
“In the wake of the barbaric act committed yesterday by the Soviet regime against a commercial jetliner,
the United States and many other countries of the
world express not only our outrage but also our
demand for a truthful accounting of the facts. Our first
emotions are anger, disbelief and profound sadness.
While events in Afghanistan and elsewhere have left
few illusions about the willingness of the Soviet Union
to advance its interests through violence and intimidation, all of us had hoped that certain irreducible standards of civilized behaviour none the less obtained. But
this event shocks the sensibility of people everywhere.
“The tradition of the civilized world has always been
to offer help to mariners or pilots who are lost or in
distress in the sea or in the air. Where human life is
valued, extraordinary efforts are extended to preserve
and protect it, and it is essential that as civilized societies we ask certain questions about the nature of
regimes where such standards do not apply.
“Beyond these emotions, the world notes the stark
contrast that exists between Soviet words and deeds.
What can we think of a regime that so broadly trumpets
its vision of peace and global disarmament and yet so
carelessly and quickly commits a terrorist act to sacri-

fice the lives of innocent human beings? What can be
said about Soviet credibility when they so flagrantly lie
about such a heinous act? What can be the scope of
legitimate mutual discourse with a State whose values
permit such atrocities, and what are we to make of a
regime which establishes one set of standards for itself
and another for the rest of humankind?

Soviet Union, a regularly scheduled nighttime flight, however much off course it may have strayed-on no conceivable assumption could the Soviet reaction be characterized as other than incommensurate,
as outrageously
excessive, as, to say it again, wantonly irresponsible. Let
us call the crime for what clearly it is: wanton, calculated,
deliberate murder.

“We join in the call for an urgent United Nations
Security Council meeting today. The brutality of this
act should not be compounded through silence or the
cynical distortion of the evidence now at hand. Tonight
I will be meeting with my advisers to conduct a formal
review of this matter, and this weekend I shall be meeting with the leadership of the United States Congress.

32. Most of us by now know the basic facts of this criminal act, but let me again outline them in brief. At 1400
hours Greenwich mean time on 31 August, a Korean Air
Lines Boeing 747 en route from New York to Seoul
departed Anchorage, carrying 269 passengers and crew.
At approximately 1600 hours the aircraft came to the
attention of Soviet radar personnel. It was tracked constantly by Soviet military authorities from that time.
According to irrefutable information
available to my
Government, the aircraft strayed into Soviet airspace over
the Kamchatka Peninsula, over the Sea of Okhotsk, over
Sakhalin Island. Throughout this entire time, for some
two and a half hours, the Soviets tracked the commercial
airliner.

“To the families of all those on the ill-fated aircraft
we send our deepest sympathy, and I hope they know
our prayers are with them all.”
27. This strong and eloquent expression of anguish for
the families of 269 victims, this expression of deep concern for what this heinous crime means for international
peace and security, this statement by the President of my
country, needs no amplification by me.

33. A Soviet pilot reported visual contact with the aircraft at 1812 hours. The Soviet plane was in constant
contact, was receiving orders and instructions from its
ground control. At 1812 hours the Korean aircraft was
reported by the Soviet pilot at 10,000 metres, roughly
33,000 feet. At 1826 hours, the Soviet pilot reported that
he tired a missile and the target was destroyed. At 1830
hours the Korean aircraft was reported by radar at an
altitude of 5,000 metres. At 1838 hours the Korean plane
disappeared from the radar screens.

28. What I will try to do this afternoon is, first, to provide some framework, some context, for this tragedy. I
will then spell out the facts as best we now know them.
And let me note here that hour by hour these last two and
a half days more and more facts have become, and are
becoming, available to my Government, and as they do
our concern deepens and our outrage grows. Then,
finally, I will draw some preliminary conclusions about
the possible meaning of this tragedy, the lessons that it
may hold for us here in the Council and more generally
for all people everywhere in the world who enjoy freedom, who would preserve the freedom they enjoy, those
who seek freedom.

34. The United States Government knows that at least
eight Soviet fighters reacted to the airliner at one time or
another throughout this period in excess of two and a half
hours.
35. The pilot who shot the airliner down reported after
the attack that he had in fact fired a missile, that he had
destroyed the target and that he was breaking away. As he
put it, “I am leaving the attack”. I must defer to our
Soviet colleague; it may well be that I am not adequately
or properly translating the Russian, but, then, he has all
the facts in his possession.

29. How can we begin to characterize this crime, a
crime worse compounded by the Soviets’ continuing
denial of any responsibility for it, a denial which is in
contempt of the truth, as gradually we are learning it, and
in contempt of the opinion of civilized mankind? On the
basis of the facts presently available to my Government,
the crime must be character&d
as calculated and
deliberate.

36. It is also of interest to note that, prior to tiring the
heat-seeking missile, the pilot of the Soviet SU-15 interceptor deliberately circled back around behind the
Korean Boeing 747 the better to aim his heat-seeking missile and in order to avoid any possibility of being hit by
flying debris.

30. From all presently available evidence, the pilot of
the SU-15 Soviet interceptor, the pilot who pulled the
trigger or pushed the button that unleashed the heatguided missile which destroyed Korean Air Lines flight
007 and 269 innocent lives along with it, that pilot had the
Korean 747 in his sights, clearly identified as a civilian
airliner, well within two kilometres of the 747, for more
than 10 minutes running prior to launching the destructive missile. The crime committed was indeed calculated
and indeed it was deliberate and it was wantonly
irresponsible.

37. As we reflect on the possible meaning of this crime,
its possible consequences, I want very briefly to touch on
its implications for any reasonable approximation to the
codes and conventions -of international law.
38. First and foremost are the legal obligations which
flow from what the International
Court of Justicewhose jurisdiction, needless to say, the Soviet Union USUally does not accept-has called “certain general and

31. On no conceivable assumption of the peril posed by
a single commercial airliner to the putative security of the
4

well-recognized principles, namely, elementary considerations of humanity, even more exacting in peace than in
war”. If there were no other relevant rules, these wellrecognized principles of humanity would rule out shooting down a passenger plane, a clearly marked airliner
engaged in international civil aviation.

strate that appropriate
against any repetition.

steps were being taken to ensure

42. What, by contrast, has the Soviet Union done till
now? Has it given the slightest indication that it accepts
responsibility for this heinous act? Has it shown the least
bit of compassion for the families of those innocent
people who were killed-who
were, as I have said, murdered? Has it taken any steps to initiate a process of investigation to determine responsibility? Has it given any sign
of reassurance to the international community that it
appreciates the gravity of what has happened and will
take whatever steps are necessary to ensure against its
repetition?

39. But there are other very relevant rules. There are the
rules of the Charter of the United Nations about the prohibition of the use of force. There are rules specific to civil
aviation. Annex 2 to the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation’ contains rules of the air. These rules
set forth the procedures to be used when intercepting a
foreign aircraft not properly within the airspace of the
intercepting country, that is to say, radio communications, rocking of wings and irregular flashing of lights.
The rules of the air do not include shooting down the civil
airliner. Attachment A to Annex 2 of the Chicago Convention is even clearer:

43. On the contrary, the Soviet attitude has lacked even
a trace of contrition. In the face of utter disbelief on the
part of the entire international community it continues to .deny any responsibility for shooting down this unarmed
civilian airliner. It has shown no regret over the loss of
life. It has indicated no readiness to punish those responsible. It has demonstrated no determination to avoid a repetition of such an incident. It has, in other words, behaved
with complete and, I must add, characteristic contempt
for the international community. and for even minimal
standards of decency and civilized behaviour. In its refusal to admit the truth it is lying-openly,
brazenly, knowingly. In so doing it is ironically showing its true face to
the world, the face that is so often hidden behind the
peace offensive, behind the propaganda machinery,
behind its talk of brotherhood and human solidarity and
international co-existence. It is the face of a ruthless totalitarian State, a State which has been responsible over the
past six and a half decades for killing more people-the
latest estimate I have read is between 70 million and 80
million-and
enslaving more nations than any State, any
regime, in the history of mankind; a State that tailors its
concept of truth to what will advance its own intereststhat and nothing else; a State that does not accept responsibility for a minimally decent international order; a State
whose ultimate objective is to remake the world in its own
image, which necessarily means a world in which it will
control the lives of people and the fate of nations as completely and as ruthlessly as it exercises control over its
own people-and,
I should add, over those who innocently stray into its airspace.

“Interception of civil aircraft should be avoided and
should be undertaken only as a last resort. If undertaken, the interception should be limited to determining the identity of the aircraft, unless it is necessary to
return the aircraft to its planned track, direct it beyond
the boundaries of national airspace, guide it away from
a prohibited, restricted or danger area or instruct it to
effect a landing at a designated aerodrome. Practice
interception of civil aircraft is not to be undertaken”
40. I have looked over the detailed log of some 75
instances, documented incidents, in which Soviet aircraft
have strayed into Western-into
American-airspace.
I
have looked over the log carefully to discover the
response in each case. I wish to cite from that long catalogue only two rather interesting such flights. Among the
numerous incidents, there was that of the Aeroflot flight
into Dulles Airport on 8 November 1981. That flight
entered United States airspace at an unauthorized entry
point in New England, flew over New England land area,
although its clearly demarcated route was almost exciusively over open water; it continued to overfly, according
to that unauthorized route, the Pease Air Force Base and
the naval facility at Groton, Connecticut, and then finally
it landed at Dulles, Washington, D.C. Several days later
the same aircraft, on leaving Dulles for its return flight,
flew a similar unauthorized route over New England. My
Government lodged a very firm protest. My Government
then imposed what it considered a proportionate penalty:
it suspended Aeroflot’s scheduled service into Dulles for
two flights. It did not authorize the use of a heat-seeking
missile.

44. If we are to learn anything from this awful tragedy,
it is this message and this terrible warning. It is said that
we must-and,
of course, we ‘must-live
in the same
world with the Soviet Union; but if we are to live in that
world in freedom, not in slavery, and if that world is to
continue to allow room for the individual existence of
nations and the survival of freedom and comparable
human values, then it is best that we recognize now,
before it is far, far too late, the true nature of Soviet
totalitarianism and the threat it poses to all people-those
hving under its yoke and those still free of such
domination.

41. What might we expect that a normal, reasonably
civilized Government might do in a situation such as the
one that confronts us? It would, first of all, admit its
responsibility for the act. It would express profound
regret for the loss of life. It would undertake a credible
investigation of the circumstances of the act to determine
if there was individual responsibility and it would discipline the responsible individuals. It also would pledge that
such an act would never be repeated and it would demon-

45. Let me complete my statement by reading the words
of a noble and eloquent Russian, formerly a citizen of the
5.

‘_

,’
.’

Soviet Union-not
atypically a former citizen of the
Soviet Union who now finds it necessary to live outside
his country. I quote the following from Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn:

of Japan. For about 10 minutes it was within the observation zone of radio location means, after which it
could be observed no more.
“Now a hullabaloo has been raised in the United
States and some other countries around the disappearance of a South Korean plane carrying out a flight
from New York to Seoul.

“Let us not forget that violence does not and cannot
exist by itself; it is invariably intertwined with the lie.
They are linked in the most intimate, most organic and
.most profound fashion. Violence cannot conceal itself
behind anything except lies, and lies have nothing to
maintain them except violence. Anyone who has once
proclaimed violence as his method must inexorably
choose the lie as his principle.”

“‘One’s attention is drawn to the fact that already in the
first report about this reference was made to the United
States Central Intelligence Agency. Further reports
emanating from the United States provide increasingly
more grounds to consider that the intinerary and the
nature of the flight were not accidental. It is indicative
that now, post factum, the American side not only off%
cially admits the fact of that plane’s violation of Soviet
airspace but also cites data which indicate that the relevant United States services followed the flight throughout its duration in the most attentive manner.

46. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republies) (interpretation from Russian): May I, first of all, congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the lofty post of
President of. the Council and wish you success in your
responsible activities.
47. I should also like to point out the unusually great
deal of energy shown by your predecessor, the representative of France.

“So one may ask that if it were an ordinary flight of
a civil aircraft which was under continuous observation, then why were there no steps taken from the
American side to end the gross violation of the airspace
of the USSR and to get the plane back to an international flight route?

48. With regard to the convening,‘at the request of the
United States, of today’s meeting of the Council, the
Soviet delegation deems it necessary to state the following. In the view of the Soviet Union, the convening of the
Council in connection with the South Korean aeroplane is
something totally without grounds, unjustifiable and
unnecessary. The Soviet view of this incident is to be
found in the TASS statement issued in Moscow on 2 Sep
tember. It reads as follows:

“Why did the American authorities, which now
resort to all kinds of dirty insinuations about the
USSR, not try to establish contact with the Soviet side
and provide it with the necessary data about this flight?
Neither was done, although there was more than ample
time for this.

“As has already been reported, on the night from
August 31 to September 1 this year an unidentified
plane had rudely violated the Soviet State border and
intruded deep into the Soviet Union’s airspace. The
intruder plane had deviated from the existing international route in the direction of the Soviet Union’s territory by up to 500 kilometres and spent more than two
hours over the Kamchatka Peninsula, the area of the
Sea of Okhotsk and the Island of Sakhalin.

“It is appropriate to recall that instances of deliberate violation of the State frontiers of the Soviet Union
by American planes, including in the Far East, are far
from rare. Protests have repeatedly been lodged with
the United States Government over that matter.
“In the light of these facts the intrusion into the
airspace by the mentioned plane cannot be regarded in
any other way than a pre-planned act. It was obviously
thought possible to. attain special intelligence aims
without hindrance using civilian planes as a cover.

“In violation of international regulations the ulane
flew without navigation lights, didnot react to iadio
signals of the Soviet dispatcher services, and itself
made no attempts to establish such communication
contact.

“More than that, there is reason to believe that those
who organized this provocation had deliberately
desired a further aggravation of the international situation striving to smear the Soviet Union, to sow hostility
to it and to cast aspersions on the Soviet peace-loving
policy.

“It was natural that during the time the unidentified
intruder plane was in USSR airspace, Soviet anti-air
defence aircraft were ordered aloft which repeatedly
tried to establish contacts with the plane using generally accepted signals and to take it to the nearest airfield in the territory of the Soviet Union; The intruder
plane, however, ignored all this. Over the Sakhalin
Island, a Soviet aircraft fired warning shots with tracer
shells along the flying route of the plane.

“This is illustrated also by the impudent, slanderous
statement in respect of the .Soviet Union that was
instantly made by President Reagan of the United
States.
“TASS is authorized to state that in the leading circles of the Soviet Union regret is expressed over the
loss of human life and at the same time a resolute
condemnation of those who consciously or as a result

“Soon after this the intruder plane left the limits of
Soviet airspace and continued its flight towards the Sea
6

of criminal disregard have allowed the death of people
and are now trying to use this occurrence for unseemly
political aims.”

with innocent travellers of different nationalities was shot
down by a missile fired by a jet fighter. This happened
only because the aircraft accidentally went off course,
straying into the airspace of the Soviet Union.

49. In light of what I have just read, the request of the
United States to the Council is only a cover, a counterfeit
coin tossed -down in the dirty game of anti-Soviet policy
they are playing. The purpose the United States is pursuing today is to create a propaganda display; this is quite
obvious. It is a display calculated to present the USSR in a
false light and thereby to acquire another pretext to justify
the militaristic policy in the United States. For this purpose the United States Administration
is determined to
use the most shameless means.

58. In the light of the urgency and the gravity of the
problems involved, I requested, under instructions from
my Government, the convening of an emergency session
of the Council [S/15950] in order to bring this unrestrained use of force to the attention of the Council.
59. A Boeing aircraft 747, Korean Air Lines flight 007,
en route from New York to Seoul, departed Anchorage,
carrying 269 passengers and crew, including 28 Japanese
nationals. According to the data available to us, we are
compelled to believe that the Korean aircraft was shot
down by a missile fired by a Soviet jet fighter at 0338
hours on 1 September, off the shore of Sakhalin, and near
Kaiba Island.

50. As is well known, to get at the truth of various
events we need to ask a key question: who stands to gain
advantage from them and who can gain from a new wave
of anti-Soviet hysteria, under the noise of which they can
say that, supposedly, the Soviet Union should not enter
into agreements with anyone? Who stands to gain from a
situation of hysteria and a whipping up of passions in
which demands are made to cut off all types of negotiations with the Soviet Union? Who stands to gain from a
military psychosis under cover of which appeals are made
to arm and arm?

60. Because ‘of the geographical proximity of the probable site of the incident, my Government immediately
staged a large-scale search and rescue operation, dispatching 10 patrol boats and 4 fishing observation boats to the
area of the high seas. At 1200 hours, on 2 September, one
of the patrol boats found a petroleum spill on the surface
of the sea, 18.6 miles west-north-west of Sakhalin.

51. There can be only one answer to these questions.
Such appeals have been made from the very beginning by
the current United States Administration, which is waging
a crusade against communism. Therefore, if we were to
summarize in one sentence the reason for today’s ignominious show, we could say the following.

61. Japan believes this insidious assault on an innocent
and defenceless ,civilian aircraft by the Soviet military
authorities is totally unjustifiable for whatever reason and
should be strongly condemned.
62. Granted that the Korean aircraft strayed into Soviet
airspace in the first place, Japan feels with indignation
that the action taken by the Soviet authorities to correct
this error was totally out of proportion.

52. The United States Administration
is looking for yet
another pretext to justify its irresponsible policy in the
preparation for nuclear war. Its manipulation
of the
norms of morality represents an attempt to justify the
most immoral actions in the history of mankind-to
justify a policy of thermonuclear world war.

63. As for measures to deal with the violation of airspace, there are relevant articles in the annexes to the
Chicago Convention on International
Civil Aviation,
which are honoured by the majority of ICAO member
States. These articles stipulate that the fullest protection
of the safety of international civil aviation must be guaranteed. All of these articles, but above all that which calls
for abstention from the use of weapons, should be fully
respected.

53. That is the very essence of the calumny against the
Soviet Union which has been dragged out today by the
United States.
54. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Japan, whom I invite to take a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

56. I should like also to express our appreciation to your
predecessor, Mr. de La Barre de Nanteuil, the representative of France, who so ably guided the deliberations of the
Security Council during the month of August.

64. Thus, in the light of the provisions of the Convention as well as of the basic norms of international law, the
action of the Soviet Union can in no way be justified. It
should be recalled that the Convention stressesthe signilicant role international civil aviation plays in promoting
friendly and co-operative relations among nations. In
view of its significance, this wanton act, if overlooked, will
lead to the collapse of the safety regime of international
civil aviation which ICAO has steadily established, and
thus will grossly hamper the promotion of friendly and
co-operative relations among nations.

57. The issue before us today is an appalling tragedy
and a wanton act of violence. A commercial airliner tilled

65. How can we maintain freedom of transportation
and a free exchange of ideas if planes are constantly

55. Mr. KURODA (Japan): I should like, first of all, to
take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency for this month. We are confident that with your amply demonstrated diplomatic
skills the Council will successfully discharge its responsibilities which are particularly important at this time.

7

-

exposed to the dangerof being attacked? How can we live
together in this small world if trespassing would immediately result in mortal danger?.

‘_
._
‘_
-,
_,
*_
‘,‘,
‘.‘_
._
‘,‘,
‘_
-,
‘,
_’
‘_

ness. I do not believe the settlement of this tragic incident
can be achieved through negative responses.
75. I once again call upon the Soviet Union to cooperate with the efforts made by my country and others
to investigate this deeply regrettable incident of violence.

66. It should also be pointed out that the lives of 28
Japanese nationals are involved in this tragedy and that
the Japanese Government has therefore every reason to
express its grave concern over this incident.

76. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Canada, on whom I now call.

67. The Government and people of Japan are extremely
anxious about the fate of the missing passengers and crew.
For this reason, the Government of Japan has been seeking the full co-operation of the Soviet authorities. We
have repeatedly requested that they provide us with any
information they may have regarding the incident. We
have requested permission to enter Soviet territorial
waters in order to investigate this matter. We have also
requested from them information regarding the actual site
of the incident and the results of the searches they have
undertaken.

77. Mr. PELLETIER
(Canada): At the outset, Sir, I
should like to congratulate you, your Government and
people for the distinction of serving as President of the
Council. Our two countries have the most cordial of relations, linked by the same hemisphere and common membership in so many organizations.
78. I should also like to express my gratitude to you and
to the Council for giving Canada an opportunity to participate as an aggrieved party in this emergency debate, the
call for which my Government strongly supported in its
letter to you, Sir, of yesterday evening [S/259493.

68. The Soviet Union, however, has totally failed to provide any satisfactory response to these requests. The
Soviet Union has not yet explained what actually took
place. This is most deplorable, since it is a situation that
affects the trust that must obtain among nations.

79. In this day of international travel. we are dealing
with an incident which has touched directly many
members of the United Nations family and which
touches, by extension, all nations. In the case of my country, at least eight of our citizens were on board the Korean
Air Lines Boeing 747 flight 007 of 31 August. The Canadian people, no less than their Government, are horrified
and outraged by what has happened. There can be no
justification, whatever might have been the circumstances, for this demonstration of the willingness of a superPower to exercise its military
might against the
unintentional presence in its airspace of innocent civilians,
and to destroy, in this instance, 269 lives.

69. The Japanese. Government, is of the view that the
Soviet attitude will have a serious effect upon the peace
and stability of the world, particularly Asia and the Far
East. It demands that the Soviet Union take prompt and
sincere action, and this should include a full report on the
facts.
70. Unless the Soviet Union shows its willingness to cooperate in good faith by clarifying the facts, it will be
exceedingly difftcult to ensure the safety of international
civil aviation in the future.

80. The deliberate in-flight destruction of this civilian,
unarmed, easily identifiable passenger aircraft by sophisticated fighter aircraft of the Soviet Union, no matter where
it occurred, is nothing short of murder. It is a flagrant
attack on the safety of international civil aviation which
should never have occurred and must not be allowed to
occur again. After condemning this act, the Council
should begin an urgent process in an impartial and effective manner to prevent any repetition of such an insult to
humanity.

71. The Japanese Government strongly urges all States
to work to ensure that incidents of this sort never take
place again anywhere in the world.
72. In order to prevent the occurrence of a tragedy of
this kind in the future, a thorough investigation is essential. To this end, it is further essential that this investigation be carried out by appropriate world bodies in order
to reinforce and complement the current search-andrescue operation.

81. From the point of view of international law and
accepted practices governing conduct between lawabiding sovereign nations, the Soviet Union in this incident has been guilty of outlaw behaviour.

73. The United Nations system is empowered with various fact-finding functions. I should therefore like to call
upon the member States of the Council urgently to mandate a fact-finding mission, making use of ICAO or other
international bodies.

82. It is widely accepted, in international law, that the
principle of proportionality
applies. The action of the
Soviet Union in dealing with this incident is without
doubt in total contravention of this principle. Moreover,
the Soviet action, in the absence of any state of hostility or
even heightened international tension in the area, makes it
all the more unjustifiable.

74. As the history of mankind amply demonstrates, this
sort of tragedy has triggered numerous international conflicts and tensions. Mistrust, suspicion and misunderstanding among nations have often led to armed conflict.
Our collective wisdom in this age demands that we deal
with such tragedy with utmost sincerity and open-minded-

83. It would be ludicrous for the Soviet Union to pretend that it had to massacre 269 civilians, travelling on a
8

civilian aircraft, to protect its sovereignty. The opening of
fire on the Korean aircraft was in excess of what is commensurate with the gravity of the threat represented by
the presence of a civilian aircraft in Soviet airspace and,
therefore, the Soviet Union has infringed a basic principle
of international law.

the debate in which we are engaged, but also, that they
may facilitate additional efforts that will ,be made elsewhere within the United Nations system and, I would
hope, by those who have caused this horrible tragedy. The
Council must make sure that this incident will be the last
of its kind to cause such universal indignation.

84. The United Nations and its system of international
organizations has the ability and the machinery in place
to undertake the task before us. It remains for the Council
to provide the impetus to ensure that it is undertaken and
completed promptly and effectively.

90. The examination of the grave situation before us
must not be imbued by any desire to engage in polemics
but rather by what ought to be our common concern for
human life, security and safety. We are therefore conlident that the deliberations of the Council and the effective
action which it must’undertake will not be hindered by
the exercise of the right of veto. Any tactic of that kind
would be considered as a lack of conscience and would
quite rightly be interpreted as an admission of guilt.

(The speaker continued in French.)

85. I should like, on behalf of my Government, to suggest for the consideration of the Council a three-part programme of action.

91. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the represen‘tative of Australia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

86. First, we believe that it is essential to conduct an
impartial investigation of this incident in order to determine all the relevant facts as well as the circumstances.
This will require the most complete form of co-operation
not only by the States directly involved in this tragic incident, but also by those such as Canada, which feel a deep
humanitarian concern because of the death of their own
citizens or, more generally, because of their fundamental
respect for human values. We believe that the SecretaryGeneral is the best person to undertake this task successfully and that it should be accomplished as soon as
possible. The Secretary-General should be requested ,to
report to the Council on this subject, which is considered
to be of the utmost urgency.

92. Mr. JQSEPH (Australia): Mr: President, first I
should like, through you, to thank the members of the
Council for allowing my delegation to address them this
afternoon:
93. As I said in my letter of today’s date to the President
of the Council associating Australia with the request for
this meeting [S/15952], it was with shock and indignation
‘that my Government learned of the circumstances of the
downing of the Korean Air Lines flight 007 on 31 August.
94. The loss of the 269 on board makes this the fifth
most serious air disaster in aviation history. The casualties
include at least one Australian family, including two small
children.

87. Secondly, we believe that we should ask ICAO to
conduct on an urgent basis, in co-operation with the
Secretary-General, a detailed investigation of the incident
with a view to making recommendations
in order to
improve the rules and regulations of international civil
aviation and to prevent the repetition of a similar incident. We take it for granted that the Government of the
Soviet Union will offer its full co-operation in such an
investigation. If this incident were only a tragic accident,
the Soviet Union would be requested, in keeping with the
Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation,’ to’
conduct its own inquiry. Since this catastrophe was the
result of a deliberate act, it is all the more mandatory for
the Soviet Union to facilitate the investigation by ICAO
in whatever manner may be necessary.

95. There is no circumstance in which,any nation can be
justified in shooting down an unarmed civilian aircraft
-serving no military purpose. The fact that the aircraft may
have strayed into Soviet airspace provides no justification’
whatsoever for an attack on the aircraft.
96.’ Let me underline this point. The Korean aircraft
concerned was clearly an unarmed commercial airliner.
Standard procedures governing the situation where a civil
aircraft may have strayed into another country’s airspace
are laid down in the 1944 Chicago Convention on Interna-.
tional Civil Aviation’ to which both the Soviet Union and
the Republic of Korea are parties, Annex 2 to that Convention, which covers the rules of the air, lays down in
attachment A specific procedures to be followed in the
event of interception, which itself is to be used only as a
last resort2. An attack on a commercial civil aircraft
which penetrates the air medium of a contracting State
has been condemned by ICAO, notably after the Libya
airliner incident of 1973.

88. Thirdly, and as an interim measure while awaiting
the result of the investigation and the revision of the rules
and practices of international civil aviation, we believe
that the Soviet Union should be requested, for urgent
humanitarian
reasons, to pay generous and immediate
compensation to the families of the victims. I could recall
precedents for the voluntary prompt payment of compensation in similar circumstances. This initiative, if necessary, could be facilitated by the assistance of bodies such
as the International Committee of the Red Cross.

97. It is abundantly clear that the Soviet tighter aircraft
involved failed to follow the procedures laid down by that
Convention and instead chose to exercise a singularly brutal option.

89. The Canadian Government presents these suggestions in the hope that they may not only move forward
9

I .

98. Many questions remain unanswered. Who gave the
order to fire?.Was it some impulsive act of a single pilot or
unit? The disciplined command system that permeates the
Soviet armed forces makes that explanation almost inconceivable. Nor is the suggestion of mistaken identity at all
credible: there is no way of mistaking a Boeing 747 even
in darkness. We have noted reports that ,the Soviet fighter
that discharged the missile was in constant contact with
its ground control and flew close enough for a visual
inspection. ,_
99. But whether it was an appalling individual blunder,
failure of communication,
or an act authorized from on
high, it was a barbarous episode incompatible with decent
relations between civilized nations. It was quite simply a
massacre in the sky.
100. The Australian authorities are conscious that,
while it was a Korean airliner that was shot down, such
lawlessness in the skies has threatening implications for
the civil aircraft of all nations. The incident must be.of
grave concern to every nation interested in the-safety of,
air navigation.
101. While I would not wish to dwell on the matter, the
episode is also a tragic illustration of the consequences of
continued hostility relating to the Korean peninsula. It is
our firm conviction that the attempts by the Soviet Union’
and others to deny the Republic of Korea its legitimate
place in the international community and its rights in
international law have contributed to the circumstances in
which this appalling act has taken place.
”

under your skilled guidance there will be a sustained
effort to bring this matter to an appropriate conclusion.
105. Mr. van. der STOEL (Netherlands): It is good to
know, Sir, that a wise and distinguished colleague presides
over the Council this month. We also owe a debt of gratitude to your predecessor, who presided over the Council
with such distinction during August.
106. Yesterday the world was shocked by reports of the
destruction of a civilian aircraft carrying 269 passengers
and crew over waters off the Japanese island of Hokkaido. We.offer our heartfelt condolences to the families
of those who died as a consequence of this disaster.
107. In the course of the day, as more information
became .available, it began to dawn upon us that this
tragedy was not an accident caused by some unfortunate
human or technical failure, but that it was brought about
by a deliberate attack by fighter aircraft of a State
Member of the United Nations. It was deliberate because,
for all we .know, the aircraft which had inadvertently
strayed from its course. when it entered Soviet airspace
was clearly identifiable as a civil aircraft, and it had been
tracked .by Soviet radar for over two hours before the
fatal missile attack occurred. Moreover, we have learned
that at the time the missile was fired the pilot of the Soviet
tighter plane was in constant contact with his ground
control.
108. It goes without saying that we learned with profound revulsion of this incredible and atrocious brutality.
109. Given the facts as they are known to us at this
moment, my Government
would agree with those
Governments which have asked for an urgent meeting of
the Council that, faced with such a flagrant and serious
attack on the safety of international civil aviation, this
body cannot and should not remain silent.

102. Finally, Australia joins other members of the international community in demanding an immediate and full
accounting from the Soviet authorities. We have put this
request bilaterally, and I repeat it here today in a multilat‘era1 context. The explanations so far emanating from
Moscow about the episode are in our view entirely inadequate. There has been a refusal thus far either to acknowledge responsibility or even to extend a convincing
expression of regret for the action. This is deplorable. We
appeal to the’soviet Union. If the Soviet authorities give
in to.the instinct to cover up, it will only confirm the worst
‘fears of those who suspect them most, with repercussions
across the spectrum of international relationships.

110. Whatever the possible mistakes made by the pilot
of the Korean airliner which led the aircraft to stray from
its course, there can be no justification for this massive
violation, not only of the law of international civil aviation but indeed of basic norms of behaviour in intemational affairs. The Netherlands therefore cannot but
strongly condemn this horrible act.

103. In this regard, I must say that one cannot but feel
profoundly disturbed ,by the latest TASS statement, which
was read to the Council earlier this afternoon by the representative of the Soviet Union Cpara. 481. We found no
element of contrition in that statement. It amounts, at
least on first reading, to blaming the victims themselves. I
remind the Soviet delegation that some of those victims
were Australian citizens, and I would say firmly on behalf
of those victims, now deceased, that they were entirely
blameless in this appalling episode. We reject this latest
attempt at evasion of responsibility.

111. The Netherlands cannot conceive of any circumstances which would warrant Netherlands military aircraft shooting down a foreign commercial airliner that
had strayed from its flight plan in our airspace, even if
attempts at communication were unsuccessful. In cases of
identified passenger aircraft straying into Netherlands
airspace such events might lead to a diplomatic protest, at
most. Penetration into our airspace of an unidentified aircraft may sometimes lead to interception by fighter
planes, which would then escort that aircraft out of our
national airspace. In any case, civilian aircraft will not be
shot down.

104. I should not wish to conclude, Sir, without welcoming your assumption of the presidency in what may well
be a difficult period. My delegation is confident that

112. In view of the gravity of these events, we had hoped
that the Council would at least receive an assurance by
10

those who must bear the responsibility for this wanton act
of destruction of human life that adequate measures will
be taken to prevent their recurrence. Also, of course, we
would have expected an expression of regret. We have
now heard the statement of the representative of the
Soviet Union. Our hope has proved to be an illusion. In
answer to the detailed and substantial evidence provided
by the representative of the United States, we have been
obliged to listen to an outrageous story about spyingspying by a commercial airliner. The total lack of credibility of this story is obvious.

up to establish contact with it. The statement is silent on
the fate of the aircraft and the specific charge that it was
shot down by Soviet fighter planes. The Soviet Union has
an obvious obligation to the world community to provide, without further delay, complete information
in
regard to the loss of the Korean Air Lines planes and also to
facilitate impartial investigation into the incident. In the
absence of such information, the world community cannot
but form its judgement on the basis of the available information and express its sense of outrage and shock at this
appalling incident.

113. In condemning the brutal act which has been committed, we must consider that this act is even more serious
because those responsible for it clearly do not show understanding of its gravity.

119. This incident is all the more regrettable since it is
not the first time that a civilian aeroplane has strayed into
alien airspace and suffered the consequences of nervous
fingers on the trigger.

114. Mr. Shah NAWAZ (Pakistan): Allow me first, Sir,
to express our profound satisfaction at your assumption
of the presidency for the month of September. I have had
the pleasure of working in close co-operation with you on
major issues facing the United Nations and am deeply
impressed by your diplomatic skill and experience and
your knowledge of international affairs, which ensure that
you will guide the deliberations of the Council with great
distinction and success.

120. In today’s world, where air travel is so extensive
and the air lanes so crowded, the safety of the hundreds of
thousands of passengers travelling daily on these airlines
cannot be guaranteed by means which are exclusively
legal and technical in nature. What is required above all is
the exercise of compassion and forbearance and the avoidance of extreme and drastic measures in situations where
the element of human error or navigational inexactitude
in conforming to technical requirements is always present.
This is necessary because unintentional and stray cases of
violations of airspace cannot be ruled out. What must be
ruled out is resort to irreversible acts of violence in such
cases, which could have the gravest consequences.

115. I also take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the
representative of France for his outstanding leadership of
the Council during the term of his presidency last month.
116. Today we have before us an issue which must cause
deep anxiety to the international community. The statements made this afternoon and the letters addressed to
you, Sir, by the representatives of Australia, Canada,
Japan and the United States and the observer for the
Republic of Korea, speak of the destruction of a Korean
Air Lines jumbo jet and its 269 passengers, and crew, in
tragic circumstances. The United States representative
stated that his Government is-in possession of incontrovertible evidence pointing to the shooting down of the
jetliner by a Soviet fighter plane whose pilot was heard
reporting its destruction by a missile tired by him.

121. Mr. LOUET (France) (interwefation from French):
Mr. President, may I first of all bk .permitted to say that
my delegation is truly happy to see you occupying this
post for the month of September. It is a responsible role
facing you and we know that your great qualities will
enable you to assume the responsibilities with great success. You can certainly rest assurred of our full cc+
operation.

117. The legal and technical questions arising from the
incident have been covered by the statements of the representatives of Canada, the United States and other speakers. Assuming that this body of information correctly
portrays all the relevant aspects of the incident, the international community cannot but deplore the shooting
down of the Korean airliner in callous disregard for the
sanctity of human life. We join the international community in expressing to the members of the bereaved families
our deep sympathy and profound condolences on the loss
of their loved ones in this tragic incident.

123. It is very difficult for me to add anything to what
previous speakers have said much more eloquently that I
might be able to do. I shall therefore make a rather brief
statement.

122. I thank you, Sir, as I thank earlier speakers, for the
kind words addressed to Mr. de La Barre de Nanteuil
which I shall not fail to convey to him upon his return.

124. It is with a profound feeling of indignation and
horror that the French Government heard the news of the
destruction, during its flight, of an aircraft belonging to a
civil airline while on a regular flight. To the families of the
269 victims we address our heartfelt condolences, and our
thoughts are also with the Governments of those nationals who died in this tragedy. As the French Foreign Ministry stated yesterday;

118. The whole world is waiting for greater light to be
thrown on this sad event by the Soviet authorities, who
are in the best position to do so. According to a TASS
report which has been cited by the Soviet representative,
an intruder plane, without navigational lights, twice violated Soviet airspace and failed to react to signals and
warnings from the Soviet fighter aircraft which were sent

“Apart from the safety of civil air transport, at stake
are the principles governing international relations and
respect for human life.”
Indeed, according to our information, this Korean Air
Lines plane was knowingly destroyed, in disregard of ele11

mentary humanitarian considerations and the demands of
civil aviation safety as recognized by the international
community.
125. It is indispensable for full light to be shed upon this
tragic event, for the circumstances to be quickly and fully
clarified with the help of all and for responsibilities to be
clearly determined. To this end, the Council should
request the Secretary-General to gather together all the
information possible in order to report to the Council
within 48 hours.
126. We make an urgent appeal to the Government of
the Soviet Union, and to the other Governments concerned, to facilitate the task of the Secretary-General.
127. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Mr. President, the Chinese delegation would like to
express great satisfaction at seeing you, a distinguished
diplomat from Guyana, conducting the deliberations of
the Council for the month of September. Your talents and
wisdom and your rich diplomatic experience are well
known, and the positive contributions made by you in the
last two years to our work are widely appreciated by colleagues in the Council. I believe that under your firm
guidance the Council will be able successfully to accomplish its tasks in the month of September.
128. I should also like to take this opportunity to
express gratitude to your predecessor, the President for
the month of August, Mr. de La Barre de Nanteuil of
France. The diplomatic skill displayed by him during his
presidency has deeply impressed us.
129. The Chinese delegation has listened with attention
to the statements made in the Council. We are shocked at
and deplore the incident in which a Soviet fighter aircraft
went so far as to. shoot down a South Korean airliner,
causing the death of 269 passengers and crew, including
quite a number of Chinese compatriots of China’s Taiwan
province and Hong Kong.

unarmed Korean passenger airliner. The Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the
United Kingdom summoned the Soviet Ambassador in
London this morning and conveyed both our strong condemnation of the incident and a request for a full
explanation.
133. Let me-reiterate in this forum our horror”at this
tragic incident for which we can see no possible just&ation. The Soviet Government is duty bound to provide us
with a proper explanation of what happened. Such explanation as we have had from it so far is totally
inadequate-and
in saying this I include the statement we
heard this afternoon from the representative of the Soviet
Union.
134. We have also heard from the observer for the
Government of the Republic of Korea that it is seeking a
proper explanation, an apology, compensation, the return
of the remains and appropriate disciplinary action against
those responsible, as well as arrangements designed to
prevent any repetition of such incidents. My Government
fully supports those requests.
135. I understand that one United Kingdom national
and 13 Hong Kong residents were on the plane when it
was shot down. In these circumstances, my Government
reserves its right to take any appropriate action in accordance with international law.
136. This horrendous event has consequences for all of
us, not just those unfortunate enough to have had nationals on board the airliner and for the bereaved: it has grave
implications for the safety of civil aviation in general and
for the travelling public of the world as a whole.
137. In the present tragic and serious circumstances, it
appears to my Government that the best course would be
for the Soviet Union to give the world a frank and honest
account of what really happened. That would do something to reduce the damage to the international climate. I
listened with mounting concern and indignation to the
last part of the statement made this afternoon by the representative of the Soviet Union. The language he used was
evasive, but even more important it was not calculated to
help the cause of good international relations.

130. The Chinese delegation would like to take this
opportunity to extend condolences and sympathy to the
bereaved families of the victims.
131. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): The circumstances in which you, Sir, come to the presidency are
sad and serious. We as a Council are therefore all the
more fortunate to have as our President at this time a man
of experience, ability and courage, one who knows how to
keep order and remain calm. We particularly welcome
and congratulate you as a representative of a notable
Commonwealth country. We know that you will conduct
our affairs with the same ability as your predecessor, Mr.
de La Barre de Nanteuil, a very distinguished diplomateven measured against the standard of the French Diplomatic Service.

138. Allow me to express the hope that the appalling
action by the Soviet authorities which has brought us
together this afternoon was not intended to be a signal of
their intentions towards international
relations as a
whole. I trust we shall receive an assurance on this point.
139. Mr. MAPANGO
ma KEMISHANGA
(Zaire)
(interpretation from French): On my own behalf, and that
of ‘my delegation, I should like at the outset to join those
who have preceded me and convey to you, Sir, our sincerest and warmest congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of September. Once again
we take pleasure in seeing you guiding our debates. Your
exceptional diplomatic and intellectual qualities that are
well known to all are a guarantee for the success of our

132. My Government has already expressed publicly its
condolences to the families of the many victims of this
disaster. It has also expressed its grave concern and horror at the shooting down by a Soviet fighter of an
12

’

work in this matter of the South Korean Air Lines flight
007 which, unfortunately, seems to augur difficult days
ahead. That being so, you can count on the positive contribution of my delegation during your difficult mandate
as President of the Council.

errors can happen, what could be more normal than to
ask the pilot to correct his course and return to the correct
route instead of moving immediately to the attack-as
though the Soviet Union were being threatened with
destruction by this commercial aeroplane?

140. I should like also to avail myself of this opportunity
to express our full appreciation to another outstanding
diplomat, Mr. Luc de La Barre de Nanteuil of France, for
the excellent manner in which he directed the Council’s
work last month.

146. Whatever the explanation, this act is far out of proportion to the argument based on the so-called violation of
Soviet airspace. Had that violation been the act of a South
Korean military aircraft we might understand it, but that it
should be attributed to a navigational error on the part of a
civilian aircraft boggles the mind. Hence my delegation
requests that urgent measures be taken in order to avoid the
repetition of such an act.

141. The question which is before the Council today is
so serious that it represents for Zaire a threefold and deep
concern. I say a threefold concern since the act that has
just occurred is, in itself, regardless of any implications
involved, one of extreme seriousness. Our first concern is
that a civil aircraft, a South Korean Boeing 747 with 269
passengers on board, was intercepted and shot down during flight somewhere over Soviet airspace, causing the
death of 269 passengers and crew-men, women and
children. That is what is so shocking. That is what shows
a certain folly of our times and cannot leave indifferent
anyone who would like to ensure the best possible conditions for inter-State relations, emanating from the interdependence of nations, an interdependence that necessarily
involves giving concrete form to the principle of the peaceful coexistence of States, large and small, with different
political, economic and social systems.

147. Before concluding, I should like to associate my
delegation with all the delegations that have already spoken
in sharing with the families of the victims the anger and grief
that they must feel at this solemn moment.
148. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of New Zealand. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
149. Mr. HARLAND
(New Zealand): May I begin, Sir,
by congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency. We appreciate very much this opportunity to
address the Council under your distinguished stewardship.
150. New Zealanders, like people in many other countries,
have been deeply shocked to hear of the shooting down by
Soviet military aircraft of an unarmed civilian aircraft carrying many passengers. Yesterday the New Zealand Parliament unanimously adopted the following motion introduced by the Minister for Foreign Affairs:

142. Our second concern stems from the fact that the
target chosen by the Soviet air force comes from a small,
developing country, defenceless and with limited resources.
143. Our third concern arises from a certain number of
questions we should like to have answered and for which no
valid explanation has so far been given. In particular we
wonder whether the Republic of South Korea has recently
been involved in full armed conflict with the Soviet Union.
And even had there been such a conflict between the two
States, is that justification for the act that caused so many
civilian victims? What remains of all the appropriate international conventions on this subject, including the 1944
Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation’, to
which the Soviet Union itself is a party, and its annexes?
144. Truth to tell, this is an odious, barbaric act, an act of
useless provocation. Having caused 269 innocent victims in
.contempt of the most elementary norms of international
law and of morality, this deliberate-this criminal-attack
against a South Korean civilian aircraft identified by a
Soviet Army fighter plane deserved the firm and energetic
condemnation of the international community, for it constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security,
Such an act, which is tantamount to murder, cannot be
explained. In the name of peaceful coexistence, the principle
upon which the whole of Zaire’s foreign policy is based, we
must condemn this act with all our energy.
145. We can understand that through a navigational
error the South Korean Boeing 747 might suddenly have
found itself inside Soviet Union airspace, but is that the
reason for such an act? If, furthermore, it is true that

,

“This House expresses its deep concern that Soviet
military aircraft tracked a Korean Air Lines unarmed
commercial aircraft for over two hours and, with
ample time to verify an innocent intrusion into Soviet
airspace and to take appropriate measures, then coldbloodedly and barbarically shot down the aircraft with
heavy loss of life. This House further calls upon the
Soviet Union to explain this act of international lawlessness and to bring those responsible to account. And
further, this House expresses its heartfelt sympathy to
the innocent victims and to the people of the Republic
of Korea.”
151. The New Zealand Government .,ioins in the international condemnation of this outrageous act of international lawlessness. The explanations so far given by the
Soviet Union are totally inadequate. The fact is that 269
innocent people have been killed. It is not enough for the
Soviet leadership to express in some shuffling way its
regret for the human loss. The world is waiting for the
Soviet leadership to explain how this tragedy was allowed
to happen and what will be done to prevent such outrages
from happening again.
152. The PRESIDENT:
The next sneaker is the representative of the Federal Republic of-Germany, whom I

invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
153. Mr. JELONEK
(Federal Renublic of Germany):
Mr. President, I should like to thank you and a11 the
members of the Council for affording my country the
opportunity to take part in this debate. I also congratulate
you on your assumption of your high office and wish you
every success in the discharge of your duties.

159. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I
would like to read to the Council a statement issued late
this afternoon in Washington by Secretary of State
George P. Shultz. I quote:
“The Soviet Union has today issued another statement in its continuing effort to cover up the facts of the
inhumane Soviet attack on an unarmed civilian &rliner. They still will not admit the truth-that
they shot
down an unarmed civilian airliner.

154. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany joins in the worldwide horror at and condemnation
of the downing of an unarmed civilian aeroplane. We are
shocked and dismayed at this unexplainable act of brutality and of contempt for human life that demanded the
lives of 269 defenceless men, women and children. The
Government
of the Federal Republic of Germany
expresses its deepest sympathy and profound condolences
to the families, the peoples and the Governments of the
victims.

“The facts are:
“First, the aircraft was a commercial airliner on a
regularly scheduled flight-and
the Soviet fighter came
close enough to see it.
“Secondly, the passengers on the flight came from
many nations and included a number of women and,
children.

155. The shooting down of a civilian aeroplane is, in
times of peace, an unprecedented and abominable act for
which there can be no excuse. Even if the aeroplane had
strayed into Soviet airspace and failed to observe orders
for landing, its destruction, involving heavy loss of human
lives, was a gross violation of international law and the
principles of humanity.

“Thirdly, the airliner in question was not of United
States registry.

156. According to State practice, as well as to welldefined regulations of ICAO, the use of military force in
such circumstances cannot be justified. The right of any
State to enforce the respect for its airspace is, like the
enforcement of other rights, limited by the principle of
proportionality,
which is a fundamental and globally recognized principle of international
law. The course of
action pursued by the Soviet Union undermines the very
foundation of international civil aviation. We, therefore,
sharply condemn it.

160. I depart from the Secretary’s statement to comment on the suspicion which the Soviet representative
expressed at the fact that United States services followed
the flight throughout its duration in the most attentive
manner. No, I would remind the representative of the
Soviet Union: we followed you following the flight. I
resume the Secretary’s statement:

“Fourthly, the United States was not aware that the
Korean airliner was in jeopardy until it was shot down.
Our first knowledge of this incident was based on subsequent analysis of Soviet defence activity.”

“TASS also asserts that the Soviet aircraft tired
warning shots with tracer shells along the route of the
plane. We know the Soviet pilot reported he had fired
on the target and that the target was destroyed. There
is no indication that the Soviets tried to warn the plane
by tiring tracers.

157. The political and moral damage caused by this
most deplorable incident is considerable. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is extremely
concerned about the ensuing risks of negative repercussions for both East-West relations and the international
climate as a whole. This development is particularly
alarming at a time at which crucial questions of East-West
relations are being discussed in Geneva and at which the
positive conclusion of the Madrid meeting of the participating States of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and the intensifying contacts
between the two super-Powers offer possibilities for the
much needed and much desired improvement of the international situation.

“The Soviet Union is clearly engaged in an effort to
divert attention from its own actions by false claims of
a United States intelligence connection with the
Korean civilian airliner”-and
presumably with the
269 contract United States intelligence agents aboard
that plane.
“None of this can obscure the facts. The Soviet
Union must accept responsibility for having shot down
an unarmed commercial airliner, taking the lives of 269
human beings. No cover-up, however brazen, however
elaborate, can change this reality or absolve the Soviet
Union of its responsibility to explain its behaviour. The
world is waiting for the Soviet Union to tell the truth.”

158. We call on the Soviet Union to take appropriate
actions in order to limit the dangerous consequences of
this incident as much as possible. In this respect, in particular, a comprehensive investigation and the indemnification of the families of the victims are required, as are
arrangements designed to prevent any repetition of such
tragic incidents.

161. I have one final comment, This is not Secretary of
State George P. Shultz speaking. This is me. Probably the
most grotesque of all the fictions to which we have been
exposed this afternoon by the Soviet representative was
14

his astounding allegation that of course the destruction of
this aircraft redounds, in some extraordinary way, to the’
benefit of the Administration
of the President of the
United States-redounds
to its benefit, to the benefit of
the Administration
that I represent.
162. Knowing as we do the less-than-hc
feelings
.. Soviet
I . Union
-- . towards_ the
-less-than-hospitable
- ._ and the AdminofI the
President
istration,
isrration, which
wmcn I1 am proud to
i represent, were it to
redound to the benefit of that Administration,
why, I

must ask the Soviet representative, did you shoot down
the aeroplane?
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

NOTES

’ United.Nations, Treury Series, vol. 15, NO. 102.
2 International Civil Aviation Organization, Rules oftherlir, Annex
2 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation, Attachment A,
para. 2.1.

_.

I

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNDZS
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dam les librairies et les agences dtpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous auprbs de votre libraire ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Get&e.
KAK

l-fOJIY=DiTb

H3&4HIUI

OPl-‘AHHSAIQIH

OlS%EJ@fHEHHbIX

HAM

M3mHIIx
Opraunsamm 06aenmiemibrx HatUifi ~omao RynUTb B KHHWibfX
Mara3UHaX
H SCHTCTBaX
BO BCeX p&OHaX
Mupa. HaBomiTe
CnpaBKIlo6
H3XSUIHXX
B BILIlICM KHHXIiOM
biamme
mm mnnme
no mpecy: Opramisamix O6aeAmeHHbrx
Harm% Cexmix no
nponaxre ~3mniB,
Hb!o-tiopx
smi %zieBa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerfas y cams .distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00400

9tl-60205-October

1991-2,050
