United Nations

S/PV.9312

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9312

th meeting
Thursday, 27 April 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administrative
Mission in Kosovo (S/2023/247)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-11960 (E)
*2311960*

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2023/247)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representative of Serbia to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Caroline
Ziadeh, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Donika
Gërvalla-Schwarz to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/247, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ziadeh.
Ms. Ziadeh: I am honoured to update the Security
Council on developments in Kosovo, which during
the most recent reporting period included serious
challenges as well as an important collective effort to
bring Belgrade-Pristina relations nearer to stability and
normalization. Efforts from both sides will be needed
in order to realize the potential for a positive change
in relations, particularly given the preceding cycles of
tension, provocations and grievances that occurred
during much of 2022 and unfortunately have continued,
in some respects, even in the most recent days.
Regular breakdowns of effective, timely and
preventive action are well documented in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/247). Without increased
2/31

27/04/2023

commitment to the mechanism for renewed negotiations,
failures of confidence could worsen within Kosovo, with
direct consequences for regional stability. Therefore,
a sustained focus of attention on the principles and
declarations jointly affirmed on 27 February in Brussels,
and further elaborated on 18 March in Ohrid, should be
matched by courageous leadership action from the parties
and from the stewards and supporters of the negotiations.
Specific commitments have been made by both
sides to the new agreement on the path to normalization
between Kosovo and Serbia, alongside which there
are immediate steps that can be taken to demonstrate
goodwill on the ground. Achieving actual progress
demands that confidence be rebuilt among those who
have grown suspicious of the intentions of each side.
Leaders should take responsible steps to reduce the
likelihood of further standoffs on issues that have
eroded public confidence over recent months.
Those issues include matters that precipitated the
withdrawal of Kosovo Serbs from Kosovo institutions
en masse in November and those that continue to
polarize public opinion during the local elections
conducted last Sunday. Steps should be taken to
demonstrate that police and judicial bodies are
fully insulated from political agendas and political
interference. Clear and continuous communication to
the public will be needed concerning issues that affect
their livelihoods and human rights — issues such as
expropriations of property and the ability to count
upon impartial institutions of justice. Reassurance is
necessary in order to replace the feelings of mistrust
and uncertainty felt by ordinary inhabitants, on both
sides of the Ibar River. Accusatory rhetoric should be
avoided, and fears should be replaced with concrete
reasons for confidence and optimism.
The 23 April extraordinary elections were peaceful
and calm. At the same time, questions of representation
must be addressed as part of the broader political
process that is now ongoing. Elected leaders, police
forces and all civic services at the municipal level
should genuinely reflect and fulfil the interests of their
local constituents.
On 2 May, the expected endorsement by both
parties of the joint declaration on missing persons,
facilitated by the European Union (EU), has the
potential to resume full cooperation between Pristina
and Belgrade on missing persons within the existing
working group, chaired by the International Committee
of the Red Cross. That would provide families on both
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

sides the chance for answers regarding their loved ones.
Likewise, the presentation by the management team of
a draft statute for the association/community of Serbmajority municipalities should lead to its immediate,
detailed and good-faith consideration. The charting of a
full-implementation path is the minimum baseline owed
to the public by leaders during their next high-level
meeting. Indispensably, the joint monitoring committee
will need to prove to be efficient in its operation and
robust in its oversight of actions taken by both sides.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to
the fact that this meeting is taking place against the
backdrop of significant anniversaries, which offer
an important perspective on recent developments.
Among them are the twentieth anniversary of the 2003
Thessaloniki Summit, at which the EU pronounced its
unequivocal support for the European perspective of
the Western Balkans. As has also been widely noted,
this month marks the tenth anniversary of the signing at
Brussels of the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations. During the intervening
years, as outlined in numerous reports to the Council,
inconsistencies of commitment and action — local as
well as international — have regularly limited progress
in advancing the normalization of relations. In the
latter half of 2022, actions and reactions took Pristina
and Belgrade further away from the course previously
agreed to in the framework of the EU-facilitated
dialogue and, worrisomely, even close to the edge
of physical confrontation. Those are the trends that
responsible leaders must now work to change.
Through my interactions with a wide array of
interlocutors — including municipal, religious, civil
society and business organizations — the most common
sentiments I encounter are frustration and concern
about an uncertain future. However, equally, I see the
spirit and the will to work to create a better reality.
That is something we cherish as we work alongside all
people striving for positive and tangible changes.
Neighbours across the region, those already
European Union members and those aspiring to join
it, are watching as well. Commerce and investment
simply will bypass those areas in which normalized
relations are unattained, or where tensions threaten
basic institutional stability. Leaders from the region
have expressed their support for the process now
being undertaken by both sides to advance along the
path to normalization. Many have faced and overcome
their own past challenges towards achieving stability,

S/PV.9312

reconciliation and progress. They have done so by
addressing difficult issues with creativity and a sense
of longer-term political responsibility.
In the region, opportunities for reducing barriers
to economic development and cooperation are being
pursued through the promotion of important initiatives
that can, and should be, expedited, including by progress
towards normalization. In support of that process, the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) will continue to dedicate all efforts
to help both sides and their constituencies reap the
benefits of improved communication and understanding
of common problems — and implementing solutions.
That brings me to another anniversary. This year
also marks five years of work under the rubric of
UNMIK’s trust-building agenda. That programme
of activity sustains support for those on the ground
working sincerely to promote inter-community trust,
resilience and confidence. It is an investment, over
the longer term, in those who can positively reshape
relations at all levels. Our focus is on the empowerment
of communities to flourish in spaces where ethnically
divisive prejudice and political rhetoric are being
transcended. Trust-building can directly help light the
path to political normalization. Political agreements
need such soil in which to grow. Together, those
approaches mark a genuine path towards a more
sustainable, peaceful and ultimately prosperous future
for all.
I will highlight only a few ways in which the Mission
is empowering trust-building champions to overcome
the divisions wrought by miscommunication and
frequent political invective. They include supporting
language rights and language learning, where an
UNMIK-sponsored online platform to learn Albanian
and Serbian reaches more than 70,000 users. We are
assisting families of missing persons via the Missing
Persons Resource Centre. We are promoting, and will
continue to promote, the empowerment of youth and
women leaders by providing substantial platforms for
their engagement at all levels of decision-making. We
are helping to ensure equal access to justice through
improved courtroom infrastructure, free legal aid and
legal interpretation services. Next month, we will
inaugurate a community dialogue centre designed and
led by local trust-building champions. We continue
to strengthen cohesive, cross-cutting work with
United Nations agencies and with all our international
partners. Together, we are steadily growing the

23-119603/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

constituency for political compromise — despite all the
challenges — while demonstrating the positive effects
that path offers in the real lives of people.
It should be the aspiration of all of us that the
accumulation of international efforts will now chart
a realistic path towards normalization. The obstacles
to that process may take the form of posturing or
insufficient political will to open the space for public
acceptance. Implementation will surely face many
pitfalls and require patience. None of those pitfalls,
however, can match the gains to be achieved for the
people through perseverance and delivery.
UNMIK will remain committed to supporting,
at all levels, the progress made, which is among the
most important parts of our mandate. We will do so
in the expectation that the choices made by political
leaders, the fulfilment of their obligations and their
commitments will lead to greater opportunities for
a generation deserving better. To play our role, the
Mission continues to rely upon the support of the
Council, as we work together with our partners within
and beyond the full spectrum of the United Nations
system. I thank the Council for that support and for
promoting solutions that serve the interests of a new
generation in Kosovo and the region.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Ziadeh for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): As always, I
am honoured to be here today. I am convinced that the
efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Ziadеh, have constructive intentions, and
we appreciate her desire and commitment. However, the
fact is that the report (S/2023/247) we are considering
today is not, and will never be, sufficient for a
comprehensive and essential understanding of all the
implications of security and other challenges in Kosovo
and Metohija on regional and global flows. Therefore,
continuing to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral’s in an open format is of key importance to better
describe the complex and disturbing situation in the
area of Kosovo and Metohija to the entire membership
of the United Nations and to the general public.
4/31

27/04/2023

I speak to the Council at a time when calls for respect
for the Charter of the United Nations have never been
heard louder in this organ. It is exactly those appeals that
the Republic of Serbia has been making continuously
for the past 24 years, but with one small and significant
difference — we are led by a powerful minority to
believe that the example of Kosovo and Metohija is socalled sui generis. Throughout history, it has been shown
that such exceptions create precedents, and precedents
greatly influence existing rules and interpretations of
norms of international law. It is clear that there are double
standards that lead us to different interpretations of the
universal principles of respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of every State Member of the United
Nations. Apparently, that does not apply to Serbia.
That is why it is my duty to call for consistent
application of the valid — I repeat, valid — resolution 1244
(1999), which unfortunately has not been consistently
or fully implemented to this day. At the same time,
in accordance with the resolution, we call for the
undiminished presence and action of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in an unchanged capacity, full scope and mandate.
Resolution 1244 (1999), as the Council enacted it in
1999, is still in force. Either the Council cancels it, or
it respects it. And if it does not respect it, then there
is a question of whether the United Nations even any
longer exists.
The dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina is at
a very complex and politically important, and perhaps
decisive, moment. On the one hand, with the agreements
arrived at in Brussels on 27 February and in Ohrid on
28 March, with the mediation of the European Union
(EU), we managed to preserve the momentum in the
attempts to normalize relations. On the other hand, as the
Secretary-General’s report itself partially shows, there
is still an atmosphere of fear, uncertainty and pressure
towards Serbs and other non-Albanian communities on
the ground.
First of all, it is necessary that all previous
agreements — starting with the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations,
which I signed 10 years ago together with Catherine
Ashton and Hashim Thaçi — be consistently and
completely implemented. It is necessary to establish
the association of Serbian municipalities as soon as
possible, because that is the only possible mechanism
for protecting the rights and security of the Serbian
community in Kosovo and Metohija.
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

In this very Chamber 10 years ago, on 14 June 2013,
a meeting of the Security Council was held following the
signing of the Brussels Agreement, where it was assessed
as a document of historical importance. Former SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon stated in his report (S/2013/254)
that the Agreement provided for the establishment of an
association of Serbian municipalities with a statute and
a range of competencies. The Permanent Representative
at the United States Permanent Mission at the time,
Susan Rice, stated that the Agreement reaffirmed farreaching municipal self-governance for ethnic Serbs in
the north. French Ambassador Briens said that Kosovo
must provide a future community of majority-Serb areas
with substantive autonomy.
And what happened in those 10 years? Nothing.
We are aware that Pristina is deliberately avoiding that
obligation. It is devastating that they only started talking
about this important topic on 2 May, even though it is
recognized as a key and first step in the implementation
of the European plan by none other than the EU’s
High Representative for Foreign and Security Policy,
Josep Borrell Fontelles, who told the entire European
community that the association of Serbian municipalities
must be formed now.
Considering everything that has been done so far,
we are certain that Kurti will never fulfil the obligation
to form the association of Serbian municipalities,
because peace and the success of the dialogue are not
his goal; his goal is to expel all Serbs from Kosovo and
Metohija. And as members know, the establishment of
the association of Serbian municipalities is the first, and
necessary, condition for the further implementation of
the agreements reached in Brussels and Ohrid. In other
words, it is necessary to ensure a dignified and normal
life for all people living in Kosovo and Metohija.
I would like to emphasize that the Republic of Serbia
will take all legal, political and economic measures to
protect the lives and basic human and political rights of
Serbs and other non-Albanian populations in Kosovo
and Metohija. In order to continue the comprehensive
social and economic progress of Serbian communities,
the Government of Serbia, through a special investment
programme, will accelerate infrastructure development
and increase financial support measures for the economy,
farmers, youth and socially vulnerable categories.
The harsh truth is that, in the past 20 years, Kosovo
and Metohija has turned from a multi-ethnic environment
into an almost ethnically pure territory. I will repeat the

S/PV.9312

information that more than 40,000 Serbs once lived in
Pristina, while today there are fewer than 100 of them.
In the ancient imperial city of Prizren, where I was born
and which today I need permission to visit, there used to
be more than 10,000 Serbs, while today there are only
about 20 left, and so on and so on. What words would
members use to describe that phenomenon, according
to which systematic work is being done to eliminate all
Serbs while taking away all their rights? Is there support
for such destructive actions, and who provides it?
It is devastating that, 24 years since resolution 1244
(1999) was adopted, the report still states the figure of
200,000 displaced people from Kosovo and Metohija.
Returns are at such a low level — the report we are
currently considering records 112 voluntary returns,
of which 60 were Kosovo Serbs — that at this rate
we will need centuries for all exiles to return to their
homes. Members heard me right: centuries. The return
rate, which is still less than 2 per cent — 1.9 per cent,
to be exact— is the lowest percentage of returnees in
post-conflict areas in the world. Is that information the
result of the democratic development of Pristina and
its contribution to the peaceful coexistence of Serbs
and Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija? Does the
Council really think that this issue should no longer
me mentioned? That those who were expelled should
forever remain so? Or does resolution 1244 (1999) — a
resolution of this body — say otherwise?
We have also witnessed that Serbian Orthodox
spiritual heritage in Kosovo and Metohija is subject
to attacks by Kosovo Albanians on two grounds. They
attribute that heritage as being part of medieval Albanian
objects, or falsely present it as Byzantine or Illyrian. In
the twenty-first century, we are witnessing the erasure
of history, the destruction of certain buildings of the
Serbian Orthodox Church, the desecration of Orthodox
cemeteries and the denial of the right to the freedom of
religion. Citizens cannot even visit cemeteries holding
their ancestors.
Is that the principle of the self-determination of some
at the expense of eliminating others? Pristina’s goal and
intention to erase the traces of everything Serbian in
Kosovo and Metohija is also evident in this action. Let
us add to that the current trend of frequent ethnically
motivated attacks on religious holidays. The wounding
of the 11-year-old boy Stefan Stojanović and his
21-one-year old cousin Miloš Stojanović, whose sin was
celebrating Orthodox Christmas and going to the forest
to collect the holy Christmas tree, raises the question

23-119605/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

of the kind of message we are sending to the remaining
Serbian population in Kosovo and Metohija. What
opportunities have we created for the return of 200,000
Serbs who were exiled from Kosovo? What are the
prospects for the remaining non-Albanian communities?
Resigned to the current state of democracy
in Kosovo and Metohija, the legitimately elected
representatives of the Serbs stepped out of political life,
insisting on the fulfilment of well-known conditions:
first, as was clearly supported here, the establishment
of the association of Serbian municipalities, which
is an international obligation for Pristina and was
mentioned by this organ 10 years ago; the provision of
the freedom of movement for Serbs; and the withdrawal
of illegally deployed Albanian police forces from the
north of Kosovo and Metohija. All that was stipulated
in the Brussels Agreement. Belgrade supported this
type of peaceful protest and considers the demands
of the Serbian community logical and legitimate. I
would like to remind the Council that during the last
year, the basic democratic rights of Serbs from Kosovo
and Metohija were violated twice: when they were
prevented from voting in the referendum and when,
for the first time, voting was not carried out in the
elections on 3 April, which is in direct contradiction of
resolution 1244 (1999) and Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe decisions. Paradoxically,
the current Pristina leadership insisted on the recent
holding of special elections in four municipalities with
a Serbian majority population.
Serbia is completely against the violent and illegal
holding of extraordinary elections, because the motive
for such a decision by the current leadership of Pristina
is completely clear to us: it is a clear attempt to forcibly
take away the rights and competencies of the Serbian
community and establish full control. It is obvious that
such a step has the support of some of the powerful
minority, because recognizing the results of these
extraordinary elections represents a type of defeat of
democracy — that is, it represents the occupation of the
north of Kosovo and Metohija. I would like to remind
the Council that the elections were held violently,
with great pressure, in containers secured by the same
persons who shoot at Serbs and other non-Albanians.
Naturally, only 13 persons of Serbian nationality
voted in those elections, out of a total of 45,095 people.
Does it seem normal or legal, not to mention just,
that barely 2 per cent of the population — the 1,500
Albanians who voted, out of 45,000 people — decide
6/31

27/04/2023

the fate of 98 per cent of people, at a time of pronounced
inter-ethnic tensions? And all of this is happening
at a time when the issue of Pristina’s membership in
the Council of Europe is being forcibly considered.
This blackmail and political manoeuvre aimed at
delaying the formation of the association of Serbian
municipalities for a full 10 years must be clearly and
widely condemned. The current Albanian leadership
does not even care about the statutes, let alone the
common values of the institutions, the memberships
of which it wants to use to fulfil its own, mundane
political goals.
Pristina obviously believes that their precedent
exceeds any right, and that their every move will still
be met with understanding. That may be true, because
the visa liberalization with the European Union they
received does not include Serbs from Kosovo and
Metohija — that is to say, Serbs are being discriminated
against, compared to Albanians. All the mechanisms to
prematurely strengthen Pristina’s capacities only further
aggravate and disenfranchise the Serbian community.
If the absence of reaction means approval, then one
justifiably gets the impression that the destructiveness
of the current Pristina leadership in putting pressure
on non-Albanian communities in Kosovo and Metohija
is being legitimized and rewarded. This has special
anti-democratic effects on the representatives of the
Serbian List, the legitimate representatives of the
Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija. Compared to
the large numbers from the Kosovo security forces,
who were released after only three months, the
Vice-President of the Serbian List, Bratislav Nikolic,
and four Serbs from Srpska have been imprisoned for 18
months now because of politically inspired accusations.
Owing to the extremely deteriorated security
situation in the Province at the end of last year, Serbia,
fully in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), sent a
request, which was not accepted, for the return of up to
1,000 members of the Serbian security forces to Kosovo
and Metohija. So there would not be any dilemma, this
is in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), which the
Council adopted. We insist that Kosovo Force (KFOR)
invest additional efforts in ensuring the right to life
and security of the Serbian community in Kosovo and
Metohija. During the last year, in the north of Kosovo
and Metohija, in the municipalities with a majority Serb
community, the so-called special units of the Regional
Operations Support Unit made incursions as many as
12 times without the consent of KFOR and four mayors
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

of the municipalities. During this year, five such illegal
incursions have already been registered. These kinds of
incidents can cause a spiral of violence that is difficult
to control.
I would like to take the opportunity to point
out another negative course of action by the current
Pristina leadership: the instrumentalization of the socalled representatives of special units and the police in
fuelling inter-ethnic tensions. There are many examples,
and it was the representative of the so-called “Kosovo
Security Forces” who participated in the aforementioned
attack on Serbian children during the celebration of a
religious holiday. Therefore, we are very surprised that,
contrary to international law and despite the warnings
of the United Nations, the European Union and NATO,
the transformation process of the so-called “Kosovo
Security Forces” into the army continued. I remind the
Council that, according to resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Military Technical Agreement, only and exclusively the
International Security Force (KFOR) have a mandate for
all military aspects of security. How, if not as a threat,
should we interpret the creation of strongholds and bases
close to the administrative line on the territory in which
exclusively Serbs live?
Of particular concern is the implementation of the
arrangement on the inclusion of members of the socalled “Kosovo Security Forces” to the infantry troops of
the armed forces of the United Kingdom in the Malvinas
Islands. Such a move is in complete contradiction not
only of resolution 1244 (1999), but also of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly concerning the
peaceful settlement of the Malvinas Islands dispute.
Serbia’s strategic commitment is full membership in
the European Union. We share and promote European
values and advocate consistent compliance with the basic
norms of international law, respecting the fundamental
principles on which the United Nations was founded. In
this sense, we are committed to the process of finding
a sustainable solution in the dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, which we consider to be of strategic interest
for the entire region, Europe and the broader geopolitical
picture. From my presentation so far, you have had the
opportunity to hear only part of the problem and the
unstable security situation in Kosovo and Metohija,
through which the other side is deliberately preventing us
from focusing our full attention on finding a compromise.
A year is too much, let alone 10 years, for the fulfilment
of assumed obligations.

S/PV.9312

We must not neglect these obligations, because
in this way we will completely let down the people
living in Kosovo and Metohija. We must sincerely
dedicate ourselves to dialogue, but I am unfortunately
convinced that on this occasion too, in the statement
by the representative of Pristina, we will hear a series
of accusations against Serbia regarding the apparently
different interpretations of the Ohrid Framework
Agreement, and the focus will be on the consequences
of the conflict in Kosovo and Metohija. On this
occasion, Serbian responsibility will be invoked, and
Serbia will be portrayed as someone else’s instrument.
It is interesting that the representatives of Pristina
talk so lightly about patronage, but emphasize the sole
responsibility of Serbia and Belgrade.
What they ignore is the loudness that their
silence leaves. Not a single word is heard about their
responsibility for the current security situation, nor
about the failure to fulfil their obligations, such as the
formation of the association of Serbian municipalities.
I must once again clearly and unequivocally call
for the unconditional and urgent formation of the
association of Serbian municipalities in accordance
with the Brussels Agreement. It is unacceptable that
discussions on this important topic only start on 2 May,
while simultaneously an action within the Council of
Europe is being carried out that directly undermines
this dialogue.
This is the twenty-fifth time that I speak before
the Council about how important Kosovo and Metohija
are for the Serbian people. The Serbian people have
lived in Kosovo and Metohija for centuries and they
will continue to do so. That is evidenced, among other
things, by our historical, cultural and religious heritage,
which we cannot and will not renounce.
We have heard that when people want to justify the
violation of international law regarding the recognition
of the unilaterally declared independence of Kosovo,
they use the term sui generis as an alibi. It is true. It is
true that for Serbia, Kosovo is sui generis. It is where
Serbia was born. It is where the essence of Serbian
history and orthodoxy lie. Four Serbian medieval
churches on the UNESCO World Heritage List are
located in Kosovo and Metohija — the Patriarchate of
Peć from the thirteenth century, Our Lady of Ljeviška
from 1307, Gračanica from 1321 and Visoki Dečani
from 1335, all of which have been on the UNESCO
list of endangered world heritage sites since 2006. And
since 2021, Dečani has been on the list of the seven

23-119607/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

most endangered cultural monuments in Europe. They
threw grenades at Dečani. They wrote Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) graffiti on churches.
Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija do not respect
the decisions of their courts with regard to church
property. The head of the Serbian Orthodox Church,
Porfirije, was banned from entering and performing
religious ceremonies in Kosovo. He was banned from
entering the Patriarchate of Peć, which has been
the seat of the Serbian Orthodox Church since the
thirteenth century. And that is democracy. Those are
human rights. Patriarch Porfirije was banned from
entering Kosovo, but returnees of ISIS can enter freely.
I want to remind the Council that as a percentage of the
population, the largest number of foreign fighters in the
world came from Kosovo, 350 in Syria and Iraq. Some
98 of them died for ISIS. Ninety-six of them remain.
So yes, it is true that for Serbia, Kosovo is sui
generis, as Jerusalem is sui generis for the Jews, Mecca
is sui generis for Muslims and the Vatican is sui generis
for Catholics. That is why I want to state clearly here
at United Nations Headquarters that Serbia cannot and
will never recognize Kosovo’s unilaterally declared
independence or accept Kosovo becoming a member of
the United Nations.
I have also reiterated several times that Serbia
wants peace. We want to talk and contribute to
achieving the long-desired normalization of conditions
and the peaceful coexistence of Serbs and Albanians in
Kosovo and Metohija. At this stage of the dialogue, we
have no time to waste and are obliged to truly dedicate
ourselves to the final goal, which, at least for the
Serbian side, represents peaceful coexistence and the
normalization of the situation. As I mentioned earlier,
at a time when the clamour for respect for the Charter
of the United Nations has never been louder, we rightly
expect those appeals to apply equally to all States
Members of the United Nations. Today, regrettably,
we are all aware of the consequences of support for
Kosovo’s 2008 unilateral declaration of independence.
We tried to warn about the negative effects of that
move, which were bound to open a Pandora’s box in
international relations. The so-called independence of
Kosovo has led to serious turbulence in international
relations, divisions among countries, globally and in
international organizations and political groups alike.
Fifteen years after that declaration of so-called
independence, I want to state very clearly, in my full
8/31

27/04/2023

obligation as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and
my awareness of the position of all States Members of
the United Nations on the issue, that in the past few
years 28 countries have revoked their recognition of
Kosovo, and of the 193 States Members of the United
Nations, only 84 now recognize it. There is no way that
Kosovo can become a member of the United Nations, as
it does not have majority support. Anyone can ask the
members of the Security Council to confirm that fact.
I feel compelled to take this opportunity to once again
express my gratitude to the majority of Member States
that have not recognized the unilaterally declared
independence of Kosovo out of their respect for
international law, as we are know that the danger posed
by unilateral moves that lead to the violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State can spill
over to other regions and countries in the world. In the
end, I want to say only one thing to all members of the
United Nations and to this respected body, which is that
we must respect the Charter of the United Nations and the
Organization’s resolutions if we want the real effect and
normalization of global action to be valid for everyone
and applied without exceptions or double standards.
We are fully dedicated to dialogue. As the
Council is aware, I signed the Brussels Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
10 years ago. The other side is interested only in the
independence of Kosovo. The Agreement adopted in
Brussels is not about recognizing each other but rather
on normalizing further relations. Whether that is too
little for the representatives of Pristina is not up to us
to decide. We will make every possible effort. We are
ready to implement all the principles of the Agreement.
However, before that, we must see that the obligations
made more than 10 years ago to form the association of
Serb-majority municipalities are being respected today.
Otherwise there can be no agreement of any kind.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz.
Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz: After the usual tirade of
slander and complaints, and all the propaganda and
claims that Serbia is being treated unfairly, I want to
make a few brief remarks and then move on to the truly
important — indeed, the real — developments for the
people of Kosovo and the region.
Since instead of in English, Mr. Dačić spoke today
in the language of the majority of his country, as his
predecessors have done, I also wanted to communicate in
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

Albanian, which is the language spoken by the majority
in my country, the Republic of Kosovo. Unfortunately
the Council’s presidency denied my request, so I will
continue in English.
The report (S/2023/247) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Serbia’s aggressive behaviour and its threat to
peace in the region, the alliance between Russia and
Serbia around racism, as well as our young State’s
accomplishments and its position in Europe and
the world, will all be significant factors. We can
summarize the current UNMIK report by saying that
more than 90 of its approximately 100 points contain
small, large or severe errors, and that important
developments and events are completely missing. Such
serious deficiencies are not new. UNMIK’s problems in
our country and internationally have been known for
many years. While a variety of worthy United Nations
organizations are doing indispensable work for peace
and stability all over the world, UNMIK has become
a destabilizing factor and does not serve stability or
peace in the region. The report has also documented
how dispensable it has become. That brings me to the
real developments that can provide hope for the region
and therefore for peace and stability.
In the UNMIK report, the Berlin process, for
example, appears only as a footnote. Neither the summit
held in Berlin in November 2022 nor the summit
held in Tirana — for the first time in the history of
the Balkans — are mentioned in the report. However,
the Berlin process is the most important, strategically
European Union (EU)-oriented process for the entire
region as an integral part of European efforts.
At the summit in Berlin, important agreements
were signed, including on the mutual recognition of
identity cards and professional and university degrees.
Kosovo, Albania and North Macedonia have ratified
the agreements, while Montenegro seems to be close
to doing so. However, the countries in which Vučić
and Dačić have influence are blocking the process. Let
us also state that Serbian President Vučić signed the
agreements himself — yet the propaganda continues.
It is internationally known by friend and foe alike that
when Kosovo promises something, it keeps its word.
We have not backed out of one signed agreement.
That is not the case for Vučić, Dačić and others.
Their political DNA makes it impossible for them to
keep their word. If promises and given signatures are
not honoured, negotiations become a farce. That is

S/PV.9312

uncivilized, outrageous and a sign of disrespect for the
entire diplomatic community. The Serbian strategy is
to block Balkan integration into Europe — and behind
those attempts for power is Russia working via Serbia,
its Balkan proxy. When dealing with people who
engage in dishonest or unfair behaviour, it is important
to take punitive action rather than negotiate with
them. More and more voices in Europe, from Kosovo
to the Netherlands and Germany, are now calling for
sanctions against Serbia. Because you do not negotiate
with cheaters — you have them face the consequences.
EU integration will eventually move forward
without Serbia. That is true not only for the Berlin
process but also for the EU’s Common Regional
Market project, which promotes integration into the
EU market, and it applies to the dialogue between the
Republic of Kosovo and Serbia as well. Serbia has
largely disregarded signed agreements from 2011, 2013
and 2015. Vučić and Dačić are the main culprits to
that constant breach of contract. When we speak about
or examine the Balkans or the destabilizing factors
there, we cannot neglect the real threat posed to the
region by Russia and Serbia. We have seen it before
our very eyes. The Security Council has stood witness
to the reality of Russia’s aggression against a peaceful
neighbour. It has forced Europe and the world to make
decisions — decisions to save lives and preserve
humankind. Kosovo was one of those decisions — in
which our allies stood up to end genocide as we now
stand here for Ukraine. The EU rightly extends its
solidarity with its European partner, Ukraine. Those
who want to join the EU are particularly bound to the
EU’s common line. Serbia claims to have EU aspirations
and has committed to that in agreements with the EU.
However, we know Serbia’s political games all too well.
Vučić claims to be a European partner but has failed on
the very agreements his country has signed. Instead of a
common foreign policy with the EU, there is a common
foreign policy with Russia. Instead of sanctions against
the aggressor, Russia, Serbia actively makes itself
available as a hub for Russia’s dirty businesses in the
areas of the economy, the military and smuggling.
Serbia is therefore actively supporting the war and
genocide against Ukraine. Serbia’s vote at the United
Nations is worth nothing because Serbs are also helping
Russia wage a barbaric war to destroy the existence of
Ukraine. One can and will forget that Vučić and Dačić
were enthusiastic supporters and accomplices of the first
racial extermination wars since the Nazis, the Yugoslav-

23-119609/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

Serbian wars of the 1990s. Today Putin is waging a
barbaric war based on racial grounds. That of course
is a classic dirty move by Putin. Putin had already sent
troops to Pristina in 1999, and even today he is sending
troops — the brutal Wagner Group troops that were
sent to Serbia and our borders. However, the UNMIK
report says nothing about that. As Russia’s closest ally,
Serbia is the biggest threat to peace in the Balkans.
Vučić, Dačić, Šešelj and Vulin live in the dangerous
world of Serbian supremacy. Serbia has decided on a
“Serbian World” as a Government programme, a 2.0
version of Greater Serbia. It documents the pathology
of a nationalist ideology that still seeks revenge for a
defeat that occurred more than 500 years ago instead of
looking towards the future.
There are concrete and strategic reasons thar peace,
development and prosperity can remain possible for the
region and how conflict has been prevented. The reason
lies in the presence of troops from the United States and
NATO in the territory of the Republic of Kosovo. That
alone holds back Russia and Serbia from completely
escalating their aggression. Despite the military
exercises by Serbia with Russia, which increased in
number from about 10 to nearly 100 in 2021, despite the
Russian military and spy bases near Kosovo disguised
as humanitarian centres, despite the Serbian troops and
fighter jets at our border and despite Vučić’s hybrid
warfare against Kosovo — with propaganda campaigns
in the media, alliances with organized crime and threats
against the Serbian citizens of Kosovo who reject his
line — it is clear to observers that without the presence of
NATO and the United States, there could be war already.
On 17 February, our Independence Day, the
Republic of Kosovo celebrated its fifteenth anniversary
of independence in perfect weather and great spirits. Of
course, that was not mentioned either in the UNMIK
report. Kosovo received congratulations from all over
the world — from Asia to Africa, Europe, and North
and South America. In Pristina there was a grand,
peaceful and impressive parade of our Kosovar defence
forces and police on that day. The joy, optimism and
composure with which people celebrated our fifteenth
Independence Day on the streets were contagious.
Equally impressive is the pride of our citizens for
the Kosovo army, which is modern and becoming
increasingly stronger and is internationally experienced.
Kosovo is proud to say that, together with our
partners and allies in NATO and the EU, we are now a
guarantor of freedom and peace in the region. We are
10/31

27/04/2023

also committed to our goal of becoming more deeply
and closely integrated into NATO, because that also
serves our peace and our freedom. Kosovo is pleased
and proud to belong to the family of countries that
stand strongly for the Charter of the United Nations. In
contrast, Serbia is increasing its dependence on Russia,
most recently in an agreement signed by Lavrov and
his Serbian counterpart that forces Serbia to coordinate
its foreign policy with Russia — and not with the EU.
Kosovo has learned the lessons of history. We echo
these words in the Chamber and for the world to hear:
never again. Never again will Kosovo be a defenceless
victim of aggression and genocide. Never again will
there be destruction. Never again will there be genocide
by Serbia. Never again will we, together with our
allies, stand defenceless. We have allies, and we are
capable of defending our country and citizens against
that aggression.
Kosovo has significantly strengthened its path
towards European integration. We are strengthening the
rule of law and combating corruption and crime more
effectively than ever before. Kosovo is an example of
what is possible when a country decides to clean up
corruption and move with full force towards the rule of
law and Europe.
That is also why Kosovo is a provocation for the
regime in Belgrade. Kosovo has fully demonstrated
that it is possible to shake off corruption and choose
new people and a new beginning over resignation. That
is a direct threat to the Belgrade model of Government
and concept of the rule of law. In the Transparency
International Corruption Perceptions Index, Kosovo
has moved up 20 places in the past two years. That
huge leap is a testament to our progress. Based on
every metric used to measure democracy, Kosovo is
the most democratic country in the Balkans, as we
have shown time and again. Meanwhile, based on the
same metrics, Serbia is no longer even recognized as a
democratic country.
The future of Kosovo lies in Europe and the
West because Kosovo is part of the West. We are well
integrated into the region, having signed dozens of
bilateral agreements to strengthen regional cooperation
in many areas. Kosovo has never previously had the
number of foreign representatives and high-level
officials from all over the world that it has welcomed
in the past two years, including from countries that
have not recognized us. Kosovo has seen a significant
increase in foreign investment, as well as tax revenues
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

and growth, with a 10 per cent increase in 2021.
International companies are exploring opportunities
for investment, and many have already invested or are
on their way to doing so. We therefore also have reason
to be optimistic in that area.
Guests from all over the world accepted our
President’s invitation to a global conference on women
and peace and security, a successful premiere for our
young country. We have worked hard and successfully
to lift the restrictions on visa-free travel from the EU by
the end of this year. Despite significant opposition from
Serbia, we achieved a major victory by securing a large
majority in the Committee of Ministers of the Council
of Europe agreed on opening the doors for the Republic
of Kosovo to become a member. We are immensely
grateful for that and are committed to doing everything
in our power to ensure that Kosovo, as has been aptly
said, takes its rightful place at the international table
of nations.
The Serbia of Vučić and Dačić is not Europe.
It looks eastward, to the relics of past Powers. It
consistently betrays the agreements signed with the
West. Just this week, Vučić has again defamed European
representatives as liars and cheats, as Westerners. He
even claimed to disagree with almost everything in
the interim results of the dialogue between Serbia and
Kosovo. It is also apparent that Serbia does not want
an agreement through the dialogue. On the contrary, it
wants to obstruct any agreement. That is because the
Serbia of 2023 no longer wants to join the European
Union. Vučić and Dačić want the EU’s billions, but they
do not want to accept the EU’s values, the rule of law
or free media at any price. That would endanger their
power and control. Vučić and Dačić want a European
order led by Moscow. However, such an order cannot
and will not exist. The EU, NATO and the United
Nations cannot and will not allow an order in which
war, invasion and violence become politics.
Unfortunately, Serbia has not learned the lessons
of history. Those responsible for genocide are still
in power in the Serbian Government. The current
Serbian President, Aleksandar Vučić, was Minister
of Propaganda for the war criminal Milošević during
the genocide against Kosovo. To some extent, he is
still acting more like a propaganda minister than a
President. The right-hand man of the so-called butcher
of the Balkans — the war criminal Milošević, who was
responsible for Serbian wars and genocides in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Kosovo — is the man

S/PV.9312

who just spoke before me. He has endless blood on his
hands, as does his President. Not a word of regret has
been uttered. Instead, there is contempt for the victims,
twisting of the truth and celebration of mass murderers.
The facade of a sometime-singing politician does not
change historical truth.
I will say it in Albanian and as a single sentence
in the Serbian language, too. Ivica Dačić, now Serbia’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, is responsible for mass
murder, rape as a weapon of war and war crimes, and
he should be brought before a war crimes tribunal.
From 1992 until 2000, Dačić was the right-hand man
of the butcher of the Balkans, Slobodan Milošević. He
celebrated him as a hero and became his successor.
He and Vučić were Milošević’s closest allies. They
are accomplices in genocide. Yet here we are, sitting
across from him. We will negotiate with him and his
accomplice, Vučić. We will negotiate because it is
we who want to preserve peace and achieve a lasting
solution to the conflict. We, the victims of genocide and
brutality, are honourable and wish to establish peace
not only for us but for the region. We are the people
of Kosovo.
We know that there is also a better Serbia — a
Serbia that is still weak, but European, and a Serbia that
wants to stop being a threat to its neighbours. We are
waiting for that Serbia and hope that it comes as soon
as possible. The citizens of Serbia can take their destiny
into their own hands. They can vote out racism, hate and
incitement and investigate the terrible crimes of the past
and bring the perpetrators to justice. They can extend a
hand to all their neighbours, not just Kosovo, for peaceful
coexistence and eventually cooperation. All of that is
possible. A country can make a new decision. Kosovo
and others have shown that it can be done. We remain
vigilant, cautious and sceptical, but open to serious
reconciliation that does not betray justice. We want to
work with all of Kosovo’s neighbours — including our
difficult neighbour to the north — wherever possible,
for the sake of the region’s future and for the sake of our
children and grandchildren.
Today is our national day of missing persons,
a tribute to those who were forcibly disappeared in
Kosovo. Every year, we remember the more than 1,600
people who were presumably abducted, killed and
buried by the Serbian military and militias. A refusal
to show respect for the dead and their families or to
provide the International Committee of the Red Cross
with locations, a boycott of the International Criminal

23-1196011/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the denial of the
chance for families to mourn and find closure are all
elements of the face of Serbian extremism. Serbia has
appointed Veljko Odalović, who is responsible for war
crimes in Kosovo, as the representative of its national
commission on this sensitive issue. It is hard to imagine
a more contemptuous and cynical choice. Kosovo has
offered to search every square metre of its territory
for possible missing persons, using the latest and most
effective technologies. Serbia is blocking progress in
that regard, too.
Today marks the anniversary of an unspeakable mass
murder. On this day exactly 24 years ago — 27 April
1999 — in a Catholic village in Kosovo, at least 377
children, women and men were barbarically killed by
Serbian police and military personnel. The village was
attacked with grenade launchers and houses were set
on fire in a barbaric act of annihilation. Not only in
Kosovo but elsewhere, every child knows that Vučić,
Dačić and others in the leadership of Serbia are political
accomplices and responsible for those and other terrible
massacres. As a State, Kosovo will investigate and
address such crimes as a legal obligation, and the rule
of law will hold accountable those responsible for the
war, genocide and all crimes committed. It may take
time, but justice will prevail. All impunity for Dačić,
Vučić and others will come to an end.
The President (spoke in Russian): While I
thank Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz for her statement in my
capacity as President of the Security Council, I reject
her assertion that the presidency did not allow her to
deliver her statement in Albanian. The presidency was
informed that she was prepared to speak in English,
as her predecessor did previously. If Ms. GërvallaSchwarz had unequivocally insisted on speaking in
Albanian — for which there is certainly precedent,
although I would like to draw Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz’s
attention to the fact that those speakers did not speak
any of the official United Nations languages — we
would have enabled her to do that.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I begin by welcoming the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić, to whom we listened closely.
I thank Ms. Caroline Ziadeh, Special Representative of

12/31

27/04/2023

the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for her informative briefing. We take note of the briefing
by Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz.
Ecuador appreciates the efforts of the Special
Representative and UNMIK personnel in promoting
security, stability and respect for human rights. The work
of UNMIK can move forward only through efficient and
constructive cooperation with Pristina and Belgrade,
their communities and the regional and international
actors. Ecuador supports finding a solution within the
framework of and pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).
We acknowledge the efforts made by the parties,
especially the fact that measures have been taken to
de-escalate the tensions that arose last year, and we
urge them to continue in that direction and refrain from
adopting unilateral measures that could exacerbate
tensions and get in the way of achieving lasting peace.
The process of normalizing relations must include
civil society, especially women and young people, in all
relevant discussions, and they must actively participate
in those discussions in order to ensure that their needs
and expectations are taken into account.
Ecuador defers to the guidance provided by the
European Union in the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations. We
acknowledge the work of the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
and European Union Special Representative Miroslav
Lajčák for their continued efforts in that regard. We hope
that the parties will continue to engage constructively
and in good faith and honour their commitment to abide
by the agreement. Undoubtedly, the new framework for
negotiations gives hope for achieving lasting solutions
and ensuring the maintenance of peace and stability
in the Balkan region within the current complex
geopolitical context.
Furthermore, we are concerned about the lack
of progress on the issue of missing persons who have
remained unaccounted for since 1999. We hope that, with
the support of UNMIK, the best way to provide relief
for their families will be found, which is an important
humanitarian aspect of the reconciliation process.
The incidents of gender-based and sexual violence,
including the femicides, mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/247) are another issue of

23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

concern and underscore the need for the adoption of
policies by the authorities that will ramp up efforts to
ensure the effective protection of, and access to justice
and support services for, the survivors of gender-based
and domestic violence. Those responsible for such acts
cannot remain unpunished.
As in all such situations, Ecuador calls on all actors
concerned to exercise the utmost restraint and tolerance.
Similarly, we expect that they carry out their actions
with the highest degree of responsibility. Accordingly,
I would like to avail myself of Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz’s
presence at this meeting to reiterate the condemnation
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States of the potential presence of members of the socalled “Kosovo Security Forces” in South America,
which would constitute an unjustified provocation
and would contravene the relevant United Nations
resolutions governing the issue.
Ecuador acknowledges the outstanding work carried
out by UNMIK in the reconciliation process, especially
its focus on the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, the youth, peace and security
agenda, and the rule of law. The work done by UNMIK
has been solidified into confidence-building measures
for the different communities, thereby enabling new
generations to be more inclusive and just in the future.
In conclusion, I also reiterate my acknowledgment
of the work of the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe to build lasting
peace in the region.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ziadeh for her briefing
today. I welcome the presence at this meeting of the
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia and the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Diaspora
of the Republic of Kosovo.
Malta acknowledges the importance of the role of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in promoting security, stability, the
preservation and promotion of human rights, gender
equality and the empowerment of women and young
people in Kosovo. We also acknowledge the importance
of the role played by the European Union in providing
stability to the situation in the region and facilitating
the ongoing discussions between both parties.

S/PV.9312

Malta welcomes the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations between
Kosovo and Serbia and underlines its firm belief that
the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue remains of crucial
importance. That result could not have been achieved
had it not been for the ongoing work and sustained
efforts of all those engaged in the dialogue. The
developments demonstrate that solutions are possible
through constructive engagement. The Agreement
will hopefully serve as a basis for further progress and
continued improved relations. We encourage both sides
to build on this momentum and fully implement all
their obligations in the Agreement without delay. The
success of the Agreement will depend on the political
will to implement it.
We are, however, concerned with some of the
facts presented in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/247), such as the reported assaults on civilians,
as well as reports of intimidation and excessive use
of force by special operations units. We call on both
sides to de-escalate tensions and refrain from any
unilateral action or divisive rhetoric that could undo the
advancements made to date.
Positive steps to create an atmosphere conducive to
reconciliation, good-neighbourly relations and further
dialogue are what is needed at this juncture. We stress
once again that dialogue is key in resolving outstanding
issues, and collaboration is the only way to ensure
peace and stability in the region. The normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia will undoubtedly
lead to further economic and social prosperity in the
region. Furthermore, increased cooperation between
Pristina and Belgrade will also result in increased
stability in the Western Balkans.
We maintain our continued support for Kosovo’s
reforms and for its efforts in its path towards EU
membership. We acknowledge the progress, including
in the rule of law and public administration, and we
continue to support focused efforts in this regard.
Moreover, we encourage reforms to address the needs
of all members of society and call for wide consultations
with the various stakeholders from within civil society,
including vulnerable and marginalized communities.
To this end, we very much welcome President Osmani’s
convening of a high-level regional forum of women,
peace and security.
Reported incidents of sexual and gender-based
violence, including femicide and child marriage, are
alarming. We commend efforts to strengthen the

23-1196013/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

criminal code, the criminal procedural code and the
Protocol for the Treatment of Sexual Violence Cases
and the Law on Protection of and Prevention from
Domestic Violence, Violence against women and
Gender-based Violence.
Malta reiterates its support for UNMIK in its efforts
to actively and constructively engage with Pristina and
Belgrade, all communities in Kosovo, as well as regional
and international actors. We now look forward to seeing
more robust political commitment to implementing the
agreement reached in the framework of the EU-facilitated
dialogue, which will continue to shape the way forward in
the normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Caroline Ziadeh, for
her briefing.
Since its establishment in 1999, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has played an important role in supporting Kosovo as
it builds its Constitution, Government and Parliament.
Even after the Mission’s reconfiguration, UNMIK’s
work continues to contribute to peace and stability in
Kosovo and the region.
Japan commends UNMIK staff for their
commitment, and we thank Special Representative
Ziadeh for her leadership and active engagement with
local and international partners, particularly during
periods of high tension, to encourage de-escalation,
promote mutual trust at the grass-roots level, and
pursue efforts to settle outstanding issues.
We were concerned that tensions between Kosovo
and Serbia escalated late last year. However, as a result
of the efforts of the parties, both sides agreed on the
“Agreement on the path to normalization between Kosovo
and Serbia” proposed by the European Union (EU) on
27 February, followed by the “Implementation Annex”
of the Agreement on 18 March. Japan welcomes these
agreements and closely monitors the developments.
We also recognize that the situation in Kosovo is
very different from when UNMIK was established.
Therefore, while taking into account the political and
social developments and efforts made by all stakeholders
involved thus far, we believe it is necessary to review
UNMIK’s functions and mandate, including the
possibility of reducing or eliminating overlaps with the
activities of the EU and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe.
14/31

27/04/2023

Japan attaches great importance to the dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia. The normalization of
relations between the two countries through the EUfacilitated Belgrade-Pristina dialogue will contribute
to peace and stability in the Western Balkans. Japan
expects both countries to implement the Agreement in
good faith.
Furthermore, we continue to support Kosovo’s
efforts towards EU membership. We believe that the
ongoing reforms and progress in the country will lead
to further steps in this direction. We encourage Kosovo
to continue working towards improving its economy,
governance and human rights situation and to engage
constructively in the EU-facilitated dialogue towards
this end.
In conclusion, Japan remains committed to
supporting the international community’s efforts to
promote peace, stability and reconciliation in the
region. We stand ready to work with all stakeholders to
achieve this goal.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke
in French): I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Caroline Ziadeh, for
her briefing.
Today’s meeting takes place in the context of
significant progress made towards the normalization of
relations between Serbia and Kosovo, and we welcome
this, even if I must say that the tone this morning of the
two Deputy Prime Ministers/Foreign Ministers from
Serbia and Kosovo was quite disturbing. We welcome
the spirit of responsibility of both parties, which
made it possible to reach an agreement in principle
in Brussels on 27 February and an agreement on the
implementation annex in Ohrid on 18 March.
This progress was achieved thanks to the efforts
of European mediation, and France was also active
at the highest level in supporting the mediation. The
President of the Republic and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs had exchanges with Prime Minister Kurti and
President Vučić, along with Chancellor Olaf Scholz, at
the margins of the Munich Security Conference.
We now expect Serbia and Kosovo to commit
themselves unreservedly, in good faith and with the same
spirit of compromise to the immediate implementation
of all their pledges under to the agreement, among which
the establishment of an association of Serb-majority
municipalities in Kosovo is fundamental. The meeting
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

between President Vučić and Prime Minister Kurti
that will take place next Tuesday in Brussels should
make it possible to launch concrete and substantial
discussions on draft legislation. We also welcome the
establishment last week of a joint committee to oversee
the implementation of the agreement.
The agreement strengthens the European prospects
for Serbia and Kosovo, prospects to which France
reiterates its full commitment. We recall that all the
provisions of the agreement and its implementation
annex are now an integral part of the commitments of
both parties with respect to their European prospects.
It is essential in the coming weeks to avoid a
new crisis on the ground so as not to disrupt the
positive momentum that has been set in motion. We
therefore call on both parties to show restraint and
refrain from any unilateral measures that could fuel
tensions. We encourage Kosovo and Serbia to find
solutions on all current issues, including the issue of
licence-plate conversion and the supply of electricity to
northern Kosovo.
We have noted the holding of elections in four
municipalities in northern Kosovo on 23 April, and we
welcome the absence of incidents. In this regard, we
commend the high level of professionalism of the Kosovo
Police, the NATO Kosovo Force and the European Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo. However, we regret the
low voter turnout and the lack of participation of some
political parties. In this context, these elections cannot
be a long-term political solution for the municipalities
concerned. The priority must be the establishment
of the association of Serb-majority municipalities in
Kosovo and the return of Serbs to Kosovar institutions.
Finally, we welcome the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
to support the dialogue process and strengthen social
cohesion within Kosovar society. France will remain
fully active in support of the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union in order to obtain rapid progress
towards the normalization of relations between Serbia
and Kosovo. There is no other way, either for Serbia or
for Kosovo, than to reach a comprehensive, final and
legally binding agreement to sustainably resolve the
dispute between the two countries.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking the Special Representative for her briefing
and for the work her team is doing to promote stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo.

S/PV.9312

Over the last year, Kosovo’s democracy and
institutions have continued to show their maturity.
This is reflected in its climb up international rankings
on political and civil liberties. Kosovo demonstrated
the third highest increase of any country in 2022.
We congratulate Kosovo on this improvement. We
welcome the Government’s efforts to tackle corruption
and strengthen the rule of law and its commitment to
addressing domestic and gender-based violence.
We recognize the important role the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has played in supporting Kosovo’s remarkable progress
over the past 24 years and the work it continues to do
today. And let me be clear, we remain fully supportive
of resolution 1244 (1999).
The conditions on the ground are, however,
unrecognizable from 1999 and, in line with our normal
Council practice on other mandates, we believe it is
time for a review of UNMIK’s role and responsibilities.
That would allow the Council to take a fresh look at
how UNMIK can adapt to serve the current conditions
in Kosovo.
For many years, the absence of a normal relationship
between Kosovo and Serbia has had implications for
regional stability and communities in both countries.
We therefore welcome the considerable progress that
has been made in the normalization dialogue facilitated
by the High Representative of the European Union,
including the 27 February Brussels Agreement and its
implementation annex negotiated on 18 March in Ohrid,
North Macedonia. Now is the moment for both parties
to engage in the dialogue in good faith, honour their
commitments and avoid actions or rhetoric that could
reduce prospects for a comprehensive and sustainable
normalization agreement.
Kosovo and Serbia have committed to the
establishment of an association of Serb-majority
municipalities. We urge both parties to engage swiftly
and constructively, so that the association can be
established as soon as possible. We strongly encourage
both sides to demonstrate the political will and courage
to deliver on what has been agreed. That is in the longterm interests of the citizens on both sides.
There are more immediate challenges too. Instead
of a secure and safe environment in the north of
Kosovo, there is a continuing security vacuum that
leaves communities isolated and without vital everyday
services. We welcome the role played by the Kosovo

23-1196015/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

Force and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo, but that cannot be the long-term solution. We
need to support functioning institutions in the north,
working to serve the interests of those they were elected
to represent.
Let me finish by reiterating that the United Kingdom
remains committed to supporting an inclusive, diverse
and multi-ethnic democracy in Kosovo and its full
participation in the international system.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) for her statement and for the
Mission’s work.
This is the first time that Switzerland is speaking on
Kosovo as a member of the Security Council. This issue
is close to our hearts, both politically and socially. More
than 20 years ago, Switzerland welcomed thousands
of refugees from all over the Western Balkans. Today
they are an integral part of Swiss society and contribute
to our close ties with the region. Switzerland was
among the first countries to recognize Kosovo as an
independent State. The future of Kosovo, its people and
lasting peace in the region are important to us.
Switzerland is committed to ensuring peaceful,
multi-ethnic and prosperous societies — societies
that respect and defend human rights and the rule of
law — in Kosovo and in the Western Balkans as a
whole. We welcome Kosovo’s progress, in particular in
the fight against corruption and organized crime. We
support Kosovo’s European prospect and its integration
into international structures and institutions.
Cooperation between Kosovo and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe Mission in Kosovo and the Council of Europe,
as well as United Nations agencies, have contributed
to that positive development. We also recognize the
important and long-standing work that UNMIK has
undertaken since 1999. In order for the United Nations
is effective, its presence must be commensurate with
reality. As such, Switzerland is ready to constructively
discuss a possible strategic review of UNMIK.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/247)
describes an eventful six months. I would like to
emphasize three points.
16/31

27/04/2023

First, it is essential to work on confidence-building
between Kosovo and Serbia. Switzerland welcomes the
agreement on the path to normalization of relations
between Kosovo and Serbia, facilitated by the European
Union (EU). The effective normalization of relations
remains essential to build common ground, preserve
stability and prevent a resurgence of the conflict. The
challenge now is to maintain that positive momentum and
to ensure that the commitments made in the agreement
are fully implemented. Sustainable progress can be
achieved only through a continued sincere, constructive
and inclusive dialogue. Switzerland is contributing to
that by providing an informal platform for exchanges
between representatives of political parties on both
sides, in support of the EU-led normalization process.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of women
must be ensured throughout the process.
My second point is on the security situation, which
has deteriorated in recent months. Switzerland deplores
the new tensions observed in northern Kosovo in
particular. We call on the parties to avoid any action or
rhetoric that could hinder the prospects for reconciliation
and lasting peace. We condemn the increase in
intercommunal incidents, which increase the sense
of insecurity and mistrust between the communities
and thereby undermine their rapprochement. In that
context, KFOR continues to play an essential role as
a guarantor of stability and security in Kosovo. In
recognition of that, Switzerland is providing its largest
military peacekeeping contingent to that mission.
With respect to the recent local elections,
Switzerland regrets that the Kosovo Serb community
did not participate. We encourage Kosovo’s leaders
to pursue dialogue with the representatives of the
Serb minority.
Finally, dealing with the past is essential to prevent
a resurgence of the conflict. The right to know, the
right to justice, the right to reparations and the right to
guarantees of non-repetition for all victims, regardless
of their affiliation, strengthen a society’s resilience.
We welcome the Kosovo Government’s inclusive draft
transitional justice strategy. We call on the parties to
cooperate in that regard, with a victim- and survivorcentred approach, and with regard to sexual violence
committed during the conflict. Switzerland supports
a renewed commitment to making further progress on
the issue of enforced disappearances and the continued
engagement of the International Committee of the Red
Cross to that end.
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

We call on Serbia and Kosovo to continue their
efforts to build on the progress made towards peace
and security in Europe. Mindful of the countless family
and cultural ties that bind us to the region, we will
accompany the Western Balkans on that path.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): Let me begin by
welcoming the presence of His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia. I thank
Ms. Caroline Ziadeh, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for her briefing. My delegation also takes note of the
remarks made by Ms. Donika Gërvalla-Schwarz.
While the war drums of the 1998 Kosovo crisis
have long stopped beating, the legacy of political and
inter-ethnic tensions continue to echo with the risk of
renewed violent conflict. We therefore reaffirm the
centrality of resolution 1244 (1999) in the efforts by
the United Nations to support the process of finding
a comprehensive and lasting solution to the decadeslong problem.
Despite the heightened tensions over the past six
months, we note the significant advancements that
continue to be made towards the normalization of
relations between the Kosovo region and Serbia, and
we are encouraged by the demonstration of political
commitment by the parties to forge past the prevailing
challenges in their mutual interests.
We have in our previous statements to the Council
advocated support for the path to dialogue to evolve the
relations between the Kosovo region and Serbia and
welcome the extensive and constructive discussions
between the two sides within the framework of the
European Union-facilitated dialogue. In particular,
we welcome the new agreement on the path to the
normalization of relations reached on 27 February in
Brussels and the implementation annex, which was
concluded in Ohrid, North Macedonia, on 18 March.
The 11-point agreement and its implementation annex
offer another opportunity to resolve contentious issues
and pave the way towards peace, stability, economic
and social advancement for all groups of people in the
Kosovo region. The implementation of the agreement,
we believe, would also help to address persisting
crises relating to the recognition of formal documents,
symbols and vehicle license plates.

S/PV.9312

It bears emphasizing, however, that the promise
of the new deal can be realized only through an
unprecedented level of commitment by all sides to the
normalization process. We encourage the intensification
of efforts towards the full and effective implementation
of the agreement and note the establishment, earlier
this month, of the Joint Monitoring Committee. We
urge all parties to act in good faith and guard against
the agreement falling into abeyance, as was the case
with the numerous preceding agreements.
We further urge the continuing support of the
European Union and other partners to help transition
the agreement to actual implementation. Returning
normalcy to the Kosovo region is essential for the
people, but also necessary for the realization of wider
peace efforts in the Balkan region.
We continue to be concerned about the heightened
tensions in the northern Kosovo region and reiterate
our call for de-escalation and restraint. Authorities
must endeavour to avoid inflammatory rhetoric and
provocative actions.
The low turnout in local elections held on 23 March
highlights serious divisions in the fibre of the society
but, more importantly, shows the need for continuing
dialogue to identify a credible process for the return
of Kosovo Serbs to administrative institutions. We
also urge the constructive engagement of the parties
on the creation of the association of Serb-majority
municipalities and related questions on its status
in line with the normalization agreement and
previous commitments.
The unresolved issue of some 1,600 missing
persons remains a sticking point that, we believe, must
be addressed from a humanitarian standpoint and
not politicized. We encourage mutual cooperation to
unearth the facts about those missing persons in order
to help dispel unsubstantiated narratives that perpetuate
distrust among the ethnic groups in the Kosovo region.
We remain supportive of UNMIK’s mandate, aimed
at promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo. As evidenced by the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/247) and the briefing by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
conditions in the region are far from normal and stable.
In our view, the situation can benefit only from the
trust-building efforts, social-cohesion measures and
enhanced intercommunal engagements facilitated
by UNMIK.

23-1196017/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

We also take a positive view of UNMIK’s
continuing initiatives with women and young people in
order to enhance their peacemaking and peacebuilding
capacities. Other measures aimed at building resilience
in the communities are strongly encouraged.

27/04/2023

of significant political actors in the four Serb-majority
municipalities in the north, underlined the complexity of
the situation.

In conclusion, we wish to underscore that
normalization efforts to resolve the Kosovo crisis must
be anchored in the rules of international law and the core
values of the Charter of the United Nations.

That said, the Brussels and Ohrid agreements offer
the possibility of a path forward. By outlining specific
measures that can support stability and strengthen civic
participation, there is greater clarity today on the ways
in which the situation can be improved, not only in those
municipalities, but across Kosovo as a whole.

Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
also like to begin by thanking Special Representative
Ziadeh for her informative briefing, and I welcome the
participation of Mr. Dačić, First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Ms. GërvallaSchwarz, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, today.

A further step of profound significance is the EU’s
announcement that Kosovo and Serbia have agreed on the
text of the declaration on missing persons. An endorsed
declaration can help to provide closure to families while
honouring those who are no longer with us. And we
offer our full support to Kosovo and Serbia’s renewed
commitment on that critical matter.

The United Arab Emirates has a strong relationship
and affinity with both Kosovo and Serbia. Those ties
were marked just last month, during the visit of Foreign
Minister Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan to
both Belgrade and Pristina on a regional tour. During
the visit, discussions focused on bilateral relations and
regional stability and prosperity.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the efforts of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo to build trust and social cohesion
across Kosovo. By promoting initiatives and forums
that enhance constructive engagement between
communities, they play an important role in building
mutual understanding, tolerance and dialogue — the
cornerstones of sustainable peace. Those pillars of their
work could be developed further.

Peace is not a simple story of a before and after.
There are many chapters. The recent agreement between
Serbia and Kosovo is the most significant breakthrough
in relations between both States in over a decade, and we
must all support that welcome trajectory.
The United Arab Emirates therefore welcomes the
agreement reached in Brussels in February on the path
to normalization, as well as the implementation road
map agreed in Ohrid last month. Neither would have
been possible without the leadership and goodwill of
both parties. We commend the European Union (EU)
for its dedication in facilitating dialogue and diplomacy.
The United Arab Emirates affirms its full support for
those efforts.

We have witnessed in our own region, the Middle
East, the value and the tangible impact that intercommunal
dialogue can have. That process is essential for securing
prosperity, not only within Kosovo, but also in the
wider region.
That said, we know that the path to reconciliation
is fraught, and we remain deeply concerned about the
continued reports of vandalism and theft targeting
cultural and religious sites in Kosovo. Though not
widespread, acts such as these can sow division and
should be dealt with firmly. We support efforts from
Government and civic leaders to counter such acts.

We are pleased to see concrete steps towards
the implementation of those agreements, such as the
establishment of the Joint Monitoring Committee. While
the resolve of each party has led them from the ashes of
war to agreement, taking it from the drawing board to
reality is the next chapter and necessitates considerable
work ahead, as we heard in the Chamber today.

In conclusion, we cannot change the past, but we can
shape our future. For that future to be secure and stable,
we look to Serbia and Kosovo’s leaders to maintain
their commitment to EU-facilitated dialogue and to
implementing the agreements that have been reached.
In doing so, they can ensure that the hard-earned
peace endures.

Last week’s events provided a glimpse of the
remaining challenges on the ground. Sunday’s local
elections in Kosovo, conducted without the participation

For our part, the United Arab Emirates is fully
committed to supporting these efforts so that the next
chapter ushers in an era of peace and prosperity for

18/31

23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

the peoples of Serbia and Kosovo, but also the wider
region — one that all these people so rightly deserve.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank Special
Representative Caroline Ziadeh for her briefing. I
welcome to this meeting the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia and acknowledge the
participation of the representatives of Kosovo.
Brazil commends the parties for the instances of
continued engagement in dialogue and negotiations,
which resulted in the agreement on the normalization
of relations between Belgrade and Pristina in February
and its implementation annex in March. We believe that
this is a positive development, with the expectation that
it will reinforce both sides’ commitment to a negotiated
and mutually acceptable solution to the question of
Kosovo. We welcome the constructive role played by the
European Union in mediating the negotiations.
It is concerning, however, that progress on other
fronts, such as the road map for the implementation of the
2013 and 2015 energy agreements, remains limited. Brazil
notes the persistence of tensions between communities,
particularly in north Kosovo, reflected in the boycott of
local elections last Sunday. We consider it important that
parties adopt confidence-building measures and avoid
unilateral actions that could trigger violence.
Brazil reiterates the call for the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in Kosovo, in accordance with the Brussels agreements.
We encourage parties to adhere to their commitment
to respecting sites of historical, cultural or religious
significance and to preserving freedom of movement.
Brazil supports the continuity of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. We
understand that it would be premature to consider its
withdrawal at this time. We believe that the Mission still
has an important role to play in preventing intercommunal
conflicts, especially in fighting misinformation and hate
speech and engaging young people in the peace process.
Finally, I would like to express Brazil’s concern
about the presence of troops from Kosovo in the Malvinas
Islands. The sending of foreign troops to that territory
is in violation of General Assembly resolution 31/49
and goes against the spirit of resolution 41/11, which
solemnly declared the South Atlantic a zone of peace
and cooperation. Brazil reiterates its firm support for
Argentine sovereignty over the Malvinas and urges
Member States to refrain from unilateral actions
concerning the territory.

S/PV.9312

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): First, I need to set the record
straight regarding the use of languages in the Council
and in today’s meeting. Two Council members backed
a formal request made by the delegation of Kosovo to
speak in the language of its choice. As we know, rule 44
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure speaks
of any representative being able to make a statement
in a language other than the languages of the Security
Council and to provide for interpretation into one of
those languages. That was provided by Kosovo to the
appropriate services, in writing. Russia, as President,
opposed it, and that is also in writing.
We were not happy, of course, and we believe that
the presidency was not impartial in its role, but in order
not to put the Council in a difficult position we went
along with the ruling, although it goes against the rules
and the spirit of multilingualism that is at the heart of the
United Nations and against precedent in the Chamber.
It was mentioned that there were precedents, and I
can inform the Council that in 2013, 2014, 2015 and
2018, there have been cases in which another language
was used in the Council by both delegations. Telling
us now that we should have insisted, although I have
not heard how many times we should have insisted, is
just ridiculous. We thank the Deputy Prime Minister of
Kosovo for her understanding and for her respect for
the Council in not putting it in the difficult position of
having to vote on the issue. That is the only truth.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Caroline Ziadeh for her briefing and for her
efforts. We welcome the presence at today’s meeting
of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Diaspora of the Republic of Kosovo, Donika
Gërvalla-Schwarz, and of First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, Ivica Dačić, and thank them for their statements.
There have been important developments since our
last meeting, in October 2022 (see S/PV.9155), and they
are worth mentioning. First, on 15 December 2022,
Kosovo delivered to the President of the European Union
its application for membership of the European Union
(EU). We congratulate the Government and the people
of Kosovo for their continued strategic commitment to
their European and Euro-Atlantic perspective, as well
as for their faithful alignment with the common foreign
and security policy of the European Union.

23-1196019/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

Secondly, on 23 April, the European Parliament
granted a visa-free travel regime to the citizens of
Kosovo. In that way, as of January next year, if not
earlier, Kosovo joins all the other countries of the
Western Balkans and only 61 countries in the world in
benefiting from visa-free travel in the Schengen area.
It represents an important foundation for the future
and for ever closer cooperation between the European
Union and Kosovo.
Thirdly, on 21 April, just a few days ago, the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
decided to accept the request of Kosovo for membership
in the organization and send it to the Parliamentary
Assembly to give an opinion, as per the procedures.
That is a historic step and another milestone on the
irreversible path of Kosovo to integrating what the
world knows as the best body the world has ever seen
for promoting democracy, human rights and the rule of
law as the foundation of a Government for the people.
Furthermore, and by no means least, the EUfacilitated dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia has
delivered. The agreement on the path to normalization
between Kosovo and Serbia and its implementation
annex, agreed in Ohrid on 18 March 2023, are historic
milestones. According to them, Kosovo and Serbia
have agreed to develop normal good-neighbourly
relations with each other, on the basis of equal rights,
and recognize each other’s documents and national
symbols, including passports and licence plates. The
text clearly stipulates that neither can represent the other
in the international arena and that Serbia, and this is
very important, will not object to Kosovo’s membership
in international organizations. That appears in the last
line of article 4 of the agreement, in black and white.
I was therefore very surprised — baffled, to tell the
truth — to hear Mr. Dačić state quite the opposite here,
even more so since he was calling on the Government
of Kosovo to abide by agreements reached between
the parties. We commend Josep Borrell, the EU High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Miroslav Lajčák, EU Special Representative for the
Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue and Gabriel Escobar,
United States Deputy Assistant Secretary for the
Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, as well as
the Special Envoys of France and Germany, for their
important contributions to the process. As we know,
however, agreements have meaning only if they are
implemented. We expect the parties to implement
their commitments in full, in good faith and without
20/31

27/04/2023

delay for the benefit of both Kosovo and Serbia and
their respective citizens. That is the only way to chart
a clear path and show leadership through concrete
commitments, which will lead to a new chapter in
relations between the two countries.
Recently, Kosovo organized snap elections in four
municipalities. They were held in accordance with the
country’s constitutional requirements after the resignation
of former elected officials, and were conducted in an
exemplary manner. We regret the fact that the Serb list,
representing the Serb community in the municipalities
concerned, chose not to participate, which affected
both the participation and the outcome. In democracy, a
boycott may be a right, but it is never a good choice, as it
deprives those concerned of direct participation in areas
in which their interests are involved. The Serb community
in Kosovo has the right to have its representatives at all
levels. The country’s Constitution and legal framework
guarantee it. But for that to happen, the respective political
representatives must act accordingly and responsibly and
make use of the formidable space they have. Kosovo is
their country. We hope that the implementation of the
agreement reached with Brussels within the dialogue
will make it possible to quickly find the best solution. In
addition, as today is Kosovo’s national day of missing
persons, we urge both countries to do much more to
find out what happened to the more than 1,600 persons
still unaccounted for, and to close that open wound.
These developments help us understand the
environment in which the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
currently operating. Kosovo is not a frozen conflict,
and every wave of tensions we have witnessed there is
artificially generated and totally avoidable. Kosovo is
a fast-developing country that is gradually finding its
place on the European and international stage according
to the choice of its citizens. The level of stability and the
prospect of the EU-facilitated dialogue, as I mentioned,
through the implementation of agreements, only amplify
the need to think seriously about UNMIK’s future. The
UNMIK mandate was defined a quarter of century ago,
based on a post-conflict situation that is a bygone reality.
As such, its roots lie in the past. But Kosovo, like the
entire region, has changed considerably, way more than
the ability of UNMIK to reflect it, or better put, more
than the Council allows UNMIK to reflect it.
Today the focus in Kosovo and the Western Balkans
is on strengthening regional cooperation, concretizing
European integration, increasing academic mobility,
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

consolidating youth exchanges, enlarging the free trade
area and the free movement of goods and persons and
deepening interconnectivity. We therefore reiterate our
position on the need for a substantial revision of UNMIK’s
activity and a gradual drawdown of its budget and staff,
leading progressively to its closure. Experience has shown
that rigid foreign missions, prolonged unnecessarily in
fast-changing environments, tend to lose their purpose
and relevance. UNMIK cannot stay in Kosovo forever for
the very simple reason that no one is able to locate the
exit sign, although it is in plain sight.
We strongly encourage both Kosovo and Serbia to
continue their efforts and pursue the only path for them
and the entire region, which is the European path. That
implies working tirelessly to build a better future for the
two countries and people, including, in particular, their
respective minorities. The Serbs in Kosovo are entitled
to the best possible enjoyment of rights in the European
landscape. I repeat, the best possible. That should be
the same for the Albanian minority in Preševo Valley,
in southern Serbia. The passivization of addresses
and lack of investment and economic incentives there
remain a source of concern.
Let me conclude by highlighting that the
developments in our part of the world — the Western
Balkans as part of Europe — make it crucial to ensure
that minorities are treated with respect and dignity so
that they contribute to the well-being of their societies,
participate fully in democratic governance and become
bridges that connect people and cultures promoting the
values of diversity and social progress. That is not only
an important lesson from the past but also a powerful
path towards our common future.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I welcome the presence at today’s meeting of His
Excellency Mr. Ivica Dačić, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and I listened carefully to Special
Representative Ziadeh’s briefing and Ms. GërvallaSchwarz’s remarks.
China welcomes the two rounds of high-level
meetings held recently between the Serbian and
Kosovar sides with the facilitation of the European
Union (EU), which led to comprehensive and in-depth
discussions on a political solution to the Kosovo issue.
China has always supported a mutually acceptable
solution to the Kosovo issue between the sides
concerned, working with each other in the framework

S/PV.9312

of resolution 1244 (1999) through dialogue and
consultation, and encourages continued dialogue and
engagement between the two sides. In that process,
Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity should be
fully respected. We hope that the existing agreements
will be effectively implemented, which will help the two
sides to build mutual trust and give momentum to the
ongoing dialogue. The establishment of an association
of Serbian municipalities is an important component
of the 2013 Brussels First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations, to which the
Kosovo authorities have made a clear commitment, and
it should be the focus of the next phase of the bilateral
dialogue and international good offices. While we
recognize the EU’s recent efforts in promoting dialogue
between Serbia and Kosovo, we hope that the EU will
remain neutral and impartial in the mediation process
and refrain from rushing to achieve quick results,
acting hastily or exerting excessive pressure.
China is concerned about the current volatile
situation in northern Kosovo. Despite the strong
opposition of local Serbs, the Kosovo authorities
once again took unilateral action, insisted on holding
elections in northern Kosovo and announced the
election results despite a turnout of less than 4 per cent,
leading to an escalation of local conflicts and regional
tensions. China is deeply concerned about that. The
recurrence of tensions in northern Kosovo in recent
years shows that unilateral actions will only aggravate
fears, escalate tensions, undermine peace and stability
in the Western Balkans and delay the final settlement
of the Kosovo issue, which is in the interests of neither
party. China calls on the Kosovo authorities to take the
overall situation into account, return to the correct track
of dialogue and consultation and refrain from creating
artificial conflicts and confrontations. We hope the EU
will play a positive and constructive role as a mediator
in that regard. Recently, we have seen a continuation of
security incidents committed against ethnic minorities
in Kosovo, and ethnic relations remain tense. The
harmonious coexistence of all ethnic groups is in line
with the fundamental interests and development needs
of the entire population of Kosovo. China hopes that the
Kosovo authorities will take active and strong measures
to protect the security and legitimate rights and interests
of all the ethnic groups in Kosovo, including the Serbs,
and to prevent the recurrence of similar incidents.

23-1196021/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

Recent developments show that the Kosovo issue
is still a security concern for the Balkans and Europe.
The Security Council should therefore remain seized
of the matter. The role of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) remains
indispensable in that regard. We hope that, under
the leadership of Special Representative Ziadeh,
UNMIK will continue to play a constructive role in
achieving a political settlement of the Kosovo issue
and in maintaining stability and promoting national
reconciliation in the country.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Special Representative Caroline Ziadeh
for her informative briefing and her commitment to
the implementation of her mandate. I welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of Mr. Ivica Dačić,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia. We listened carefully
to the briefing delivered by Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz.
The acrimonious dispute over vehicle license plates
remains a bone of contention and a source of tension
between Belgrade and Pristina. It was at the heart of
the mass resignation of thousands of Kosovo Serbs
from local institutions, as well as the boycott of the
municipal elections held in the north, whose historically
low turnout of about 2 per cent demonstrates the extent
of the divide between communities. Community life
is being seriously undermined by a range of factors,
including arbitrary arrests, an increasing number of
incidents, shots being fired at police patrols, attacks on
journalists, the looting of stores and physical attacks, all
of which contribute to a climate of chronic insecurity.
It is essential to reach a long-term political solution in
order to defuse tensions and ease the political climate.
My country takes note of the European Union’s
proposal to breathe new life into the negotiations
between Belgrade and Pristina with a view to
normalizing relations. Nevertheless, we remain
convinced that the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina must be achieved through the
implementation of the 2013 Brussels First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations.
In that context, we welcome and support the various
initiatives to accompany Pristina in the implementation
of that important agreement. It is also crucial for
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolution 1244 (1999), of 10 June 1999, to
be used as key benchmarks in the search for solutions.
We must also not lose sight of — and above all, respect
22/31

27/04/2023

for — the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular the principle of respect for the
territorial integrity of States.
We note with interest the progress in the facilitation
process and call on the parties to remain committed
to it and refrain from any unilateral approaches. The
community tensions must also be defused and dialogue
maintained in order to advance the negotiations in the
technical areas that are essential to people’s daily lives.
We are concerned about the increase in community
incidents affecting the religious domain, in particularly
with respect to the church and religious leaders, and
about the minority communities who are targeted by
violence, including sexual violence. We hope that
the proposed amendments to the criminal code and
the criminal procedure code will be sufficiently
dissuasive and a deterrent against such despicable acts
and their perpetrators. The disproportionate use of
force, as well as the recurrent intimidation by special
operations units, is unacceptable. We urge the parties
to refrain from any unilateral action, including hate
speech, which fuels communal tensions. We call on
the authorities in Pristina to ensure the safety of all
communities and prevent police violence that could
reignite tensions. A durable peace can be built only
as a result of peaceful cohabitation among the various
communities. In that regard, my country stresses the
need for expatriates to return and notes with interest
the 112 voluntary returns recorded during the reporting
period. We encourage continued efforts to return all
200,000 displaced persons.
It is essential for the authorities in Pristina to put
in place legal mechanisms to strengthen the rule of law,
including through judicial reform, because good justice
is essential for building peace. The completion of the
draft law on the documentation of crimes committed
during the Kosovo war will contribute to bringing
about calm.
The remarkable work of the United Nations
specialized agencies, especially the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, is to be commended
for facilitating the voluntary return of members of
minority communities and for providing asylum
seekers with access to education, public services,
legal aid and psychosocial support. The International
Organization for Migration’s investment in housing to
create a friendly living environment among returnees
and host communities is also commendable, as are
efforts aimed at helping to create small businesses for
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

demobilized ex-combatants and their families. The
European Union’s fight against corruption, which is an
obstacle to development and peaceful coexistence, is
also welcome.
We welcome the increasing number of initiatives
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), including its awareness-raising
campaigns against early marriage in Kosovo and its
strengthened support for the economic empowerment
of young people from minority communities, as well
as the organization of seminars and conferences by the
United Nations Development Programme, UN-Women
and international partners on the involvement and
contributions of women in peace processes.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its support for
UNMIK in its efforts on the ground and encourages
the parties to maintain their dialogue in order to find a
political solution through negotiations.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): Let me start
by thanking Ms. Caroline Ziadeh, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
briefing. I welcome the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dačić, to this meeting. We also took note of the
statement by the representative of Kosovo, Ms. Donika
Gërvalla-Schwarz.
Mozambique welcomes the diplomatic efforts
that led to an accord between Belgrade and Pristina
on the agreement on a path to the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia. That important
milestone, facilitated by the European Union, is an
example of the pivotal role of regional organizations
in matters related to international peace and security.
The need for stability in Kosovo is important, as it has
implications for the wider security landscape of Europe
at this challenging time. We strongly urge the national,
regional and international parties to carefully consider
the impact of their decisions going forward in order to
preserve the advances made over the years of efforts
towards peace and reconciliation in Kosovo. We urge
all the parties to remain committed and consistent in
their implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
Despite the important milestones highlighted by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
her briefing, we remain concerned about the continued
animosity and tensions between Belgrade and Pristina.
The disagreements over freedom of movement and
the voting process that took place recently, as well

S/PV.9312

as the ensuing boycott by Kosovo Serbs of their
participation in Kosovo institutions, will undermine
the implementation of the European Union’s proposal.
We strongly urge both the Serbian and Kosovar
leaderships to proactively promote reconciliation
between their respective communities and to refrain
from acts that provoke vandalism and violence. Acts of
intercommunal retribution jeopardize the prospects for
a long-term settlement of the existing divisions between
the two communities. It is important that instances of
hate speech, inflammatory rhetoric, misinformation
and disinformation, hateful narratives and especially
gender-based and sexual violence, including femicide,
are unequivocally condemned and those responsible
brought to justice.
My country knows from experience that it is not
possible to achieve lasting peace without building a more
tolerant and inclusive society, based on lessons of the
past and a vision for a prosperous future. The inclusion
of all stakeholders and main actors — including women,
young people and civil society — is extremely important
to the successful implementation of the reconciliation
process. We therefore commend the efforts of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) aimed at creating common ground,
preserving stability, rebuilding trust and improving
dialogue among communities and institutions to avoid
any relapse into a cycle of conflict.
In conclusion, Mozambique reiterates its support
for the work done by UNMIK and applauds the
efforts by regional actors, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to
mediate conflicts and strengthen Kosovo’s institutions.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I am grateful to Special Representative Ziadeh for
her briefing and thank Foreign Minister GërvallaSchwarz and Foreign Minister Dačić for participating
in today’s meeting.
The United States remains firmly committed to
enhancing stability in the Western Balkans, especially
during this time of greater tensions in Europe. We
are working closely with our European partners to
continue fostering democracy, multi-ethnic societies
and the rule of law across the Western Balkans. That is
a critically important endeavour, and we will continue
to support our partners going forward, including on
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU).
We especially appreciate the engagement of EU High

23-1196023/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

Representative Borrell Fontelles and EU Special
Representative Lajčák with Kosovo and Serbia under
the EU-facilitated dialogue.
We commend Kosovo and Serbia for taking a
crucial step forward with a legally binding agreement
reached in Brussels and Ohrid, which is a positive
development. We encourage both Kosovo and Serbia
to move quickly to implement their respective
commitments and to avoid the recurring crises that
have hampered progress in the EU-facilitated dialogue
for so long. We hope to see more of that new spirit when
the leaders of Serbia and Kosovo meet in Brussels on
2 May. A critical part of that important work is further
steps by Kosovo to establish an association of Serb
majority municipalities in a way that complies with
Kosovo’s Constitution. The EU-facilitated dialogue,
re-energized through the 27 February basic agreement
and its implementation annex on 18 March, continues
to be the principal mechanism for reconciling issues
between the two neighbours.
The positive momentum over the past few months
further supports our long-standing view that it is time
for the United Nations to find a more relevant role in
Kosovo that does not require a Chapter VII mandate.
While we greatly appreciate the contributions that the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo has made to peace and security since it was
established in 1999, we should acknowledge that the
Mission has long fulfilled its original mandate.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Ms. Caroline Ziadeh, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
briefing on the situation in the province and for the
views she has presented. We welcome the participation
in this meeting of the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dačić.
We also listened to the views of Ms. Donika GërvallaSchwarz, although she devoted more of her statement
to the ties and bilateral relations between Russia and
Serbia — which have nothing to do with Pristina — than
to Pristina’s own legitimate claims, which have been
expressed here, and its policies.
I already mentioned this at our previous meeting (see
S/PV.9155), but today Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz has once
again attempted to pass off the plan of interministerial
consultations signed by the Russian and Serbian Foreign
24/31

27/04/2023

Ministers as Serbia surrendering its sovereignty and
putting foreign policy decision-making in Russia’s
hands. I would say to Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz that that is
ridiculous and simply unprofessional. Russia’s position
on the issue of Kosovo remains unchanged. We are in
favour of reaching a sustainable, mutually acceptable
international legal solution for Belgrade and Pristina,
based on resolution 1244 (1999). The solution must be
in the interests of Belgrade and the Serbian people, and
it must be endorsed by the Security Council.
The situation in Kosovo is increasingly alarming.
Over the past few months, the situation in the province
has repeatedly been on the verge of a renewed heated
conflict. Pristina, with the support of Western capitals,
has not abandoned its attempts to take control of Serbpopulated areas. It seems that despite the international
community’s obsession with human rights, almost
no one cares about their observance with respect to
the Serbs. As Minister Dačić mentioned earlier, the
systematic policy of physically displacing Serbs and
transforming the province into an ethnically pure
Albanian space continues. I would add that 209,000 of
the 372,000 non-Albanians who lived in the province
until June 1999 were forced to leave. There are regular
incursions by the special forces of the Kosovo police
into the northern part of the province. They are building
security-agency strongholds on plots of land that were
confiscated from non-Albanian locals. Former Serbian
members of the Kosovo police are being prosecuted
on spurious charges. Orthodox shrines and tombs are
being desecrated. Physical attacks against Serbs and
their property have increased. Since Albin Kurti came
to power in February 2020, more than 300 violent
acts against Serbs have been recorded in Kosovo. The
perpetrators are generally not prosecuted.
Those are the realities on the ground. But we
all understand that without a negotiation process,
agreements or adequate mechanisms to ensure the
protection of Serbs in the north and the few who remain
south of the Ibar River, resolving the current problems
will be impossible. In that regard, we must revisit recent
history. Ms. Ziadeh already evoked several noteworthy
dates today: 19 April marks the tenth anniversary of the
signing of the Brussels First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 2013,
the main provision of which was the establishment of
a community of Serb municipalities in Kosovo. But
during all the time that has elapsed since then, the
Kosovo authorities have avoided its implementation
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

with impunity. The remaining substantive problems
remain unresolved because Pristina — we must be
frank— is not interested either in the normalization of
relations or the fulfilment of its obligations. That is why
Albin Kurti unreasonably demands that the community
of Serb municipalities comply with the provincial
Constitution and be multi-ethnic without conferring
executive powers. Throughout the entire period, the
Kosovo Albanians have attempted to substitute what
was agreed for the establishment of something akin
to a non-governmental organization, which must be
rejected. Only a full-fledged community will ensure
the basic rights and security of the province’s Serbs
and the socioeconomic development of the areas they
inhabit and preserve their cultural identity. Finally, it
would be a prerequisite for achieving lasting and not
merely temporary progress towards the settlement of
the issue.
In our opinion, it is with an understanding of the
true goals of Mr. Kurti’s policy that we should approach
the 18 March verbal agreements reached between
Belgrade and Pristina in Ohrid on two documents — the
Agreement on the path to normalization between Kosovo
and Serbia and its Implementation Annex. We believe
that the optimism expressed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/247) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
with regard to the prospects for their implementation
is greatly exaggerated. We recall that, as made clear by
the many frank statements of the Serbian leadership,
Belgrade agreed to continue the dialogue with
Pristina on the basis of that understanding and on the
condition that its red lines be respected — namely,
its non-agreement with the unilateral declaration of
independence and Kosovo’s membership in the United
Nations and the swift establishment of the community
of Serb municipalities in Kosovo in accordance with
the Brussels Agreement.
On 23 April, Pristina decided to escalate tensions
once again by holding so-called municipal elections
in northern Kosovo. Despite the refusal of the Serbian
majority to propose any candidates, the elections were
held nevertheless under pressure from the United
States and the European Union. As we know, the Serbs
unanimously refused to participate in such a mockery of
democratic procedure. However, the paltry 3.5 per cent
turnout and the lack of needed resources for holding the
elections did not stop Pristina from declaring successful
the completely illegitimate elections and announcing

S/PV.9312

the winners — four Kosovar Albanians who represent
a tiny fraction of the local population, 96.5 per cent of
whom ignored the farce. The normal electoral process
was provocatively replaced by an artificial election
process, which was immediately approved by Pristina’s
Western sponsors. The United States and the European
Union have condoned the Kosovars’ de facto usurpation
of authority in the north of the province and seek to
deprive the Serbs of their voice in the face of the terror
unleashed against them. In that way, Western countries
continue to fuel the conflict between Belgrade and
Pristina and continuously exert pressure on the Serbs
on all fronts.
For example, at the height of the confrontation in
December 2022, the Czech presidency of the Council of
the European Union accepted Kosovo’s application for
European candidate status. On 18 April, the European
Parliament approved visa liberalization with Kosovo
for its citizens, which will enter into force no later than
1 January 2024. The same applies to the immediate
review of Kosovo’s membership in the Council of
Europe, which was conducted on April 24. The way
that was organized and the manner in which votes
were cast in favour of it by certain countries shows
better than words can their attitude towards the United
Nations and Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 1244 (1999) providing the framework for
the settlement of the Kosovo issue. UNMIK is also
under pressure from the Kosovo Albanians — which
our Western colleagues would never allow to happen
in the context of other peacekeeping operations.
We believe that UNMIK must be able to fully carry
out its functions and be provided with the necessary
human and financial resources to that end. We call for
accelerating the investigation into the circumstances
of the May 2019 detention of UNMIK staff member
Mr. Krasnoshchekov by members of the Kosovo
Albanian police and the severe injuries that he suffered
as a result. We must once and for all end the recurrence
of Pristina’s arbitrary treatment of Mission personnel,
such as in the case of the Russian citizen Mr. Antonov,
who was declared persona non grata in December 2021
by an unlawful decision of the regional authorities.
It is obvious that the main goal of the West is to
subdue the Balkans by all means possible and draw the
countries of the region into one of its military-political
blocs. Under such conditions, it is pointless to talk about
the sincerity of statements by members of the Quint
concerning the stabilization of the region. If it served

23-1196025/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

their interests, they would have no scruples in setting
the region on fire. The increasing activity of NATO
attests to that. In violation of resolution 1244 (1999), its
members are contributing to the gradual establishment
of a virtual Kosovar army by increasing the supply
of weapons and military equipment. Washington has
essentially privatized the Bondsteel military base, which
was created exclusively for peacekeeping purposes.
And Washington is doing that shamelessly, as if
everyone had forgotten about the so-called Reçak/Račak
massacre, which was staged to justify NATO’s invasion
of Yugoslavia and resulted in the mass bombing of the
country with depleted uranium weapons, mass civilian
casualties and the destruction of civilian infrastructure.
The environment suffered catastrophic damage, as
noted in the report on the environmental impact of the
war in Yugoslavia on South-East Europe, which was
adopted by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council
of Europe in January 2001. The fact is that NATO has
never been too concerned about the “collateral damage”,
as former United States Secretary of State Albright
termed it, and that remains the case, as demonstrated by
Britain’s deliveries of depleted uranium weapons to the
Ukrainian regime.
In the light of the 1999 events I just mentioned, we
should like to draw attention to the trial of one of the
leaders of the Kosovo Liberation Army, Hashim Thaçi,
and his accomplices, which began at a special court in
The Hague in April. We view this as the last chance
for restoring justice, albeit 25 years after the inhuman
atrocities that were committed. We hope that these
criminals will be punished, as they deserve, and the Court
in the Hague will not repeat the disastrous mistakes of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
(spoke in English)
I understand that Albania has already spoken the
issue that was raised at the beginning of the meeting.
As President I would like to make a comment on what
has been said today since the way the representative of
Albania raised this issue directly or indirectly implicates
the presidency and basically accusing it of being partial,
that is, of abusing its prerogatives as the presidency.
I would like to clarify this issue. Council
members — actually, two Council members — addressed
the presidency with the request to allow Ms. GërvallaSchwarz to speak in Albanian. Today the representative
26/31

27/04/2023

of Albania invoked rule 44 of the Security Council’s
provisional rules of procedure. I will quote the rule for
the Council:
“Any representative may make a speech in a language
other than the languages of the Security Council. In
this case, he shall himself provide for interpretation
into one of those languages. Interpretation into the
other languages of the Security Council by the
interpreters of the Secretariat may be based on the
interpretation given in the first such language.”
Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz does not fall under the
category of representative. She speaks under rule 39,
not under rule 37, in contrast to Serbia. At 99 per cent
of the meetings of the Security Council, briefers and
speakers are invited under rule 39, and none of them
insist on speaking his or her own language if different
from one of the six official languages of the United
Nations. We thought it should not be otherwise at this
meeting, and this has nothing to do with discrimination
against the Albanian language. I have already referred
to precedents where there were statements under rule
39 in native languages, but these exceptions were made
for those speakers who did not speak any of the six
official United Nations languages.
Had that been the case with Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz,
we would have treated the situation in the same
way: she would have been granted an opportunity
to speak Albanian. But we all witnessed today that
she masters English more than decently, and we did
not object, as the representative of Albania claimed
today, but consulted with the Member States through
the political coordinators network. The result of
these consultations was the communication of one
State member of the Council to the Secretariat of the
decision — I emphasize, decision — by Ms. GërvallaSchwarz to address the Council in English. The same
message was communicated to the Russian presidency.
In the message to the Secretariat, that same Council
member underlined that if the request to speak Albanian
reaches the Secretariat before the communication
that Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz had decided to speak
English, the formal request should be disregarded. We
therefore reject any attempts to accuse the presidency
of non-impartiality. We are conducting our duties in
good faith.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): As
long as we are on this issue of the language, I just want
to state for the record that my understanding of this
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

language issue, as raised first by the Foreign Minister
of Kosovo, then the presidency and then the Permanent
Representative of Albania, coincides 100 per cent
with the explanation provided by the Permanent
Representative of Albania. I thank the presidency for
its further explanation of this issue, but I believe that
the explanation provided by Albania stands.
The President: We note the position of the United
States. We already stated how we see the matter and
how things developed and are developing in the course
of discussion of that issue.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): I do not
know why we are having a language problem. We
never had problems like this before; I do remember that
Hashim Thaçi and others speaking in Albanian in this
Chamber on previous occasions, so I hardly think that
there was anything wrong in this. On the other hand,
Council members have heard what Citizen Gërvalla
said, so they have a first-hand idea of what the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristine looks like, in particular
in terms of the degree of extremism it entails. From
this, it is clear to see that Kosovo does not actually
want a dialogue. Kosovo wants to see war and conflict
continue. Members should take note of Ms. GërvallaSchwarz’s racism towards Serbian DNA in her
statements. Colleagues in her Ministry have accused
her of promoting segregation by nationality.
I was born in Kosovo, while Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz
was born in Skopje, in northern Macedonia. She
therefore has no lessons to teach me on the history of
Kosovo. As I mentioned previously, it is abundantly
clear that Kosovo is not interested in dialogue. Let me
quote a statement by Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz from 1998:
“The Albanian people thought wrong when they
believed that the Americans would bring them
freedom and that [the Albanian people] should
be prepared for the Kosovo issue to be resolved
through war”.
That was her statement before the NATO aggression
in 1999.
When we speak of Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz’s father,
whom she did not mentioned today, I wish to say
generally and absolutely that Serbia had nothing to do

S/PV.9312

with Federal State Security Services from 1988, while
those services were staffed with Slovenians, Croats
and others. Citizen Gërvalla has actually accused some
members of the Kosovo parties in power of having
worked for Serbian and Yugoslav security forces. When
it comes to the reasons why her father had the kind of
political positions he had, I would remind her that, in
1982, long before Milosević, Dačić and Vučić, he, like
other Albanians, was a separatist and was advocating
an independent Kosovo.
What, then, are we talking about? Ms. GërvallaSchwarz has shown that her policy for decades has been
an independent Kosovo, and if it can be done through
Americans, French, Germans, so much the better, but,
if it has to be done through war or conflict, so be it,
because her friends will accept it in the end. Since she
has invited the Kosovo issue to be resolved through
armed conflict, her hands are bloody.
In 2017, she said that she will send evidence of
crimes committed by Hashim Thaçi and Kadri Veseli
against her political opponents, and they say that she has
done so, which is why she has security with her all the
time. I would like to remind the Council that, 10 years
ago, I signed the Brussels Agreement, together with
Hashim Thaçi and Catherine Ashton. I am here. Where
is Hashim Thaçi? Why was I or President Vučić not
accused of being responsible for something? It is because
we have not taken part in anything, while she has. I
thank her for helping to accuse Mr. Thaçi and Mr. Veseli
for war crimes, because I am certain that they helped
her gather the testimonies from the victims’ families.
When she talks about genocide, one side, which
is accused of committing genocide, has endured great
sacrifices and has victims. I told her that there were
40,000 Serbs living in Pristina in the 1990s. Where are
those Serbs? Today there are only 100 or a couple of
hundred. Kosovo used to have 10,000 Serbs in prison.
Now it has only 25 or 23. If genocide is being committed
against it, which she claims, the numbers should be
reversed. What is she talking about?
Every metre of Kosovo land has been covered in
Serbian blood for centuries. She is talking about bloody
battles, including the Kosovo battle, which she did not
witness. That battle happened 500 years ago and took
place between Serbs and Turks, because Albanians did
not live there. In any case, resolutions 1160 (1998), 1203
(1998) and 1199 (1998) refer to the representatives of
Kosovo security forces as terrorist forces.

23-1196027/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

She is talking about the alliance of her foreign
policy with that of the European Union. That is very
interesting. With what foreign policy did Kosovo align
its decision to open an embassy in Jerusalem? Was that
in accordance with the policy of the European Union?
Was that in accordance with the position of the General
Assembly or was that necessary for Kosovo in order
for Israel to recognize its independence? Do not be
ridiculous. We are small, but we are not stupid.
She is talking about principles and about Ukraine.
Ukraine does not recognize Kosovo. She is talking
about our alliance with Russia and Albania. We have the
Open Balkan Initiative. Does the fact that we have deals
with Russia mean that Albania and North Macedonia
have deals with Russia too? I know that she has lectured
them on entering the Open Balkan Initiative. She is
talking about the boycotts of the elections. The people
of Kosovo have boycotted elections in Serbia for many
years. She can tell that to those who do not know. This is
theatre of the absurd. Had Kosovo been hers, she would
have an Albanian word for Kosovo and she would not
be using the Serbian word Kosovo.
When it comes to crimes, I do not want to remind her
that the families in Staro Gracko killed people, including
children. Near Klečka 1,300 people were kidnapped, and
there were rapes. That was recorded by the consultative
bodies of UNMIK. I do not approve of any crimes towards
Albanians or Serbs, but I kindly ask her that, when we
talk about this, we not have a selective approach. Each
war criminal must be brought to justice. Selective and
double standards lead us to discussing crimes which were
allegedly committed only against Albanians and certain
statements of the citizen Gërvalla will become part of
the history. I think Orwell would envy her statements.
Many Council members think that this is perhaps
like a hidden camera or a joke, so I kindly ask them
to write it down as a reminder of something very
hypocritical. Kosovo is the most democratic country
in the Balkans. She is not only offending Serbs and
others. Does she know how many other countries there
are in the Balkans, if Kosovo could even be considered
a country? Kosovo is the most democratic country in
the Balkans. Kosovo is a guarantor of freedom and
peace in the Balkans. Yes, that is something it has been
for centuries when, in the First World War, it fought
against Americans, French and the British and, in the
Second World War, it fought on the side of Hitler, the SS
Skanderbeg and so on. Kosovo was definitely always on
the right side of freedom and a guarantor of stability.
28/31

27/04/2023

And then citizen Gërvalla says that when Kosovo
promises something, it keeps its word. That is like a
tragic comedy. Security Council members should refer
to Council records from 10 years ago. In the presence of
Hillary Clinton and with the support of Angela Merkel,
Hashim Thaçi, Catherine Ashton and I signed the
Brussels Agreement. Gërvalla says that if something is
not being fulfilled, then it is a farce and a lie. That is
where she is right. This is a farce. Kosovo’s failure to
form the association of Serb-majority municipalities has
been tolerated for 10 years. I did not think of that; it was
the request of the international community. Now she is
saying that Mr. Vučić, Mr. Dačić and she have discussed
that so many times. I think she probably just rewrote
her statement from the last meeting (see S/PV.9155) and
added me to it, as I was not that interesting to her when
she participated in the meeting last time.
When it comes to us, we fulfilled all our
international obligations, and international capitals
knows that. She talks about the visits of the international
community to Pristina. They came to pressure her to
form the association of Serb-majority municipalities,
not because she is an example of democracy.
She talks about military exercises. Since 2021, we
have had only four with Russia and Belarus, while we
had five or six with the United States and she knows
that. What is she — more Catholic than the Pope?
She refers to the Serbian people, the Serbian World
and Greater Serbia, but as far as I know, Kosovo has
the day of the Albanian flag on 28 November. The list
during the elections she represented did not recognize
the flags of Kosovo. She received international
representatives under the Albanian flag. Do you think
the representatives at this meeting do not know that her
political programme consists of uniting with Albania?
Albin Kurti said several years ago that Kosovo sought
independence from Serbia, but not from Albania. She
is now talking about the great Serbian world while she
calls for all Albanians to unite. That is something her
father advocated back in 1982. Was Vučić, Milošević or
Dačić in power then? No, it was Josip Broz Tito, whom
she allegedly liked and supported in her youth. And
now she is complaining about Yugoslavian security
forces. She hates Serbia, and it is very hypocritical, but
if she could use it, then she has no problem with it.
Here I have a list of employees of the United
Nations, not counting the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo — 240 people
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

employed by the United Nations, and after each of their
names, it says Serbia. But 123 of them are actually
Serbs, whereas 105 of them are Albanians. Is she not
embarrassed by this? She is spitting on Serbia, but she
has no problem with taking a couple of thousand dollars
on our account. Eighteen of them are in P- and D-level
positions. She knows the level of importance of those
posts and the highest position that Serbia reaches in the
United Nations. She, who does not recognize Serbia,
is from independent Kosovo, but here in the United
Nations, she works under a Serbian passport. Is she not
embarrassed? If she refuses it, then she should maybe
give it up. She should say that she despises Serbia, that
Serbia is disgusting and a genocidal country.
I am the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and she has
greatly offended me. Yet, her colleagues and people have
Serbia written in their passport. I am certain that she has
seen them here. Perhaps one of them is here listening to
this. I did not think it would be correct. I do not know
whether they recognize Serbia or not or under which
principles those people are representatives of Serbia in
the United Nations.
To cut it short, she can say whatever she likes. She
can lie, but she has to understand that we are different
and that we have our differences on the issue of status
of Kosovo. We do not consider Kosovo to be a State, but
she does. She has her approach, and we have our own
approach. Each country has its own Kosovo. That is
why each country is wondering how we should approach
solving this issue. We think that Kosovo is Serbia. She
does not agree. Should we lead a war?
I kindly ask her to align her approach to the political
will expressed by everyone in order for dialogue to
succeed. When it comes to the red lines President Vučić
mentioned, I want everyone to know that Vučić never
signed an agreement, because for us de facto or de jure
recognition of Kosovo their membership in the United
Nations are unacceptable. We have verbally agreed to the
implementation of something, but the first condition of
the implementation of any part of these agreements is
the formation of the association of Serb municipalities,
and we will see what will actually happen in that regard.
She does not want peace. She is full of hatred, and she
wants war. We are not afraid of her, but the international
community should be afraid of her. That is what
Mr. Escobar says when he comes, that the association
of Serb municipalities has to be formed — with Kurti
or without him. I say this since she talked about this and
about Aleksandar Vučić and I.

S/PV.9312

I am here for the twenty-fifth time at a Security
Council meeting. From the way she speaks and thinks
that a President could go against the will of the
international community tells me that she probably
will not remain in her position for long, but that is
her problem. We do want to dialogue, but we do not
want for someone not to fulfil their obligation while
being rewarded for not doing so, which is the case
with Pristina.
We could probably have long discussions over
many days. Regardless of our political differences and
our different political views, we have no reason not
to talk. Of course we have to talk. But if we hope for
success, we have to have good political will, and I am
not certain that we do. Actually, I am certain that this
is not the case with the representatives of the Pristina
Administration, headed by Kurti.
The President (spoke in Russian): Ms. GërvallaSchwarz has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Gërvalla-Schwarz: Mr. Dačić has just shown
today why people in Serbia in the 1990s called him
“little Sloba”, which means little Slobodan Milošević,
after his boss and hero. I do understand that he is angry,
and I know this language. I have known it for a long
time because it have spent more than just two, three or
four years in European politics.
But he needs to explain to his people at home what
he has done and how, in 1999, he lost Kosovo forever,
instead of using that old rhetoric from the 1980s and the
1990s. I think that people in Serbia do not deserve that.
I know that the truth hurts. He can take citations from
the year 1000 or 1500. But the truth hurts. I am very
sorry for him because he is our neighbour, and we need
to deal with him.
Talking about my father makes it even clearer
how Mr. Dačić personally thinks. My father, who was
a writer and journalist, was murdered — assassinated
by the Serbian-dominated UDBA. And this is a fact.
There are facts and there are lies. The fact is that the
former UDBA was a Serbia-dominated secret service
that assassinated my father because he wanted the
independence of Kosovo. The independence of Kosovo
is so difficult for Mr. Dačić to accept that he would
rather accept the assassination of a journalist for
wanting to peacefully get through his written text on
the independence of Kosovo.

23-1196029/31

S/PV.9312

Kosovo

This shows that Mr. Dačić is old Serbia, not new
Serbia. He is Milošević Serbia. And it is the other
Serbia that the Europe and the region needs. So with
him, Serbia knows that there is no way to Europe or to
a better future for his citizens. If he tries to put me in
connection with the Kosovo Specialist Chambers, let
me just tell him that it is different from anything in
Serbia. He is talking about the special court set up by
the Kosovo Parliament — because we are not the Serbia
of Dačić, Vučić and Milošević. It was a sovereign and
independent decision to investigate possible crimes and
offences committed between 1998 and 2000. In that
regard, it is important to acknowledge the heroic efforts
of the people of Kosovo, who saved tens of thousands
of lives from the merciless Serbian war machine. He
was part of that. Our Government, our State and our
citizens acknowledge the brave efforts and adore the
brave Kosovo Liberation Army, which took a stand
against genocide. The terrorists were the ones who
burned down villages, slaughtered thousands of people,
from babies to the elderly, and brutally raped women
and girls. They denied everything and even celebrated
it; they celebrated genocide. And he was in the middle
of them. People cannot sink lower than that, whether in
Serbia, Russia or elsewhere.
The people of Kosovo who defended their families,
villages and fellow citizens were not the terrorists.
It was the Serbian forces who were the terrorists,
sponsored by their State. Unfortunately, the United
Nations blockade imposed by Russia hindered their
defeat. But it was only through the courage and civility
of United Nations Members, as well as the bravery of
our own men and women, that we were able to prevail.
It is true that at the moment President Thaçi is at
The Hague, where I strongly believe that he will show
that the Kosovo Liberation Army, himself and others
who are being accused have all the arguments on their
side to show that they are innocent of the accusations.
What Mr. Dačić said about me being a witness at The
Hague merits no comment. It is simply not true. He
would be well advised to read a little deeper than just
the headlines; it really would be very worthwhile.
Kosovo is today an independent State. It is
a sovereign, democratic State — one of the six
countries in the Western Balkans. That means that,
as a sovereign, democratic State, we are discussing
with a very problematic neighbour the normalization
of our relations. It is not a dialogue about the status
of Kosovo, because that is a done deal recognized by
30/31

27/04/2023

more than 115 Members of the United Nations. But it
is a discussion — negotiations — in Brussels about
the status and normalization of our relations. We made
progress last month where we though that Serbia had
committed to and accepted the European proposal,
which has the support of the European Union and the
United States.
Hearing Mr. Dačić today, and in recent days his
President, I sincerely wonder whether we really had
an agreement at Ohrid or not. As we understand it,
we have an agreement and will be very committed to
implement what we promised to do at the two meetings,
in Brussels and Ohrid. Meanwhile, I have doubts in
hearing all those statements, which are made more for
domestic public consumption than for this body. But it
is as it is. We cannot choose our neighbours. We will
continue the discussions. Whether with the current
Serbian political elite or with others, we will normalize
our relationship — because there is no other alternative.
To conclude, I understand the frustration. I
understand all the efforts to use history to excuse
genocide. But as a true European, I am not ready to
accept any of these backward-looking arguments.
I hope that in Belgrade and the Serbian Government
reasonable people will prevail and find a way to deal
with people like Mr. Dačić and Mr. Vučić, who represent
Serbia’s past and not its future.
I could continue into the night discussing
Mr. Dačić’s lies, but I want to spare this body this kind
of discussion. And so that is all I have to say.
The President: We cannot continue into the night.
We have other plans in the Security Council in the very
near future.
The representative of Albania has asked for the
floor to make a further statement. As this is starting
to resemble an open debate, I will draw the line here
on representatives asking for the floor and will end the
meeting after he speaks.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I am absolutely aware of the
time. This is not to reply to anything that was said, but
just to make one comment.
What we heard — and it has happened many
times — shows how difficult the discussion on some
topics can be. But I regret that we do not see in the
Council the spirit we see in Brussels, where the parties
meet. It is not always an easy discussion, but they agree.
What happened on 18 March is absolutely a milestone. I
23-11960

27/04/2023

Kosovo

think we should really strive to bring to the Council the
spirit of what is happening and not really argue about
the historical perspectives, about which we disagree.
Nobody forgets that, but I think we have to look
forward. What happens between Kosovo and Serbia
is extremely important for Kosovo and Serbia, but it
is important for other countries in the region as well.
That is why we want that to succeed. That is why want
such agreements. That is why we want implementation.
But in order to avoid the Council having the opposite

S/PV.9312

effect of what happens in Brussels, I reiterate what we
have said before, that is, that we do not need two annual
meetings. Just one per year is probably enough.
The President: Let the spirit prevail. The question
is, what spirit?
As I announced, I drew a line. There are no more
speakers on my list. I am sorry to anybody who wanted
to request the floor, but we really have run out of time.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

23-1196031/31
