United Nations

S/PV.6235

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6235th meeting
Thursday, 10 December 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kafando . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Hernández-Milian
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-64217 (E)

*0964217*

S/PV.6235

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Yukio Takasu, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). I now give the floor to
Ambassador Takasu.

the items are neither allowed to reach their intended
destination nor returned to their place of origin.
In the second instance, the Committee received a
letter from a Member State regarding the presence of
suspicious cargo originating from Iran and destined for
another State aboard the Francop, again shipped by
IRISL. With the consent of the relevant authorities, the
vessel was boarded by the navy of the reporting State,
which conducted an on-board State inspection.
According to this State, the cargo contained armsrelated materiel. The State reported that, in line with its
international obligations, it unloaded, retained and
stored the cargo, and that the State will ensure that the
items will neither be allowed to reach their intended
destination nor returned to their place of origin.

On two occasions, the Committee received
reports of further violations of paragraph 5 of
resolution 1747 (2007), which imposed an export ban
on arms and related materiel on the Islamic Republic of
Iran. In line with its mandate to examine and take
appropriate action on information regarding alleged
sanctions violations, the Committee has studied these
reports carefully and notes with grave concern an
apparent pattern of sanctions violations involving
prohibited arms transfers from Iran.

In response to each of these reports, the
Committee dispatched letters to the two States
involved in the transfer of the arms-related materiel,
inviting them to provide an explanation for the
transactions as well as additional relevant information
about the origin, final destination and ownership of the
goods. The Committee reminded both States of their
obligation to accept and carry out the decisions of the
Security Council under Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations, noted with great concern the fact that
the Committee had received multiple reports of
violations of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007)
involving these States, and recalled that the violation
by Member States of their obligations under the
Charter is a serious matter. The Committee also
requested that both States respond to the Committee
within 15 days. The Committee also wrote to all three
reporting Member States, expressing its appreciation
for their responsible actions and urging them to
continue to cooperate closely with the Committee and
with any other States that might be investigating the
cases.

In the first instance, the Committee received
letters from two Member States regarding the presence
of suspicious cargo originating from Iran and destined
for another State aboard the M/V Hansa India chartered
by the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines
(IRISL). The vessel was redirected to a port of one of
the reporting States, where the cargo was offloaded and
inspected. According to this State, the cargo contained
arms-related materiel. The State reported that, in line
with its international obligations, it retained, unloaded
and stored the cargo, and that the State will ensure that

Finally, the Committee wrote to the States with
the reported links to the Francop, inviting them to
provide any additional relevant information. In those
same letters, the Committee highlighted the need for
Member States to redouble their efforts to ensure the
full implementation of resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007) and 1803 (2008); drew attention to the
involvement of IRISL in multiple incidents involving
the transport of items in violation of resolution 1747
(2007); and, with reference to its Implementation
Assistance Notice of 24 July 2009, strongly urged

Mr. Takasu (Japan): This is the twelfth 90-day
report to the Security Council in accordance with
paragraph 18 (h) of resolution 1737 (2006). The report
covers the period from 10 September 2009 to
10 December 2009, during which time the Committee
held no meetings but conducted its work using the
silence procedure.

2

09-64217

S/PV.6235

Member States to exercise extra vigilance as regards
IRISL.
During the period under review, the Committee
received three notifications from a Member State,
pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006), in
connection with the unfreezing of funds to make
payments due under contracts entered into prior to the
listing of an entity.
Finally, with regard to reporting by States on the
implementation of all relevant measures set out in
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008),
the figures remained unchanged: 91 reports under
resolution 1737 (2006), 78 reports under resolution
1747 (2007) and 67 reports under resolution 1803
(2008).
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Takasu for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Takasu for his report.
Unfortunately, we have witnessed several
significant developments on this critical issue over the
past 90 days. First, the latest report of the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) on Iran has once again underscored Iran’s
refusal to comply with its international nuclear
obligations and to cooperate with the IAEA. I should
like to highlight a few of the major points today.
Iran continues to expand its enrichment and
heavy water-related activities. It conducted a multiyear effort to construct a clandestine enrichment
facility near the city of Qom, in contravention of its
Security Council obligations. The IAEA has requested
clarifications from Iran about several aspects of this
facility. The IAEA secretariat concluded that Iran’s
failure to inform the IAEA of its construction of an
undeclared enrichment facility near Qom was
inconsistent with Iran’s IAEA safeguards obligations
and reduces confidence further about the absence of
other nuclear facilities that have not been declared to
the IAEA.
The IAEA Board of Governors responded to the
report by adopting a resolution on Iran by an
overwhelming majority on 27 November. The
resolution underscores the international community’s

09-64217

increased, serious and unified concern that Iran
continues to defy its requirements and obligations
under IAEA and Security Council resolutions. The
resolution urges Iran to immediately suspend
construction at Qom and to cooperate fully with the
IAEA in order to comply.
Secondly, the United States condemns the serious
and repeated sanctions violations reported to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). In the past year, there have
been three reported incidents. All three involved the
transfer of arms or ammunition from Iran to Syria; all
three involved the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping
Lines; and all three are clear violations of paragraph 5
of resolution 1747 (2007). Iran has now been caught
breaking the rules repeatedly.
In today’s briefing, the Committee expressed its
grave concern about the “apparent pattern of sanctions
violations involving prohibited arms transfers from
Iran”. The Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) has documented in great detail
Iran’s habit of violating this Council’s resolutions.
Such violations are unacceptable. The illicit smuggling
of weapons from Iran to Syria is not just a sanctions
violation; it is also an important factor in the
destabilization of an already fragile Middle East.
We applaud the responsible actions that States
have taken to detect and disrupt sanctions violations. In
the two cases that occurred during the 90-day period,
involving two vessels, the Hansa India and the
Francop, two Member States took action in the face of
suspicious cargo originating from Iran. In both cases,
the Member States offloaded the arms-related materiel
to ensure that it would not reach its intended
destination or be returned to its place of origin. The
Committee has also already called attention to its July
2009 Implementation Assistance Notice, which urged
Member States to “exercise extra vigilance” with
respect to the role of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Shipping Lines role in violations of these resolutions.
The scope of these violations is alarming. On
board the Francop were found 36 containers of arms
and related materiel, including 690 122-millimetre
rockets, around 12,000 anti-tank and mortar shells,
more than 20,000 fragmentation grenades, and more
than half a million rounds of ammunition. Tons of
bullet casings were found on board the Hansa India.

3

S/PV.6235

We commend the Committee for the diligence it
has shown in carrying out its mandates. The
effectiveness of Security Council sanctions depends on
the follow-up of the Council, the Committee and,
ultimately, all Member States. We must ensure that
these sanctions are rigorously enforced to ensure that
destabilizing weapons are not allowed to flow from
Iran to other parts of the Middle East and elsewhere.
As the cases we have discussed here today amply
demonstrate, all States should give extra scrutiny to all
shipping between Iran and Syria, especially if the
Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines is involved.
States should also report any information about
sanctions violations to the 1737 (2006) Committee. We
look to the Committee to consider options for effective
action to prevent new incidents, and we look forward
to its ideas on ways that Member States can better
implement those measures.
My third point is to note that these recent events —
the discovery of the Qom facility, Iran’s announced
intention to build new enrichment plants, and its
prohibited arms transfers — underscore the renewed
urgency of full and robust implementation of
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008).
Member States need to redouble their own enforcement
efforts, and the 1737 Committee should be even more
vigilant, engaged and active.
More rigorous implementation of those sanctions
will make it harder for Iran to acquire the technology
and assistance to support its prohibited proliferation
activities. It will make it harder for Iran to smuggle
weapons to extremists and non-State actors. It will
make it harder for Iran to abuse the international
financial system to fund its proliferation activities. And
full implementation will make it harder for Iran to
build any more covert nuclear-related facilities, such as
the site near Qom, beyond the gaze of international
inspectors.
The United States, along with our P5+1 partners,
continues to pursue a dual-track approach of
engagement while increasing the pressure on Iran to
fulfil its obligations to suspend all proliferationsensitive nuclear activities and to cooperate with the
IAEA. We have repeatedly expressed our strong
preference for resolving concerns over Iran’s nuclear
programme through diplomatic negotiations to build
confidence and to respond to Iran’s request to meet its
own humanitarian and medical needs.

4

The IAEA, with support from Russia, France and
the United States, made a proposal to respond
positively to Iran’s request for nuclear fuel for the
Tehran research reactor, despite Iran’s continuing
violation
of
the
Council’s
resolutions
and
non-compliance with IAEA requirements on its nuclear
programme. Iran’s failure thus far to take advantage of
that opportunity raises serious questions about its
nuclear intentions — questions that deserve urgent,
international attention.
The United States remains firmly committed to a
peaceful resolution with respect to international
concerns of Iran’s nuclear programme. We also remain
willing to engage Iran to work towards a diplomatic
solution to the nuclear dilemma it has created for itself —
if Iran will only choose such a course.
But engagement cannot be a one-way street. Iran
must conclusively demonstrate a similar willingness to
engage constructively and address the serious issues
associated with its nuclear programme. The
international community stands firm in its conviction
that Iran must comply with its international
obligations. Should Iran continue to fail to meet its
obligations, the international community will have to
consider further actions.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank Ambassador Takasu for
introducing the twelfth 90-day report. His briefing
revealed quite clearly the extent of the Iran’s deliberate
violations of the sanctions arising from resolutions
1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008), as
reaffirmed by resolution 1835 (2008).
The serious violations are accumulating:
Monchegorsk, ANL Australia, Hansa India and now
Francop. These ships represent a true flow of arms and
other dangerous material that is designed to destabilize
fragile regions and to perpetuate conflicts. The regular
shipments originating in the port of Bandar Abbas
probably represent only the tip of the iceberg. Almost
all of those violations involve the Islamic Republic of
Iran Shipping Lines.
We have to understand the consequences. States,
ports, charter companies and captains must be alerted
to the risks they are being made to take. We shall not
be satisfied with simply writing letters that go
unanswered, which merely compounds violations of
the law with disdain for those who administer it.

09-64217

S/PV.6235

Moreover, even more serious is the fact that Iran
has placed itself in a dangerous deadlock. Since 2003,
we have tirelessly sought to open negotiations with
Iran. We have stepped up our efforts and proposals, and
for several months now we have involved the United
States at the highest level in order to engage Iran in
dialogue. That country has responded to none of our
proposals.
The most recent offer — one of emblematic
cooperation involving Russia and France — proposed
enriching Iranian fuel abroad in order to operationalize
the Tehran research reactor. The International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) guaranteed the operation. That
was a unique opportunity to build trust. Iran refused.
Even more serious, on 25 September a
clandestine uranium enrichment site of a size and
configuration clearly inappropriate for civilian use was
revealed to the IAEA. Iran had not declared that site, in
violation of its Safeguards Agreement and of Code 3.1
thereof, as confirmed by the latest report of the
Agency. That is a new, major affront to the trust of the
international community. Everyone is now wondering
how many other sites there are in Iran.
Given the gravity of the situation, on
27 November the Board of Governors at the IAEA
adopted and transmitted to the Security Council, for the
first time since 2006, a specific resolution on Iran. That
resolution urges Iran to respect its obligations. It
demands that Iran suspend work at the clandestine
Qom site and provide full access and all documents in
order to shed light on the origins of that site. It also
demands that Iran confirm in writing that there are no
other clandestine sites. The Agency had already made
that request in writing on 6 November, and Iran did not
respond. The resolution also demands that Iran apply
the transparency measures requested of it under Code
3.1, an obligation for Iran under its Safeguards
Agreement that it illegally and unilaterally rejected.
Finally, the resolution asks Iran to resolve outstanding
issues with the IAEA, which the Agency considers to
be essential in order to provide credible assurances that
there is no military programme in Iran.
Iran’s reaction to the adoption of that resolution
of the IAEA Board of Governors was to announce the
construction of 10 new uranium enrichment sites. It
goes without saying that, in the absence of a nuclear
reactor, having 10 new enrichment sites makes no

09-64217

sense within the framework of a civilian nuclear
programme.
We find ourselves most reluctantly at a turning
point. This week, the heads of State and Government of
the European Union will meet in Brussels. They will
take stock of month after month of Iranian refusals to
negotiate. If Iran continues to do its utmost to violate
five Security Council resolutions, to reject the slightest
confidence-building measures, and to refuse dialogue
and transparency after the major revelations that have
just been made, we must draw all the necessary
conclusions and move on to a new resolution involving
sanctions. Let us be prepared to do so. France, for its
part, is prepared. There is no longer any reason to wait.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, we should like to express our
gratitude to Ambassador Takasu of Japan, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) for his briefing on the work of
the Committee over the past 90 days.
Libya reaffirms the importance of stepping up
international efforts to achieve a peaceful resolution of
the Iranian nuclear issue, based on a commitment to
Security Council resolution 1803 (2008), which calls
for continued diplomatic efforts to encourage renewed
dialogue and consultations with Iran with a view to
achieving a comprehensive, appropriate and long-term
solution to this issue. That would open the way for the
development of comprehensive relations and
cooperation with the Islamic Republic of Iran on the
basis of mutual respect and for the building of
international confidence in the peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme. In this respect, we call on all
relevant parties to continue direct negotiations until
that goal is achieved. We repeat that what happened in
Iraq should not be allowed to occur again anywhere
else in the world, especially when it is based on
groundless information.
Libya reiterates its conviction that we must deal
with questions of non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament in a comprehensive and non-selective
way and that all States, without exception, must subject
their nuclear facilities to the safeguards regime of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
We note with disapproval that the Security Council
has disregarded Israel’s nuclear weapons, even though
that country refuses to join the Non-Proliferation Treaty
or to subject its facilities to the International Atomic

5

S/PV.6235

Energy Agency’s comprehensive safeguards regime.
This stands as an obstacle to the aspirations of the
States of the Middle East to create a nuclear weaponsfree zone, as expressed at the 1995 Review Conference
of the States Parties to the NPT concerning the Middle
East and in relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly. The International Atomic Energy Agency
must inspect the Israeli Dimona reactor, so as to
confirm that Israel is not above the law. Otherwise, all
States in the Middle East can rightly wonder why they
do not have the right to have such weapons while Israel
does possess them.
Our concern for and commitment to the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons should not lead
us to forget the inalienable right of all States Parties to
the Non-Proliferation Treaty to the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, to possess nuclear energy and to
develop nuclear technology. In this respect, we
reaffirm that the International Atomic Energy Agency
is the only specialized authority equipped to verify the
fulfilment by States parties of the safeguards
agreements, carried out in compliance with their
obligations under the Treaty, in order to prohibit
nuclear energy being diverted from peaceful uses to
nuclear weapons and other forms of nuclear explosive
devices.
The International Atomic Energy Agency is also
the international coordinating centre for technical
cooperation in nuclear matters. The international
community should consider expanding the functions of
the Agency to include the verification of bilateral
nuclear arsenal reductions carried out by nuclear
States, with a view to achieving the ultimate goal of
totally eliminating these nuclear arsenals.
In conclusion, we reaffirm that international
peace and security cannot be achieved through the
possession of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction, or the threat of their use. Rather,
these can be achieved by consolidating the principles
of dialogue, understanding and mutual respect,
upholding justice and promoting fruitful cooperation
between States. We hope that those States which
possess nuclear weapons will uphold their
responsibilities in this area.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Japan, Ambassador Takasu, for
having briefed the Council on the work of the Security

6

Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) over the past 90 days and for the work
undertaken in that period. The Committee will need to
continue to study the specific situation, which was the
main focus of his briefing.
Over the period in question, the Committee
continued to act in strict compliance with the
provisions of the Security Council resolutions 1737
(2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008). In our view, the
Committee should, in its future work, continue to work
in the spirit and letter of those resolutions, with a view
to effectively resolving the Iranian nuclear problem
exclusively through political and diplomatic means.
At present, the situation relating to the Iranian
nuclear programme is not simple. Unfortunately, it is
still not possible to have substantive negotiations with
the Iranian side. Nevertheless, the six States, including
Russia, have not discarded the possibility of renewed
dialogue with a view to reaching a comprehensive
resolution of all issues relating to the nuclear
programme of Iran. In our work in this area we need to
be patient and calm, and must not let ourselves be
overcome by emotion. Emotion will only hinder us in
achieving our objective.
We hope that the resolution adopted on
27 November (GOV/2009/82) by the Board of
Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) will have a positive impact. We expect that
Iran will take the signals contained in the IAEA
resolution very seriously and that it will cooperate
fully with the IAEA for a swift return to negotiations
on the situation relating to the Iranian nuclear problem.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I should like to thank Ambassador Takasu
for his briefing on the progress in the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) over the 90-day reporting
period. We should like to thank him for his efforts
since he assumed the Chairmanship of the Committee.
China has always supported the international
non-proliferation regime. We are opposed to nuclear
proliferation and do not wish to see any new instability
in the Middle East. China is in favour of the peaceful
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue through
diplomatic negotiations.
Recently, there have been new developments on
the Iranian nuclear issue. It has been noted that Iran

09-64217

S/PV.6235

has various views regarding the supply of nuclear fuel
for the Tehran research reactor. However, the path
towards a resolution of the issue is not completely
blocked. Iran is still willing to engage in further
consultations with the parties concerned to resolve the
issue together. This shows that there is still the
possibility that the diplomatic efforts of the
international community will see talks resume. That
may require more time and patience on all parts.
We also note that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) recently adopted a new resolution on
the Iranian nuclear issue. We support the IAEA’s
playing a larger and more constructive role in order to
properly resolve the Iranian nuclear issue and to
promptly resume negotiations. We also hope that the
parties concerned will strengthen the dialogue and
cooperation with the IAEA and avoid taking further
action that could complicate the present situation.
We believe that resolving the Iranian nuclear
issue through diplomatic negotiations is the best
option. It is also in the common interest of the
international community. In the current circumstances,
it is particularly important that the parties concerned
continue to be patient and to exercise restraint so as to
leave sufficient time and space for the ongoing
diplomatic efforts.
We hope that the relevant Security Council
resolutions on this issue will be effectively
implemented. China will continue to participate
actively in the work of the 1737 Committee. We will
support and cooperate with the efforts of the Chair of
the Committee and work to ensure that the Committee
plays a constructive role in the due handling of the
Iranian nuclear issue.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank Ambassador Takasu for his report and for his
truly able leadership of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
It has been a busy and difficult three months for
the Committee, a period in which, as the report makes
clear, a pattern of sanctions violations has emerged. As
the report notes, there were two violations of Security
Council resolution 1747 (2007) of a similar nature in
this reporting period: first, the M/V Hansa India
interdiction in October and, later, the Francop seizure
in November.

09-64217

We are grateful for the prompt, effective and
responsible action of all States concerned with those
interdictions and seizures and for their cooperation
with the Committee in investigating the cases. That has
ensured that the prohibited arms and related material
have been neither returned to Iran nor allowed onward
to their intended destinations.
Those incidents leave no doubt that Iran is
determined to flout the requirements of the Security
Council, but they also show that the international
community is determined that Iran abide by
international rules and that mandatory Security Council
resolutions must be upheld.
It is worth restating the reasons for these
measures. Iran lost the trust of the international
community by hiding the most sensitive aspects of its
programme for nearly 20 years, by failing to
implement International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) transparency measures, and by refusing to
answer all the questions put to it by the IAEA as it
sought to establish the facts.
The most recent report by former IAEA Director
General Mr. ElBaradei concludes, as his previous
reports have done, that he was unable to verify that
Iran’s nuclear programme is for exclusively peaceful
purposes. It makes clear that Iran has not suspended its
enrichment-related activities or its work on heavy
water-related projects, as required by the Security
Council.
The report also covers the IAEA’s initial
conclusions following its inspection of the enrichment
facility at Qom. Development of that site was in
contravention of five Security Council resolutions. The
Agency makes clear that it was inconsistent with Iran’s
obligations under the subsidiary arrangements of its
Safeguards Agreement. Those state that Iran must
inform the Agency of new nuclear facilities at the time
of the decision to construct.
It is essential that Iran suspend all enrichmentrelated activities, including any further construction
work at Qom. Iran asserts that it began construction of
the Qom facility in 2007. The Agency makes clear that
it has information that shows that Iran started
construction before that date, noting that Iran’s
explanation about the purpose and chronology of its
design and construction requires further clarification.

7

S/PV.6235

The report also shows that Iran has continued to
ignore the Agency’s crucial questions over its
weaponization activities. The report states that the
Agency is also still awaiting Iran’s response to its
repeated requests for access to persons, information
and locations identified in the alleged studies
documents. The report concludes again that, until those
issues are clarified and until Iran implements the
additional protocol, the Agency will not be in a
position to provide credible assurance about the
absence of undeclared nuclear activities by Iran.
Iran’s refusal to respond positively to the IAEA’s
proposed agreement on the provision of fuel to the
Tehran nuclear research reactor is also disappointing.
The deal offered a fair, viable and transparent means of
meeting Iran’s needs. It would have improved the
prospects for a successful negotiation with Iran.
Instead, Iran has shown once again its unwillingness to
engage seriously with the international community.
That proposed agreement showed that the
international community does not wish to deny Iran its
right to civil nuclear power. We would support its
development of peaceful nuclear energy providing that
it meets its international obligations, and the generous
E3+3 offer contains everything that Iran needs to
pursue a modern civil nuclear power programme,
which it claims is its aim.
However, Iran has taken every opportunity to
delay and protract our efforts to reach agreement on
that issue. The only reasonable conclusion that can be
drawn is that its responses are calculated to buy time
and to try to divide the international community.
The IAEA Board of Governors voted
overwhelmingly to support the IAEA in its efforts to
get answers to important questions. The vote sent a

8

strong signal to Tehran. Iran’s response was to
announce the construction of even more enrichment
facilities, to threaten to cease contact with the IAEA
and to speculate about leaving the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Instead of
engaging with us, Iran chooses to provoke and
dissemble. Iran can flaunt its isolation, but that will
only increase the determination and unity of the
international community. I urge Iran to recognize that
and to accept the outstretched hand that is on offer.
We need to dissuade Iran from continuing to
develop and acquire proliferation-sensitive technology
and materials. That risks sparking a regional nuclear
arms race. In a region that already faces huge security
challenges, nuclear proliferation would be disastrous
for regional stability.
The international community has been very
patient, but that patience is running out. If Iran
continues to choose not to engage with us, we shall
need to seek further sanctions. Our dual-track strategy
will continue. It involves pressure to encourage the
Iranians to comply and to negotiate seriously, at the
same time as engagement to allow negotiations to
begin when the Iranians are prepared to take the E3+3
offer seriously.
We are 100 per cent committed to solving those
issues diplomatically. We hope that Iran’s leaders are
too, but ultimately that is a choice that only they can
make.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

09-64217
