A/75/195–S/2020/834

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
25 August 2020
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-fifth session
Agenda items 36 and 37 of the provisional agenda*

Security Council
Seventy-fifth year

The situation in the Middle East
Question of Palestine

Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report is submitted in accordance with the request of the General
Assembly in paragraph 15 of its resolution 74/11. The report, which covers the period
from September 2019 to August 2020, contains replies received from the parties
concerned to the note verbale sent by the Secretary-General pursuant to the request
contained in resolution 74/11, as well as the observations of the Secretary-General on
the current state of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and on international efforts to move
the peace process forward, with a view to achieving a peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine.

* A/75/150.

20-11062 (E)

020920

*2011062*

A/75/195
S/2020/834

I. Introduction
1.

The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 74/11.

2.
On 2 July 2020, pursuant to the request contained in paragraph 15 of resolution
74/11, I addressed the following letter to the President of the Security Council:
“I have the honour to refer to resolution 74/11, which the General
Assembly adopted on 3 December 2019, at its seventy-fourth session, under the
agenda item ‘Question of Palestine’.
“Paragraph 15 of the resolution requests the Secretary -General, including
through his Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative to the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority, to continue his efforts with the parties concerned, and in consultation
with the Security Council, including with regard to the reporting required
pursuant to resolution 2334 (2016), towards the attainment of a peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine and the promotion of peace in the region
and to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session a report on
these efforts and on developments on this matter.
“In order to fulfil my reporting responsibilities under this resolution, I
should be grateful if you would kindly convey to me the views of the Security
Council by 20 July 2020.”
3.

As at 15 August 2020, no response to that request had been received.

4.
In a note verbale dated 22 May 2020, I sought the positions of States Members
of the United Nations, in particular the Governments of Egypt, Israel, Jordan,
Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the State of Palestine, rega rding
any steps taken by them to implement the relevant provisions of the resolution. As at
15 August 2020, replies had been received from Israel, Namibia, the Philippines,
Qatar and the Permanent Observer Mission of the State of Palestine.
5.
The note verbale dated 29 May 2020 from the Permanent Observer Mission of
the State of Palestine to the United Nations reads as follows:
“For decades, the General Assembly has affirmed its authoritative stance
on the question of Palestine by adoption of its annual re solution ‘Peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine’, most recently resolution 74/11. The
provisions and principles reaffirmed therein reflect the fundamental parameters
for achieving a just solution. Overwhelming support for the resolution confirms
the long-standing international consensus in this regard.
“At its seventy-fourth session, the Assembly’s debate was again
characterized by calls for ending the Israeli occupation that began in 1967;
realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including to self determination and independence; and responsible international action to justly
resolve the Palestine question in all aspects, in accordance with international
law, the relevant resolutions and the permanent responsibility of the United
Nations, which remains unfulfilled since the adoption of resolution 181 (II)
(1947) and the decision to partition Mandate Palestine, the consequen ces of
which persist to this day.
“The international community reaffirmed its resolve to end the Israeli Palestinian conflict through actualization of the two -State solution of Palestine
and Israel, living side by side in peace and security within recogni zed borders
based on the pre-1967 borders, based on international law, United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, and a just
solution for the Palestine refugee question based on resolution 194 (III).
2/16

20-11062

A/75/195
S/2020/834

Moreover, near-unanimous support was reaffirmed for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and the
imperative to ensure continuity of its vital assistance to over 5.6 mi llion
Palestine refugees in the Agency’s fields of operation in Jordan, Lebanon, Syria
and the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, pending
achievement of a just solution.
“Palestine is grateful for such principled positions by the gl obal majority.
Yet, the passage of time and compounding of the conflict show starkly that
statements and resolutions alone cannot end this historic injustice and the grave
violations and hardships that the Palestinian people continue to endure, nor will
they prevent Israel, the occupying Power, from further advancing its illegal
colonial ambitions. Only concrete action to uphold international law, implement
those resolutions and hold Israel accountable for its violations can change this
dismal equation.
“After 53 years of Israel’s occupation and 72 years of the dispossession,
displacement and oppression of Palestinians in an ongoing Nakba since 1948,
collective, practical efforts are urgently needed to implement resolution 74/11
and all relevant resolutions. Otherwise, the occupying Power will continue
flouting the law, violating human rights and solidifying its illegal occupation,
eroding the two-State solution and entrenching a one-State reality of apartheid,
with grave consequences for the prospects for a peaceful settlement.
“Since the adoption of resolution 74/11, Israeli violations have only
escalated, as have provocative declarations by Israeli officials of plans to
commit more crimes in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem, including threats to annex parts or all of the West Bank, beginning
with the illegal settlements and the Jordan Valley, in flagrant breach of the
Charter prohibition on the acquisition of territory by force. Whereas the
international community calls for the complete, immediate cessation and
reversal of settlement activities, Israel instead aggressively pursues such illegal
actions. This includes plans for the construction of thousa nds more settlement
units, particularly in areas in and around Occupied East Jerusalem and
Bethlehem, including in the sensitive so-called ‘E-1’ area; construction of the
Wall; confiscation of large parcels of land and exploitation of natural resources;
demolition of hundreds more Palestinian homes and properties; and forced
displacement of thousands more Palestinians, further fragmenting the contiguity
of the Palestinian territory and destroying the viability of the two -State solution.
“Israel’s Prime Minister, right-wing Israeli officials and extremists are
escalating their annexation push. Calls for annexation of all or parts of the West
Bank have shockingly become commonplace, including as fodder in Israel’s
election campaigns in 2019–2020. Many politicians openly declare intent to
destroy the two-State solution and obstruct the Palestinian right to self determination. Such actions further confirm Israel’s rejection of the peace that
the Palestinian leadership remains committed to achieving, alongside th e rest of
the international community, and undermine efforts by regional and
international partners to foster the conditions and political horizon for its
achievement.
“These developments are not occurring in a vacuum. Israel’s hostile
rhetoric and annexation measures reveal how far it has been emboldened by the
lack of accountability for its crimes and a permissive political environment,
particularly under the current United States administration, which offers
unbridled support for Israel and its occupation while acting punitively against
the Palestinian people and leadership.
20-11062

3/16

A/75/195
S/2020/834

“The Israeli non-governmental organization Peace Now estimates that,
since President Donald Trump took office, Israel’s average annual settlement
construction rate has risen by 25 per cent. His administration’s support has
extended to declaring that it does not consider settlements illegal under
international law; unilaterally declaring Jerusalem as Israel’s capital on
6 December 2017 and transferring its embassy to the city; and ref using to
acknowledge Israel’s presence in Palestinian territory as an occupation,
contravening the law, United Nations resolutions and global consensus on the
two-State solution on the 1967 lines.
“Regrettably, these moves were followed, on 28 January 2020, by
President Trump’s presentation of a ‘plan’ to resolve the Israeli -Palestinian
conflict that departs from the internationally endorsed terms of reference and
parameters for a just, comprehensive and lasting solution and dismisses the rule
of law and the Palestinian people’s inalienable rights. The United States
Ambassador to Israel is even now heading a joint United States-Israel
‘Committee’ to ‘map out’ areas of the Occupied West Bank slated for illegal
annexation. This plan thus attempts to legitimize Israel’s illegal occupation and
colonization of Palestinian land, deeming crimes such as the settlements, the
wall and the forced displacement of thousands of Palestinians as mere ‘realities’
that must be accepted; endorses Israel’s illegal annexation of Occupied East
Jerusalem; and validates further annexation schemes, effectively dismantling
the two-State solution and turning the rules-based order on its head.
“This plan has rightly been rejected by the international community. This
was reflected in statements issued by many capitals and in the 11 February 2020
meeting of the Security Council, which was addressed by President Mahmoud
Abbas, who reaffirmed Palestine’s commitment to the terms of reference and
parameters of a just solution, in line with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. This position,
consistent with the provisions and principles enshrined in resolution 74/11, is
starkly contrasted by the combative positions and illegal practices of Israel, the
occupying Power, which continues violating resolution 74/11 and all relevant
resolutions, gravely breaching the Fourth Geneva Convention and d isparaging
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the entire international
community, ridiculing efforts to uphold the law vis-à-vis the conflict.
“Israel clearly perceives the Trump plan as a green light for its
annexationist agenda. Settlement plans in and around East Jerusalem previously
frozen due to international pressure have been boastfully relaunched, as the
Israeli government exploits the circumstances – whether international inaction
or distraction due to the grave challenges of the coron avirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic – to move forward with these illegal schemes. Extremist
Israeli settlers have equally been emboldened, demanding full annexation of the
West Bank, seizing Palestinian land and escalating attacks against Palestinian
civilians.
“Against this backdrop, Israel continues its military operations and raids,
wilfully killing and injuring Palestinian civilians; detention and imprisonment
of thousands of civilians, including children; restrictions on movement and
other fundamental freedoms and rights, including to education, health care,
worship, development and water; imposition of a 13-year blockade on Gaza,
isolating and collectively punishing the 2 million Palestinians under
humanitarian conditions deemed to be dire, if not inhu man and unliveable;
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric on Jerusalem and provocations against
Muslim and Christian holy sites, particularly targeting Haram al-Sharif and
violating the historic status quo.
4/16

20-11062

A/75/195
S/2020/834

“Absent tangible steps by the international community to hold Israel
accountable, such actions have further hardened the political deadlock,
undermined peace prospects and deepened despair among Palestinians,
diminishing belief that a just solution can be found and that the international
community will live up to its responsibilities to assist them in attaining their
inalienable rights, foremost their erga omnes right to self-determination.
“Despite this dismal reality, the Palestinian leadership remains committed
to the path of peace and international law as the guarantor of justice. This
includes a firm commitment to non-violence and the pursuit of peaceful,
political, diplomatic, legal and popular means to realize the Palestinian people’s
rights and a sustainable solution that would ensure peaceful coexistence and
security. The Palestinian commitment to the two-State solution on the pre-1967
borders based on international law and all relevant United Nations resolutions
has been repeatedly reaffirmed, including at the highest levels by President
Abbas and the Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
“For over 30 years, Palestine’s position has mirrored the global consensus
on the two-State solution. This began with the Palestine National Council’s
acceptance of the solution in the 1988 Declaration of Independence, a major
compromise agreeing to establish the Palestinian State on only 22 per cent of
our historic homeland, for the sake of realizing Palestinian rights and
establishing lasting peace. This compromise remains the primary te stament of
our commitment to peace and, with the Arab Peace Initiative, the boldest
contribution to solving the conflict.
“This commitment is reinforced by our abiding pledge to respect the
Charter, international law and the relevant United Nations resolu tions, as
confirmed, inter alia, in the 28 September 2011 application by the State of
Palestine for admission to United Nations membership; in Palestine’s accession
to international treaties and conventions; in Palestine’s official communications
and interventions at the United Nations; in relevant provisions of declarations
by the League of Arab States, the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the Group of 77 and China; and
in the 2019 chairmanship of the State of Palestine of the Group of 77, which
reaffirmed its adherence to multilateralism and the core principles of
international development, peace and stability.
“Palestine has consistently striven to uphold United Nations resolutions
and urged the international community to fulfil its obligations and demand
compliance towards tangibly contributing to de-escalating tensions, protecting
civilian life, reversing negative trends on the ground and advancing peace
prospects. Despite significant setbacks and Israel’s persistent bad faith,
Palestine’s leadership has cooperated with all credible international and regional
efforts for nearly three decades, beginning with the Madrid Peace Conference
in 1991, to the Oslo Process that began in 1993, to every negotiation proces s
thereafter, engaging in good faith and respecting the long-standing parameters
of a just solution, as reflected in resolution 74/11.
“For the sake of peace, Palestine’s leadership also engaged with the c urrent
United States administration from the start, affirming readiness to partake in
negotiations, until the December 2017 decision by President Trump on
Jerusalem and the subsequent transfer of the United States embassy to the city,
in violation of United Nations resolutions. The United States administration’s
so-called ‘peace to prosperity’ plan, which contradicts the global consensus and
the fundamental legal principles underpinning it, has further hampered efforts

20-11062

5/16

A/75/195
S/2020/834

to create conditions conducive to meaningful negotiations and undermined the
United States role as a credible, impartial peace broker.
“The State of Palestine stresses that peace cannot be achieved without
restoring the primacy of international law to efforts to resolve the conflict,
including all final status issues – Jerusalem, Palestine refugees, settlements,
borders, security, prisoners and water. Unlawful imposition of facts on the
ground will never create peace. As affirmed in the Secretary -General’s agenda,
peaceful resolution of conflicts requires a human rights, justice and
development perspective, not just a security perspective, and the root causes of
the conflict must be fully, properly addressed.
“Palestine does not seek anything beyond what we are entitled to as a
people, as per international law, as legislated in United Nations resolutions and
affirmed in the July 2004 advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
We will accept nothing less.
“It is for this reason that we, along with the vast majority of the
international community, rejected the United States plan as unacceptable as a
basis for peace and only prolonging the conflict and injustice. This message was
conveyed by President Abbas in his address to the Security Council and echoed
by nearly all Council members, who reaffirmed the global consensus on the
established terms of reference and parameters for a just solution. President
Abbas has reiterated the call for a multilateral process in the form of an
international peace conference to achieve a just solution, and we have
continually prioritized peace efforts in all engagements with regional and
international partners, bilaterally and multilaterally.
“In this regard, we have consistently engaged with the Security Council
members and Quartet members – the Russian Federation, the European Union,
the United States and the United Nations – individually and collectively,
appealing for respect of obligations and exertion of serious efforts, in
cooperation with the League of Arab States and with the vital support of OIC,
NAM and all peace-loving nations, with the latest communications with the
Quartet members conveyed in May 2020, yet to no avail. We have also fully
adhered to the Arab Peace Initiative and continue to call for its reciprocation
and implementation.
“Palestine also continues efforts to confront the occupation’s
humanitarian, socioeconomic and security consequences to prevent further
destabilization and preserve peace prospects. We seek to serve the needs of our
people, including in health care and education, alleviate hardships, ensure calm
and security, promote reconciliation and restore hope that the occupation will
end, that rights and dignity will be realized and that a better, peaceful future is
within reach. Such hope is critical for shoring up public support for peace efforts
and for countering the extremism plaguing the region, especially among youth.
“These efforts are being undertaken in cooperation with international
partners and with their solidarity and generous support to Palestine, its national
institutions and civil society, and with United Nations agencies that are
providing vital assistance to the Palestinian people, including the Palestine
refugees. UNRWA, along with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Office of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary -General to the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and other humanitarian organizations,
6/16

20-11062

A/75/195
S/2020/834

along with the United Nations Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People and the Division for Palestinian Rights, has
been instrumental in assisting the Palestinian people in line with international
humanitarian law and the Palestinian National Development Plan and the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework. The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to Palestinians also remains
highly relevant in this regard.
“At this time, such efforts have regrettably been complicated by the
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and the additional vulnerability and needs
it has imposed and by the occupation’s illegal practices undermining these
efforts. Moreover, while Palestine supports the Secretary-General’s responsible
call for a global ceasefire, Israel has regrettably ignored i t, exploiting this time
of pandemic to instead advance its illegal plans to annex more Palestinian land.
“Palestine also continues to underscore the obligation to ensure the
protection of civilians, an obligation being grossly and systematically violated
by Israel. The Palestinian civilian population under its occupation and blockade
is in need of protection, as per the Fourth Geneva Convention and international
human rights law and resolutions concerning the safety and well-being of
civilians in all situations of armed conflict. Protection measures contribute to
peace efforts; they do not detract from them.
“Yet, beyond alleviating the human suffering and insecurity caused by this
situation, action must be taken to bring an end to this travesty of justice . Despite
all good-faith intentions, the international community is failing to fulfil its legal,
political and moral obligations in the face of Israel’s total disrespect of the law.
It is high time to mobilize the political will to implement the United Nat ions
resolutions central to achievement of a peace settlement and to enact measures
to compel Israel’s compliance.
“While Israel’s disrespect for the law and contempt for the Security
Council’s authority are central to this failure, so is the paralysis ca used by use
of the veto by one permanent member. The prospect of a peaceful future for the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples will remain elusive as long as the occupying
Power is shielded from accountability, even as it breaches the law and destroys
the two-State solution.
“It is time for accountability measures, including by the Security Council
and the General Assembly, and concrete action by States to uphold third -party
obligations, in line with article 1 common to the Geneva Conventions, Security
Council resolution 2334 (2016) and all other relevant provisions of international
law and United Nations resolutions. This is also vital for restoring the credibility
of the United Nations and the authority of the international rules-based order,
which is under threat.
“The 12 February publication of a database of businesses engaged in
Israeli settlements by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), as mandated by the Human Rights Council, was a
recent step in the right direction. It is also hoped that accountability efforts being
pursued by the State of Palestine at the International Criminal Court will soon
lead to an official investigation towards bringing perpetrators to justice,
deterring further war crimes and paving the path for a just solution.
“It must be clearly signalled to Israel that its continued defiance will not
be tolerated and that it must halt all violations or bear the consequences. This is
critical for fostering an environment conducive to the credible dialogue and
efforts needed to bring an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967; to
20-11062

7/16

A/75/195
S/2020/834

help the Palestinian people finally realize freedom and the independence of the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital; and to establish lasting
peace, security and coexistence between the Palestinian and Israeli peoples on
the basis of the two-State solution and in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including resolution 74/11.”
6.
The note verbale dated 29 July 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Israel to the United Nations reads as follows:
“Even before Israel declared its independence, its people sought to live in
peace beside their Arab neighbours. This vision of a shared future was reflected
in the Jewish people’s embracement of multiple endeavours, such as the Balfour
Declaration (1917), the Royal Commission of Inquiry to Palestine (1936) and
the Palestine Plan of Partition (1947). Since declaring independence, Israel has
maintained a pragmatic and constructive posture, paving the way for the signing
of historical peace agreements with Egypt in 1979 and Jordan in 1994.
“Unfortunately, the Israeli approach, which led to the normalization of
relations with two neighbours, has been met with repeated refusal by the
Palestinians, accompanied by surges of violence and terrorism against Israeli
civilians, many times with the implicit support of the Palestinian leadership.
This aforementioned Palestinian support for violence is well documented and
includes the financing of terrorist activities, the use of violent rhetoric by leaders
and the indoctrination to hatred in its education system.
“Since the adoption of resolution 74/11 in December last year, two major
events have transpired, affecting the global and regional landscape – the
outbreak of COVID-19 and the unveiling of President Trump’s peace initiative.
These events, though distinct in nature and impact, have perfectly exemplified
the tragic situation highlighted in the above paragraph, in which Israel faces
outright Palestinian ‘rejectionism’.
“Following the outbreak of COVID-19, Israel tightened and strengthened
its humanitarian and medical cooperation with the Palestinian Authority and
relevant United Nations agencies in order to mitigate the effects of the
COVID-19 outbreak. This unique cooperation was welcomed by the
international community, the Security Council and relevant United Nations
officials. However, the Palestinian Authority has chosen not only to minimize
this achievement, but also to politicize the issue in a bid to delegitimize and
demonize Israel.
“President Trump’s peace initiative, presented on 28 Januar y 2020,
presented another historic opportunity to revitalize Israeli -Palestinian
negotiations. The plan was repeatedly referred to, by both American and allied
countries, as a valuable starting point and guideline for peace talks, and was
embraced as such by Israel. Unsurprisingly, the Palestinian Authority chose to
reject it and has since embarked on an international campaign to counter any
deliberations or follow-ups regarding the initiative. This latest rejection by the
Palestinian Authority to begin negotiations highlights its unwillingness to break
the deadlock on the Israel-Palestinian conflict.
“The ongoing attempts by the Palestinian Authority to internationalize the
conflict by calling on international institutions for recognition and promoting
one-sided resolutions, such as resolution 74/11, is yet another attempt to avoid
direct negotiations while maintaining legitimacy. Security Council resolution
2334 (2016), which Israel rejects, is another example. The resolution is
unreservedly hostile towards Israel and will only make peace harder to achieve.

8/16

20-11062

A/75/195
S/2020/834

“The Palestinian Authority’s refusal to negotiate is accompanied by its
refusal to recognize Israel as a Jewish state – based, inter alia, on its continued
denial of any historical connection between the Jewish people and its land,
which remains one of the main obstacles to peace.
“Israel continues to extend its hand in peace and believes that the co nflict
will be resolved only through direct bilateral negotiations without
preconditions. Attempts to impose solutions or to dictate parameters and
timetables will only drive peace farther away.
“If the international community wishes to support a solution to the IsraelPalestinian conflict, it must reject the Palestinian Authority’s attempts to avoid
negotiations by internationalizing the conflict and encourage the Authority to
come to the negotiating table. It must also echo Israel’s right to exist in pea ce
as the nation State of the Jewish people and oppose any attempt to undermine
Israel’s legitimacy.”

II. Developments
7.
International efforts to promote the peaceful settlement of the question of
Palestine continued during the reporting period. The envoys of the Middle East
Quartet (the Russian Federation, the United States of America, the European Union
and the United Nations) consulted one another informally throughout the year and,
on 26 March and 22 May, held conference calls to discuss the prospect of IsraeliPalestinian peace. The United Nations reaffirmed its commitment to achieving a
negotiated two-State solution, in line with relevant United Nations resolutions,
international law and bilateral agreements, and reiterated its call t o all stakeholders
to refrain from any unilateral action that harms the prospects of meaningful
negotiations and peace. Discussions are ongoing, notwithstanding substantial
differences among Quartet members regarding the way forward.
8.
On 28 January, the United States released its proposal entitled “Peace to
prosperity: a vision to improve the lives of the Palestinian and Israeli people”. Senior
Israeli officials welcomed the proposal, saying that they would be willing to use it as
the basis for direct negotiations. The Palestinian Government has rejected the
proposal. The League of Arab States and OIC also released statements rejecting the
proposal, saying that it did not meet the minimum rights and aspirations of the
Palestinian people. The High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy said that the proposal departed from “internationally
agreed parameters”. Some Member States expressed their hope that the release of the
vision would be an opportunity to bring the partie s back to the negotiating table, in
the interest of advancing a two-State solution.
9.
Throughout the reporting period, Israeli officials continued to make statements
regarding the potential annexation of parts of the occupied West Bank. On
10 September 2019, the Prime Minister of Israel declared his intention, if re -elected,
to “apply Israeli sovereignty over the Jordan Valley and the northern Dead Sea” as a
first step towards applying Israeli sovereignty over “settlements in Judea and
Samaria, as well as additional areas with significance for [the country’s] security,
heritage and future”. Following the release by the United States of its vision, senior
Israeli officials vowed to unilaterally annex large portions of the West Bank, including
all Israeli settlements and the Jordan Valley. On 17 May 2020, a new emergency
national unity Government was sworn into office in Israel following a year of political
uncertainty that included three general elections. The new coalition Government was
formed on the basis of an agreement signed on 20 April, which stipulates that, from
1 July, and following consultation with the Alternate Prime Minister, the Prime
20-11062

9/16

A/75/195
S/2020/834

Minister of Israel can present “the agreement to be reached with the United States on
the application of sovereignty” over parts of the occupied West Bank for approval in
the Government or Knesset. The agreement also calls for the promotion of peace
agreements with the country’s neighbours and regional cooperation. On 13 August,
Israel, the United Arab Emirates and the United States issued a joint statement
announcing “the full normalization of relations between Israel and the United Arab
Emirates” and stating that “Israel will suspend declaring sovereignty over areas
outlined in the [United States] President’s vision for peace”.
10. On 19 May, in response to the stated intentions of the Government of Israel to
annex parts of the occupied West Bank, the Palestinian Authority announced that it
considered itself absolved “of all the agreements and understandings with th e
American and Israeli Governments and of all the obligations based on these
understandings and agreements, including the security ones” and called upon Israel
to assume its obligations as the occupying Power. In the statement, the President of
the State of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas, also reaffirmed the Palestinian “commitment
to a solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict based on the two-State solution … on
the condition that negotiations will be held to achieve that under international
auspices (the Quartet plus) and through an international peace conference based on
international legitimacy”. He reaffirmed the Palestinian leadership’s willingness to
“achieve a just and comprehensive peace”, on basis of the Arab Peace Initiative and
United Nations resolutions, including Security Council resolution 2334 (2016). On
20 May, the Palestinian Prime Minister instructed Cabinet members to immediately
commence implementation of the Palestinian leadership’s an nouncement, while
making assurances that the Palestinian Authority would not allow security to
deteriorate. On the same day, Palestinian officials formally notified Israeli
counterparts of the termination of security coordination. On 3 June, the Palestinia n
Authority announced that it would refuse to receive the clearance revenues that Israel
collects on its behalf under the Protocol on Economic Relations between the
Government of the State of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, as part
of the decision to disengage from bilateral agreements. The Palestinian leadership has
repeatedly stated its willingness to resume negotiations on the basis of international
resolutions, calling for the convening of an international peace conference.
11. In the period from 27 February to 17 March, the Russian Federation hosted a
series of bilateral discussions with representatives of various Palestinian factions. On
2 July, leaders from Fatah and Hamas held a rare joint video press conference in an
effort to set aside their differences and commit themselves to a unified Palestinian
front against annexation. Palestinian factions welcomed the move, hoping that it
would pave the way to advancing reconciliation. However, intra-Palestinian divisions
remain entrenched.
12. Against the backdrop of continued Israeli closures and the absence of a political
horizon, the security situation in Gaza remained volatile. However, there was a
significant decline in violence and the number of casualties compared with the two
preceding years, due largely to the end of the weekly protests and clashes along the
perimeter fence in late December and the overall maintenance of a fragile calm
between Israel and Hamas as a result of mediation efforts led by the United Nations
and Egypt. Overall, 49 Palestinians, including 13 children and 3 women, were killed
by Israeli security forces as a result of air strikes and during demonstrations, clashes,
security operations and other incidents, and 2,304 Palestinians were injured, including
some 434 by live ammunition. A total of 37 Israeli civilians were injured in attacks,
clashes and other incidents. In addition, one Israeli woman died on 17 September as
a result of wounds that she sustained when a rocket hit her house in the town of
Ashqelon on 12 November 2018.

10/16

20-11062

A/75/195
S/2020/834

13. On 1 November 2019, 10 rockets were launched from Gaza towards Israel, 1 of
which hit a house in Sderot, causing damage but no injuries. In response, the Israel
Defense Forces targeted what they identified as various Hamas military site s across
Gaza. One Palestinian militant was killed and two others were injured.
14. Over a 48-hour period of escalation, from 12 to 14 November, following the
targeted killing by Israel of a commander of Palestinian Islamic Jihad in Gaza,
Palestinian Islamic Jihad launched more than 500 rockets towards Israel. According
to the Israel Defense Forces, the interception rate by the Iron Dome system was 90 per
cent, while some rockets landed in Israeli towns and cities, causing property damage.
Shelters across large parts of the country were activated, schools and businesses
remained closed for at least a day, and 78 Israelis were treated for injuries or shock.
In response, the Israel Defense Forces conducted a number of strikes against what
they identified as Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other militant targets in Gaza, killing
33 Palestinians, including 3 women and 8 children, and injuring 109 others, including
51 children and 11 women. Approximately 25 of those killed were identified by the
Israel Defense Forces as Palestinian Islamic Jihad militants. Eight members of a
family, including five children, were killed in a single Israeli strike in Dayr al -Balah.
Another family member succumbed to his wounds a few days later. In addition, one
Palestinian was reportedly killed by a rocket launched by Palestinian Islamic Jihad
that had fallen short inside Gaza. Following an intense mediation effort, calm in Gaza
was restored.
15. The situation escalated briefly again on 26 November, when two rockets were
fired by Palestinian militants towards Israel. According to the Israel Defense Forces,
one rocket was intercepted by the Iron Dome system and the other landed in an open
area in southern Israel. In response, the Israel Defense Forces struck a number of what
they identified as militant targets in Gaza. No injuries were reported.
16. On 23 February 2020, two Palestinian Islamic Jihad militants attempted to place
an explosive device along the fence. One was killed by the Israel Defense Forces,
who retrieved his body using a bulldozer inside Gaza and withheld it in an incident
that caused outrage and a serious escalation. In the following two days, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad launched over 100 rockets and mortar shells towards Israel, including
one that landed in a playground. Israel responded by firing at what it identified as
Palestinian Islamic Jihad targets in the Gaza Strip. Overall, 18 Palestinians and 16
Israelis were injured in the exchanges before mediation efforts succeeded in restoring
calm on 24 February.
17. On 27 March and 6 May, Palestinian militants launched one and two rockets,
respectively, which landed in open areas of Israel. In response, the Israel Defense
Forces fired nine tank shells, reportedly targeting an alleged military observation post
in Gaza. Israeli drones furthermore fired three missiles reportedly targeting Hamas
military sites in Gaza. No injuries were reported.
18. Over several days in mid-August, Palestinian militants launched incendiary
balloons and rockets from Gaza, which caused fires and m aterial damage in southern
Israel. In response, the Israel Defense Forces targeted what they identified as Hamas
military targets in the Gaza Strip. No injuries were reported. However, damages were
reported to UNRWA schools in Bayt Hanun and near Gaza City. In response to the
incendiary balloons, Israel also shut the Gaza fishing zone and closed down the
Kerem Shalom crossing, including for fuel, prompting the halt of the Gaza power
station and bringing electricity supply down to three to four hours per day.
19. During the reporting period, in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, 22 Palestinians were shot and killed, including 1 woman, and 3,802
Palestinians were injured, including 801 children, by Israeli security forces during
demonstrations, clashes, security operations and other incidents. In addition, a woman
20-11062

11/16

A/75/195
S/2020/834

was killed during a search-and-arrest operation in Janin city in still unclear
circumstances. Some 60 Israelis, including 16 members of the Israeli security forces,
were also injured, according to Israeli sources.
20. In East Jerusalem, the situation remained relatively tense, with violent incidents,
protests, operations by Israeli security forces, arrests by Israeli police of Palestinian
officials and clashes between them and Palestinian residents, in particular in the
Isawiyah neighbourhood and in the Old City. On 6 February, a Palestinian shot and
wounded an Israeli soldier at the Lion’s Gate in the Old City, and on 22 February,
another Palestinian reportedly carried out a stabbing att ack in the same place. Both
were killed by Israeli security forces. On 30 May, Israeli security forces shot and
killed an unarmed autistic 31-year-old Palestinian man in the Old City. Senior Israeli
officials expressed regret over the incident, and an inte rnal investigation into the
killing was opened. During the reporting period, the Palestinian Authority Minister
of Jerusalem Affairs and the Palestinian Authority Governor of Jerusalem were
detained several times and interrogated over allegations of violating an Israeli law
prohibiting Palestinian Authority activities in Jerusalem without coordination.
21. On 12 May, the Israeli authorities approved the seizure of municipal planning
authority at the Ibrahimi Mosque/Tomb of the Patriarchs from the Palestinia n
Municipality in Hebron. The Israeli authorities justified the decision as necessary in
order to make the site accessible to those with disabilities, while stating that the
project “will not change prayer arrangements or the status quo”. The Palestinian
leadership, the Hebron Municipality, the Waqf and the Islamic authorities, among
others, have condemned this move, arguing that it violates the 1997 Protocol
concerning the Redeployment in Hebron.
22. Throughout the reporting period, the Israel Defense Forces continued to conduct
search and arrest operations and to detain Palestinians, including children. The
Palestinian Authority continued its arrests of suspected Hamas affiliates in the West
Bank, and the de facto authorities in Gaza summoned and, in some cases, detained
Fatah affiliates in Gaza. At the end of June 2020, at least 357 Palestinians, including
2 children and 1 woman, were being held by Israeli authorities under administrative
detention. OHCHR has raised serious concerns over the legality of th e detentions, fair
trial standards and the risk of ill-treatment in and outside detention.
23. In a statement released on 20 December 2019, the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court announced that the Court’s preliminary examination into the Situa tion
in Palestine “has concluded with the determination that all the statutory criteria under
the Rome Statute for the opening of an investigation have been met”. She expressed
her view that, among other things, “war crimes have been or are being committed in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip”. She also stated her
position that the Court’s jurisdiction applies to the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
She nonetheless sought a ruling from the Pre-Trial Chamber on the territorial scope
of the Court’s jurisdiction in the situation in hand. The Court adjourned in July
without a decision on this point.
24. During the reporting period, Israeli authorities advanced or approved some
8,000 housing units in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, marking a
decrease compared with some 12,000 units during the previous reporting period.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned structures also continued across the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. As at 15 August, citing th e absence
of Israeli-issued building permits, which remain almost impossible for Palestinians to
obtain, Israeli authorities demolished or seized 593 structures, resulting in the
displacement of 687 people, including 347 children and 177 women, and leaving
about 18,860 others affected. A further 73 structures were demolished by their
owners, leaving 238 people displaced, including 122 children and 55 women.
12/16

20-11062

A/75/195
S/2020/834

Demolitions and seizures continued despite the COVID-19 outbreak and some
indications from Israeli authorities of a temporary freeze on the demolition of
inhabited buildings in the light of the pandemic. During the Muslim holy month of
Ramadan, 42 structures were demolished, which is a significant increase compared
with previous years (13 in 2019; one in 2018; none in 2017). Israeli authorities also
demolished structures and homes built by settlers in unauthorized settlement outposts.
25. On 12 November 2019, the Court of Justice of the European Union issued a
ruling determining that “foodstuffs originating in the territories occupied by the State
of Israel must bear the indication of their territory of origin, accompanied, where
those foodstuffs come from an Israeli settlement within that territory, by the indication
of that provenance”, in order for the indication of origin to be correct and not
misleading for the consumer. On 12 February 2020, OHCHR issued a report on the
database of all businesses involved in activities related to settlements in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory (A/HRC/43/71), as requested by the Human Rights Council in
its resolution 31/36, adopted on 24 March 2016. As noted in paragraph 19 of the
report, the work done by OHCHR to produce the database “does not purport to
constitute a judicial or quasi-judicial process of any kind or to provide any legal
characterization of the listed activities or business enterprises’ involvement in them”.
Proceedings are ongoing in the Federal Court of Canada related to the labelling of
products originating in Israel and the territories occupied since 1967.
26. During the reporting period, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs recorded 80 violent incidents involving Israeli settl ers, resulting in 139
Palestinians injured, including 14 women, and property damage. In the same period,
according to Israeli sources, 44 Israelis, including 10 women, were injured as a result
of stone throwing, the use of live ammunition and stabbing atta cks. A high number of
incidents were also recorded in relation to the olive and wheat harvesting season,
including the physical assault and harassment of Palestinian farmers by Israeli
settlers, as well as damage to thousands of olive trees and saplings an d dozens of
dunams of agricultural land.
27. In Gaza, the United Nations and its partners continued to implement the package
of urgent humanitarian and economic interventions endorsed by the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee in September 2018. With these efforts, the energy supply to households in
Gaza has significantly increased, and some improvements were felt in the economy.
Qatar funded the supply of fuel for the Gaza power plant, and the daily availability
of electricity more than doubled during the reporting period, leading in turn to an
increased supply of desalinated water and a significant reduction in the amounts of
untreated wastewater pumped into the sea.
28. During the reporting period, Palestinians faced immense socioeconomic impacts
from the COVID-19 pandemic, as did Israelis. Tens of thousands of Palestinians have
lost their jobs, small and medium-sized enterprises are unable to operate, and violence
against women and children has increased. Several expert analyses, including from
the World Bank, estimate that the Palestinian economy will contract by approximately
10 per cent in 2020, depending on the severity of the pandemic and the length of the
necessary shutdowns.
29. The COVID-19 pandemic has compounded the already dire humanitarian,
economic and political situation in Gaza. Recent job losses come on top of an already
high unemployment rate in Gaza of 45 per cent at the end of 2019. The fragile and
underfunded health-care system in Gaza is particularly worrying in the context of the
spread of COVID-19 in the region. Furthermore, Gaza is one of the most densely
populated areas in the world, which makes it a particularly high -risk case for the
COVID-19 pandemic. The United Nations is working to increase its support for the
health-care system in Gaza, including in the context of the COVID -19 response.
20-11062

13/16

A/75/195
S/2020/834

III. Observations
30. During the reporting period, I delivered four reports to the Security Council on
the implementation of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016) (S/PV.8625,
S/2019/938, S/2020/263 and S/2020/555), in which I expressed my concern regarding
the continued lack of implementation of the provisions of the resolution. In my
reports, I took note of international efforts and reiterated the commitment of the
United Nations to supporting Palestinians and Israelis to resolve the conflict and end
the occupation, in line with relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and
bilateral agreements, and to realizing the vision of two States – Israel and Palestine –
living side by side in peace and security within recognized borders on the basis of the
pre-1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
31. I welcome the suspension of the implementation of th e plans of Israel to annex
parts of the occupied West Bank in the context of the announcement by Israel, the
United Arab Emirates and the United States on 13 August regarding the normalization
of relations between Israel and the United Arab Emirates. This agreement will
hopefully create an opportunity for Israeli and Palestinian leaders to re -engage in
meaningful negotiations that will end the occupation and realize a two -State solution,
in line with relevant United Nations resolutions, international law an d bilateral
agreements. I have consistently called upon Israel to abandon its annexation plans.
Annexation would constitute a most serious violation of international law, including
the Charter of the United Nations. It would be devastating to the two -State solution
and threaten efforts to advance regional peace and broader efforts to maintain
international peace and security. Concern and opposition to annexation are
widespread and shared throughout the region and the international community.
32. The implementation of the announcement of 19 May by the Palestinian
leadership could alter local dynamics and trigger instability across the Occupied
Palestinian Territory and beyond. Particularly worrying is the decision to stop
accepting clearance revenues that Israel collects on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority. Combined with the fiscal impact of the COVID -19 pandemic, the lack of
clearance revenues has caused an overall reduction in Palestinian Authority revenues
of approximately 80 per cent. Given the economic uncertainty caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic and the reduced donor support, this decision contributes only
to the hardship of the Palestinian people and threatens the viability of Palestinian
institutions. The parties must quickly find a way out of the pre sent fiscal emergency.
Moreover, it is critical that humanitarian and other assistance not be delayed or
stopped as a result of such policies. In the longer term, however, modernizing the
outdated framework governing the Israeli and Palestinian economic an d
administrative relationships would be warranted.
33. Discussions on holding Palestinian general elections should continue. If held,
these would be the first since 2006, renewing the legitimacy of national institutions.
The international community should support this process, with a view to
strengthening national unity rather than division. It is critical that the important
Egyptian-led intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts also continue. The United
Nations stands firm in its support of the efforts by Egypt in this regard, and I call
upon all Palestinian factions to make serious efforts to ensure the reunification of
Gaza and the occupied West Bank under a single, democratic, national Government.
Gaza is and must remain an integral part of a future Pale stinian State as part of a twoState solution.
34. Reports of violent incidents throughout the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, remain of concern. I unequivocally condemn all attacks on Palestinian and
Israeli civilians and call upon all sides to refrain from violence and to clearly and

14/16

20-11062

A/75/195
S/2020/834

unequivocally condemn attacks when they occur. All perpetrators must be held
accountable for their crimes.
35. The dispute over the construction work planned by the Israeli authorities at the
Ibrahimi Mosque/Tomb of the Patriarchs in Hebron risks fuelling tensions in a highly
sensitive part of the occupied West Bank. Any changes to the delicate balance at holy
sites not agreed to by all stakeholders threaten stability and should not be taken
unilaterally. I urge both parties to resolve this issue through dialogue and in a
coordinated and respectful manner.
36. I reiterate the call for the status quo at the holy sites to be upheld in line with
the special and historical role of Jordan as custodian of the Muslim and Christian holy
sites in Jerusalem.
37. As stated in my reports to the Security Council on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), I continue to urge leaders on all sides to stop incitement and
to condemn, consistently and unequivocally, acts of terror and violence in all their
forms.
38. The general state of human rights and freedoms in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory remains of concern. I reiterate my earlier calls to end the practice of
administrative detention and either to charge all detainees or to release them
immediately. All children should be treated with due consideration for their age, and
they should be detained only in situations justified under applicable rules of
international humanitarian law and international or applicable human rights law.
39. I remain deeply troubled by the continued settlement activities in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. I reiterate that Israeli settlements in the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have no legal validity and constitute
a flagrant violation under international law. The establishment and expansion of
settlements fuel resentment, hopelessness and disillusionment among Palestinians,
are key drivers of human rights violations and significantly heighten IsraeliPalestinian tensions. They entrench the military occupation of Israel and undermine
the prospect of achieving a viable two-State solution by systematically eroding the
possibility of establishing a contiguous, independent and sovereign Palestinian State.
I urge the Government of Israel to stop the advancement of all settlement plans
immediately.
40. Continued settler-related violence in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, is of deep concern. I urge Israel, as the occupying Power, to ensure the
safety and security of the Palestinian population and to investigate and hold the
perpetrators of attacks accountable.
41. Despite the efforts of the United Nations and its partners to implement urgent
humanitarian and economic interventions in Gaza, the situation remains dire, and the
health system in Gaza remains on the brink of collapse. Despite some positive steps
by Israel in the reporting period, it is not possible to genuinely and sustainably
improve the socioeconomic situation without significantly easing restrictions on the
movement and access of goods and people to and from Gaza. It is critical for the
Palestinian Authority to increase the support to the health system in Gaza, in
particular in relation to COVID-19 response. The ultimate goal remains the lifting of
all restrictions in line with Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) and the
reunification of Gaza and the West Bank under a single, dem ocratic, national
Government. At the same time, it is crucial to ensure sustained calm in order to
gradually introduce longer-term projects that will support the development of Gaza.
I reiterate my call upon Hamas to provide full information regarding the Israeli
nationals who are being held in Gaza. I also remain deeply concerned at the continued
Israeli practice of holding the bodies of killed Palestinians and call upon Israel to
20-11062

15/16

A/75/195
S/2020/834

return withheld bodies to their families, in line with international humanit arian law
and human rights law.
42. The increased violence in Gaza and southern Israel precipitated by the launching
of incendiary balloons by Palestinian militants is of concern. The indiscriminate
launching of rockets and mortars towards Israeli civilian population centres is
prohibited by international humanitarian law and must cease immediately. Israeli
security forces have the responsibility to exercise maximum restraint and to use
intentional lethal force only when strictly unavoidable in order to pro tect life.
43. The impact on women of the ongoing humanitarian and economic crisis in Gaza
is of particular concern. The participation of women in the labour force in Gaza is
among the lowest in the world, and some 70 per cent of women are unemployed.
These poor employment prospects result in female-headed households facing greater
poverty and food insecurity. In turn, poverty and a lack of economic opportunities are
key factors driving violence against women in Gaza, while the humanitarian crisis
has resulted in a large number of health issues for women. The United Nations
continues to assist Palestinian women and girls across a broad range of areas, but
much more needs to be done to address their needs and vulnerabilities.
44. The United Nations response to COVID-19 in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory has been swift and effective and has directly supported the Palestinian
Government’s own efforts. The humanitarian country team’s inter-agency response
plan and the United Nations country team’s development system response plan, as
well as the Palestinian Government’s own response plans, urgently need donor
support. Israeli-Palestinian cooperation to respond and mitigate the impact of the
COVID-19 crisis in the Occupied Palestinian Territory during the first months of the
pandemic is commendable. It is critical that humanitarian and other assistance and
cooperation continue to address the current surge of infections.
45. The financial situation of UNRWA remained a serious concern during the
reporting period, with the lowest ever cash flow levels and a significant outstanding
funding shortfall. I applaud the leadership that Jordan and Sweden have shown in
mobilizing support for the Agency. I urge Member States to continue their support for
UNRWA, which is not only a lifeline for millions of Palestine refugees, but is also
critical for regional stability.
46. I would like to express my deep appreciation to my Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov, for his outstanding service in w hat
remains a challenging context. I am also grateful to the outgoing Commissioner General of UNRWA, Pierre Krähenbühl, and his successor, Philippe Lazzarini, and
for the remarkable work on behalf of Palestinian refugees carried out by the staff of
the Agency. I pay tribute, too, to all United Nations staff who work under difficult
circumstances in the service of the Organization.
47. I will continue to ensure that the United Nations works towards a resolution of
the conflict that would end the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and establish an
independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable Palestinian State living
side by side with Israel in peace, security and mutual recognition, with Jerusalem as
the capital of both States, within the framework of a comprehensive regional
settlement, consistent with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 425
(1978), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003), 1850 (2008), 1860 (2009) and 2334 (2016) and in
accordance with the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and international law.

16/16

20-11062
