UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
1
‘.

:
,.

.:

,

>,

I,
. .

,(
.)_!.

_

,

8

St

MEETING:

9 APRIL

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2351) . , , . . . , . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 April 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14959) . * , . , . * . . . . * . . , . , , . . . . . . . . *. . . . . * . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . ) . . . .

1

YPV.235 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .I are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Corrncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2351st MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
KAMANDA

Pw.sici~~nt:M~-.

wa KAMANDA

(Zaire).

with the Charter of the United Nations, the resolutions of the Security Council and relevant international instruments to save the lives of the three
men.”

Pws~17t:
The representatives ofthe following States:
China,
France, Guyana. Ireland. Japan, Jordan.
Panama. Poland. Spain. Togo, Uganda. Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics. United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. United States of America . Zui rc.

Provisional

Adoption

3k.

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/ 14959)
Tl7lT

i?7lYting

4. As I have said. that amendment is acceptable to
the sponsors. so the ttxt that I have just read out is
now operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution.
5_ . We have asked that this meeting be called for
purely humanitarian
reasons. to enable the Council to
help save the lives of three patriots by means of cr
simple and direct appeal addressed to the South
African authorities.

agenda (S/Agenda/2351)

I.

of the agenda

11'iiS

c~rrlll~ci

Adoption

to

or&r

trt

9 April 1982, at 3.30 p.m.

6. Last vVednesday. 7 April. we learned with deep
concern that the South African Court of Appeal had
confirmed the death sentences passed on 26 November 1980 by the Transvaal Division of the Supreme
Court on the three patriots. Ncimbithi Johnson Lubisi.
Petrus Tscpo Mashigo and Naphtali Manana. all of
whom are members of the African National Congress
of South Africa (ANC). The subject of the fate of these
three patriots is not a new one for the Council. Members will recall that on 5 February 1981 the President
of the Council issued a statement on behalf of the
Council expressing grave concern for the lives of the
three patriots [S//426/ ].

4JO p.177.

of the agenda

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 April 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14959)

7. As I have already said. we have asked for this
meeting to be held for purely humanitarian
reasons.
The draft resolution contained in document S/l4960
is very straightforward and focuses on a purely humanitarian concern. It has three essential elements: first.
in its third preambular paragraph the Council would
express the deep concern that the carrying out of the
death sentences would further aggravate the situation
in South Africa: secondly. in operative paragraph I
it would call upon the South African authorities to
commute the death sentences: and. thirdly, in operative paragraph 2 it would urge all States and organizations to use their influence and to take urgent measures in conformity
with the Charter of the United
Nations. resolutions of the Security Council and relevant international
instruments to save the lives of the
three men.

I.
The PRESIDENT
(intopi'ctotion
jTo177
Frcnt~h):
The Council is meeting in response to the request contained in a letter dated 8 April 1982 from the representative of Uganda addressed to the President of the
Council [S//4YSY].

2. Council members also have before them document S/14958. which contains the text of a letter dated
8 April from the representative of Uganda addressed
to the President of the Council. and document S/ 14960.
which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted
by Togo, Uganda and Zaire.
3. Mr. OTUNNU
(Uganda): First of all, I should
like to draw the attention of the members of the Council to an amendment which has been proposed and
which is acceptable to the sponsors of the draft resolution in document S/14960. It replaces operative
paragraph 2 by the following text:

8. On behalf of the delegations of Togo. Uganda and
Zaire and the Group of African States, on whose behalf
we speak. I wish to commend to the Council the draft
resolution which is before it. It is our hope that it will
be adopted unanimously.
This is literally a matter of
life and death for the three young patriots.

“UIXPJ all States and organizations to use their
influence and to take urgent measures in conformity
I

9. The PRESIDENT:
(i,ltcJ,pr.ctrrtio/? ,Jhn Fwm*k):
I take it that the Council is ready to vote. If there are
no objections. therefore. I shall put to the vote draft
resolution S/ 14960, as amended by the representative
of Uganda.

thorities of all the other States of the world. that executions and arbitrary sentences victimizing
South
African patriots will not succeed in stifling the aspirations of the South African people to exercise its right
to self-determination,
or its determination to regain its
fundamental rights and freedoms. in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations. In the view of the
Zaire delegation. such acts. motivated by deliberate
and unjustified offensive violence, can only provoke
in turn acts of defensive violence by a people that has
been left no other recourse, until power is transferred
to the South African black majority. For. quite obviously. the Africans of South Africa, like those elsewhere. will not let themselves be intimidated.

IO. The PRESIDENT
(i/7tc’/.l,/‘(Jtr/tion 3~~77 Fwm~h):
I shall now speak as representative of ZAIRE.
I I. On 5 February 198 1, after considering the letter
dated 28 November
1980 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representative of Senegal [S//4277], the Council authorized its President,
the representative of France. to appeal to the Government of South Africa to avoid aggravation of the
situation in that country and to take into account the
concern expressed by the international
community
for the lives of Mr. Johnson Lubisi. Mr. Naphtali
Mamma and Mr. Petrus Tsepo Mashigo. The text of
the statement by the President of the Council was
immediately
sent to the President of the Republic of
South Africa. It is regrettable that the Pretoria rkgime
rejected that appeal of the Council. that it did not
deem it fit to give the appeal the attention it deserved
and that consequently the Pretoria Court of Appeal
on 7 April 1982 confirmed the death sentences imposed
on Mr. Johnson Lusibi. Mr. Naphtali Mamma and
Mr. Petrus Tscpo Mashigo.

IS. I now resume my role as PRESIDENT
Council.

of the

16. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): The delegation of the United States was very
pleased to be able to associate itself affirmatively with
the draft resolution before the Council. We commend
its sponsors for their agreement to make a critically
important amendment to operative paragraph 2.
‘17. The United States is deeply and continuously
concerned with the preservation of human rights. with
the extension of human rights in South Africa and
throughout the world. We ground our association with
this resolution in the same concern that we presently
feel for the four prisoners of conscience in Moscow.
now in the eighth day of a hunger strike. seeking desperately to focus the world’s attention on their request
to be permitted to join their spouses, who are living
in three other nations of the world. We ground our
concern in the same concern that we feel for the people of Poland who are being deprived of human rights.
and the people of Afghanistan. of Kampuchea. and.
unhappily, of a very long list of other countries in
every part of the world.

12. The legitimacy of the liberation struggle of the
internationally
recognized liberation movements has
been acknowledged by the entire international community. which regards them as the legitimate and
authentic representatives
of the peoples of South
Africa. It is therefore unacceptable for the Pretoria
@me to continue treating the freedom-fighters as
common-law
criminals.
thereby denying the -just
claims of the South African black majority for respect
for their inalienable rights and fundamental freedoms
and for the emergence of a truly democratic society.

18. In this context, and in the context of our understanding that “relevant
international
instruments”
include of course the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. the United States endorses and supports the
resolution.

13. This is certainly the time for all the enlightened
people of the world struggling to ensure respect fat
human rights and fundamental
freedoms to demonstrate the full extent of their dedication to the defence
of those values by intervening with the South African
Government to urge it not to carry out the death sentences against the South African patriots members
of the ANC.

19. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (il7t~~‘l.pl.~~t(ltio/l jiwn Rnssion):
The representative of the United States. using an old tactic.
has today preferred to speak not on the agenda item
now before the Council but on a question quite alien
to that agenda item, I wish only to say a few words
on the conduct of the delegation of the United States.
strictly on the item now under consideration by the
Council.

14. The Republic of Zaire has associated itself with
the efforts of the Group of African States and all the
members of the Council to induce the Pretoria rigime,
for profoundly humanitarian
reasons, to commute the
death sentences imposed on these patriots and to free
them. purely and simply. It cannot have escaped the
attention of the South African authorities. or the au-

20. This is not the first time that the Council has
been obliged to consider an item connected with the
threat to the lives of freedom-fighters and patriots in
South Africa. In February last year, the Council considered this issue [2264th muting].
What was the
2

behaviour of the delegation of the United States at that
time? As a price for a humanitarian appeal to save the
lives of these patriots. the United States delegation
demanded that the Council virtually recognize the
juridical system of uptrsthcid. That demand of the
United States was rejected by the other members of
the Council. But it clearly revealed the thinking of the
United States delegation, which was seeking to defend
the illegal system of upcsthrid.
21. Today we were called to urgent consultations
because the South African regime had ignored the
appeal made by the President of the Council in February I98 I [S//4.36/ 1, and because the lives of these
three patriots were once again threatened. The United
States once again took part in the discussion. And
what was the price it demanded from the other members of the Council. and from the Council as a whole,
in exchange for its agreement?
22. The amendment which it submitted was designed
to change the entire context-that
is. the context of the
saving of the lives of these three young patriots. That
context is completely clear: it is to be found in Security Council resolution 473 (1980), which was adopted
unanimously
on 13 June 1980. Paragraph 3 of that
resolution states that the Council:
“Rcr!iflim.v
that the policy of rrpartheid is a crime
against the conscience and dignity of mankind and
is incompatible with the rights and dignity of man.
the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration.of Human Rights, and seriously disturbs
international peace and security.”

23. That is the context in which the Council must
consider and is considering the issue of the threat to
the lives of these three patriots, What was the reason
for the manoeuvre on the part of the United States
today? What is the meaning of this attempt-which
indeed failed-to
make the Council bend to its will?
The United States wanted us to consider the threat
to the lives of these three patriots in the context of
the violation of human rights and not in the context of
the policy of rrprrrthrid. a policy incompatible
with
human rights and dignity. This attempt has failed. but

it has once again revealed the thinking of the United
States.
24. These two cases show that in recent months
there has been an increasing merging of the policy of
the United States with the policy of the racist opapthvid regime of South Africa. That is a very dangerous
association. Indeed. in August last year. the delegation of the United States. here in the Council, came to
the defence of South Africa when it had committed
an act of aggression against the People’s Republic of
Angola 12296th to 2300th metings].
At that time, the
United States. defending its C/Pjkto ally, the rrprrl+
laid
regime, vetoed the draft resolution [S//4664/
Rrlq,J] in the Council. Therefore, the policy and practice of the United States is increasingly merging with
the shameful rrporthrid regime, and that United States
policy consists of considering the upurthid
regime
as an ally.
25. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): In the interest of thorough and accurate rather
than selective history. and with reference to the context in which I put the resolution before us and the
United States vote on that resolution. I too should like
to quote from resolution 473 (1980), adopted on I3 June
1980 with the affirmative vote of the United States.
In the seventh paragraph of that resolution the Council reaffirms:
“its recognition of the legitimacy of the struggle
of the South African people for the elimination of
optrrthcid and the establishment of a democratic
society in accordance with their inalienable human
and political rights as set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.”
24. Mr, WYZNER (Poland): My delegation regrets
that the representative of the United States saw fit to
deviate from the grave and urgent subject on our
agenda and to make a totally unfounded reference to
my country. We firmly reject that reference as having
nothing in common with the truth.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
liom bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde
entier.
Informez-vows
aupres
des ventes.
New York ou GenPve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

in United

Nations.

New

York

DES NATIONS

sont en vente dam les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLKACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nuevd
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NAClONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et les agences
B : Nations

dcpositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distributdoras
en
Unidas,
Seccibn
de Ventas,
