S/2002/1296

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 November 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 25 November 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached letter, dated 21 November 2002, from
Mr. Joschka Fischer, Deputy Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Federal Republic of Germany, and Mr. Jaap G. de Hoop Scheffer, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the Netherlands (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter circulated as a
document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-71313 (E)

261102

*0271313*

S/2002/1296

Annex
Letter dated 21 November 2002 from the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Germany and the Netherlands addressed to the
Secretary-General
The Federal Republic of Germany and the Kingdom of the Netherlands
welcome the positive developments in Afghanistan since the successful completion
of the Emergency Loya Jirga in June 2002. The continued strong support from the
international community, however, is essential to strengthen the newly established
political order. We would like to congratulate you and Ambassador Brahimi for the
key role the United Nations has played in the past months to foster peace and
stability in Afghanistan.
We would like to inform you that the Governments of the Federal Republic of
Germany and the Kingdom of the Netherlands are willing to assume the lead nation
status for the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) for a period of six
months, following an extension of the authorization of the International Security
Assistance Force by the Security Council. Germany and the Netherlands are looking
forward to a prolongation, for a period of 12 months, of Security Council resolution
1413 (2002) to be adopted by the end of November in order to fulfil the national
parliamentary requirements in due course. The six-month period will commence
with the actual transfer of responsibility from the current lead nation, Turkey, to the
Federal Republic of Germany and the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
The Governments of the Federal Republic of Germany and the Kingdom of the
Netherlands have taken this decision with the understanding that the mandate and
the area of responsibility of ISAF will be maintained as stipulated by the Security
Council in its resolution 1386 (2001) and reconfirmed in Security Council resolution
1413 (2002) and that the national parliamentary requirements for the continued
participation of their forces in ISAF will be met. The core mission of ISAF would
remain to be of assistance to the Government of Afghanistan in the maintenance of
security for Kabul and its surrounding areas, as envisaged in annex 1 to the Bonn
Agreement, while the responsibility for providing security and law and order
throughout Afghanistan continues to reside with the Afghans themselves.
Under the leadership of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland as well as Turkey, and with the valuable assistance of the contributing
States, ISAF has been successful in fulfilling its tasks. The continuous strong
support of the international community is crucial for maintaining the present
capabilities and efficiency of ISAF. An early adoption of a new Security Council
resolution extending the mandate of ISAF will enable Member States to make
concrete and timely contribution plans for the force.
As was the case under the leadership of the United Kingdom and Turkey, the
International Security Assistance Force will continue to have a particular mission
authorized by a Security Council resolution that is distinct from Operation Enduring
Freedom. Germany and the Netherlands, as the lead nations, will exercise command
of the International Security Assistance Force. They will continue to integrate the
troops and equipment contributed by other nations and will have the support of the
United States of America and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).

2

S/2002/1296

With respect to the relationship between the International Security Assistance
Force and forces operating in Afghanistan under Operation Enduring Freedom, and
for reasons of effectiveness, close coordination will be maintained between ISAF
and the United States Central Command to deconflict International Security
Assistance Force and Operation Enduring Freedom activities and to ensure that each
group’s activities do not interfere with the successful execution of the other’s.
The joint coordinating body established with representatives from the United
States Central Command, the Government of Afghanistan and the International
Security Assistance Force to deal with operational issues will be maintained.
To ensure effective political-military coordination, the Committee of
Contributors will continue to meet with the lead nations as the chair. Germany and
the Netherlands, as lead nations, will report regularly to the Security Council on
developments.
The precise date for transfer of responsibility as the lead nation from Turkey to
Germany and the Netherlands is envisaged to take place not later than 15 February
2003. Following the termination of the six-month period under the combined
German-Dutch lead, the identification of a successor at an early stage will enable
the timely preparations for the transfer of leadership. Germany and the Netherlands
would like to ask you to support our efforts in identifying a successor lead nation by
inviting Member States to consider urgently the possibility of taking over as the next
lead nation.
(Signed) Joschka Fischer

(Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer

3
