A/61/PV.104

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

104th plenary meeting
Friday, 29 June 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items: reopening of the consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 63
The President: I invite the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/61/L.63, circulated
under sub-item (b) of agenda item 63, entitled
“Promotion and protection of the rights of children:
follow-up to the outcome of the special session on
children”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of agenda item 63 at its
81st plenary meeting, on 19 December 2006. As
indicated in the footnote to document A/61/L.63, in
order to enable the General Assembly to consider the
draft resolution, it will be necessary to reopen its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 63. May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
reopen its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item
63?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will also recall that, at
its 2nd plenary meeting, on 13 September 2006, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 63
and its sub-items to the Third Committee. In order for
the General Assembly to take action expeditiously on
draft resolution A/61/L.63, may I take that the

Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (b) of agenda 63
directly in plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: May I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 63 (continued)
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
(b) Follow-up to the outcome of the special session
on children
Draft resolution (A/61/L.63)
The President: In connection with draft
resolution A/61/L.63, I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Chief, General Assembly Affairs
Branch): In connection with draft resolution A/61/L.63,
on the commemorative high-level plenary meeting
devoted to the follow-up to the outcome of the special
session on children, I wish to place on record the
following statement of financial implications, on behalf
of the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of operative paragraphs 1, 3, 10
and 11 of the draft resolution, respectively, the General
Assembly would:

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-40479 (E)

*0740479*

A/61/PV.104

“[Decide] to convene a commemorative
high-level plenary meeting to evaluate progress
made in the implementation of the Declaration
and the Plan of Action contained in the document
entitled `A world fit for children’ on 11 and 12
December 2007;”
“[Decide] that the commemorative highlevel plenary meeting will comprise plenary
meetings and two thematic interactive round
tables;”
“[Request] the Secretary-General to submit
a comprehensive analytical report on progress
achieved
and
challenges
remaining
in
implementing the commitments set out in the
Declaration and the Plan of Action at least six
weeks prior to its consideration by the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session;”

Although no provisions have been made under
the programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007 for
servicing the two parallel round tables as envisaged in
the draft resolution, the necessary requirements would
be accommodated to the fullest extent possible from
within existing provisions of the programme budget for
the biennium 2006-2007, and resources required over
and above the existing capacity would be
accommodated by the United Nations Children’s Fund.
Therefore, should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/61/L.63, no additional conference
servicing resources would be required for the servicing
of the two parallel round tables.
The President: We will now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/61/L.63.

and
“[Decide] that the chairpersons of the
interactive round tables will present summaries of
the discussions at the closing plenary meeting”.
Pursuant to those operative paragraphs of the
draft resolution, it is understood that the
commemorative high-level plenary meeting would
comprise a total of four General Assembly plenary
meetings with simultaneous interpretation and
verbatim records in the six official languages of the
United Nations, as well as two parallel round tables
with simultaneous interpretation in the six official
languages. Documentation requirements are estimated
at 32 pages of pre-session and four pages of in-session
documents, to be issued in all six languages. No postsession documentation is foreseen.
Should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/61/L.63, no additional conference
servicing resources would be required for the four
General
Assembly
plenary
meetings
and
documentation indicated earlier, on the understanding
that these are part of the normal work of the General
Assembly, for which resources have already been
budgeted throughout the year according to its
entitlements.
As regards the two parallel round tables, these
would constitute an addition to the draft calendar of
conferences and meetings of the United Nations, for
which it is estimated that implementation would
involve additional conference servicing resources in

2

the total amount of $22,500 under section 2, General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs
and conference management, of the programme budget
for the biennium 2006-2007.

I now call on the representative of Cuba, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position before
action is taken on the draft resolution. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote or position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegation from their seats.
Mrs. Pérez Álvarez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Cuba would like briefly to explain its
position on draft resolution A/61/L.63, which is before
us today.
The delegation of Cuba would like to thank those
countries which, for several weeks, contributed to the
negotiations on this draft resolution, which outlines
organizational arrangements for the holding of the
commemorative high-level plenary meeting devoted to
the follow-up to the outcome of the special session on
children. My delegation would also like to commend
the representative of Belarus for his efforts as
facilitator during the negotiating process.
Cuba reaffirms its steadfast commitment to the
Declaration and the Plan of Action contained in the
document entitled “A world fit for children” (resolution
S-27/2,
annex).
We
acknowledge
that
its
implementation is closely linked to the attainment of
the Millennium Development Goals. That being said,
the delegation of Cuba would like to express its
understanding of paragraph 7, in the light of what
representatives of the United Nations Children’s Fund

07-40479

A/61/PV.104

(UNICEF) stated to delegations during the
negotiations: organizations accredited to UNICEF
already have consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council, unlike those in a collaborative
relationship with UNICEF, which are not in that
category and to which the no-objection procedure
would apply for a final decision by the General
Assembly on the matter.
The delegation of Cuba would also like to point
out an error in paragraph 12 of the draft resolution. The
word “commitment” should be replaced by the word
“commitments”.
Once again, I would like to thank the Secretariat
for its efforts throughout the entire negotiating process,
which went on for several months.
Here, I would like to recall the words of José
Martí, the champion of Cuban independence: “Children
being the hope of the world”. That sums up the highest
aspirations of humankind — which, however, is
obliged to struggle for this reality. That should be the
objective of our work and of open, transparent
negotiations — which we hope will continue under the
President of the sixty-second session of the General
Assembly — among all Member States present in this
room.
The President: The correction made by the
representative of Cuba will be reflected in the final
text.
We have heard the only speaker in explanation of
position before action is taken on the draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/61/L.63, entitled “Commemorative highlevel plenary meeting devoted to the follow-up to the
outcome of the special session on children”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/6l/L.63, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/61/L.63, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 61/272).
I call on the representative of the United States of
America, who wishes to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted.
Ms. Shestack (United States of America): The
United States would like to make an explanation of
position after the adoption.

07-40479

The United States joined consensus on draft
resolution A/61/L.63 reluctantly. We would have
preferred that paragraph 12 of this resolution left more
discretion to the President of the General Assembly as
to the appropriate format and methodology for arriving
at an outcome of the commemorative high-level
plenary meeting. The United States would have been
satisfied with a chairman’s statement or summary as
the outcome of the commemorative meeting.
The Declaration and Plan of Action contained in
“A world fit for children” (resolution S-27/2, annex)
adopted by consensus in 2002 and still relevant and
applicable, sets out the commitments of the
international community towards children. We believe
that the outcome of the commemorative meeting in
December 2007 should reaffirm those commitments
and that every precaution should be taken by the
President of the General Assembly and by Member
States to keep the outcome extremely brief and to
avoid re-opening, undermining or calling into question
any of those commitments.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassador Andrei Dapkiunas of Belarus, who so ably
and patiently conducted the discussions and complex
negotiations in the informal consultations in order to
bring them to a successful conclusion. I am sure that
members of the Assembly join me in extending to him
our sincere appreciation.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 63.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 115; 117; 129 together with 130; 116 together
with 117, 127 and 132; 132; 133; 134; 135; 136; 138;
139; 140; 141; 142; 143; 144 and its sub-items (a) and
(b); 145; 146; 147; 151; and 116.
I now request the representative of Guatemala to
introduce the reports of the Fifth Committee in one
intervention.
Ms. Samayoa-Recari (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to present to the General
Assembly, on behalf of the Rapporteur, Mr. Diego

3

A/61/PV.104

Simancas of Mexico, the reports prepared by the Fifth
Committee during the second part of the resumed 61st
session of the General Assembly. From 8 May to 27
June 2007, the Fifth Committee held 12 formal
meetings and numerous informal meetings as well as
informal informal consultations.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution
49/233 A of 23 December 1994, this resumed session
of the Fifth Committee was devoted primarily to
considering the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping missions and associated peacekeeping
issues. The Committee considered the financing of 18
peacekeeping missions as well as related peacekeeping
items and other issues.
In connection with agenda item 115, entitled
“Financial reports and audited financial statements, and
reports of the Board of Auditors”, and in particular on
the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Board
of Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping
operations, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document
A/61/631/Add.1,
the
Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution that the Committee adopted without a
vote.
Under agenda item 117, entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 2006-2007”, the Committee
recommends, in paragraph 6 of its report
(A/61/592/Add.5), the adoption of a draft resolution
entitled “Special subjects relating to the programme
budget for the biennium 2006-2007”, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 129, “Financing of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”, and
item 130, “Financing of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”, in paragraph 6 of document A/61/967 the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly that
it adopt a draft resolution entitled “Comprehensive
proposal on appropriate incentives to retain staff of the

4

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia”.
Regarding agenda items 116, 117, 127 and 132,
the Committee recommends, in paragraph 6 of its
report (A/61/980), the adoption of a draft resolution
entitled “Terms of reference for the Independent Audit
Advisory Committee and strengthening of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services”, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
In its report under agenda item 132, entitled
“Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations”,
contained in document A/61/968, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
four draft resolutions — draft resolution I, entitled
“Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations: Crosscutting issues”; draft resolution II, entitled “Financing
of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi,
Italy”; draft resolution III, entitled “Consolidation of
peacekeeping accounts”; and draft resolution IV,
entitled “Strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations to manage and sustain peacekeeping
operations” — as well as an oral draft decision entitled
“Closed peacekeeping missions”. All of the draft
resolutions and the oral draft decision were adopted
without a vote.
With regard to the draft proposals on the
financing of peacekeeping operations, I should like to
inform the General Assembly that, with the exception
of that relating to agenda item 144 (b), entitled
“Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the Middle East: United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon”, all were adopted by the Committee without
a vote.
The relevant reports of the Fifth Committee are
presented under the following items: item 133,
“Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi”; item 134, “Financing of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”; item 135, “Financing of
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”;
item 136, “Financing of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo”; item 138, “Financing of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor”; item 139,
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea”; item 140, “Financing of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia”; item 141,

07-40479

A/61/PV.104

“Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti”; item 142, “Financing of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”; item 143,
“Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia”; item 144 (a), “Financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East:
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force”; item
145, “Financing of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone”; item 146, “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan”; item 147, “Financing
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara”; and item 151, “Financing of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste”.
Regarding agenda item 144 (b), entitled
“Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the Middle East: United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon”, the report of the Fifth Committee is
contained in document A/61/657/Add.2. The
Committee decided to retain the fourth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 20, by a
single recorded vote of 84 in favour to 5 against, with
47 abstentions. In paragraph 8 of the report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of the draft resolution as a whole, which was
adopted by the Committee by a recorded vote of 136 in
favour to 2 against, with 1 abstention.
Concerning agenda item 116, “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the report of the
Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/61/667/Add.2. In paragraph 5 of the report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft decision entitled “Questions
deferred for future consideration”, which was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
Before I conclude, allow me once again to thank
delegations for their cooperation in the conduct of the
negotiations. I would like to thank the Chairman of the
Fifth Committee, Ambassador Youcef Yousfi, for the
excellent way in which he guided us through our
difficult work, as well as the members of the Bureau,
with whom it is always a pleasure to work. On behalf
of all of us, I wish to express our profound thanks to
the representatives of the Secretariat, in particular the
Fifth Committee secretariat, for their patience and
support.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the

07-40479

General Assembly decided not to discuss the reports of
the Fifth Committee, which are before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records. May I
remind members that under paragraph 7 of decision
34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance. This means that where
recorded or separate votes were taken, we will do the
same. I should also hope that we may proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/631/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.48.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?

5

A/61/PV.104

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/233 B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 115.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/592/Add.5)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.54.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Special subjects relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007”. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/273).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 117.

We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Comprehensive proposal on
appropriate incentives to retain staff of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia”. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/274).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda items 129 and
130.
Agenda items 116 (continued), 117 (continued),
127 and 132 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Programme budget for the biennium 2006-2007
Report on the activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations

Agenda items 129 (continued) and 130 (continued)

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/980)

Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in
the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1
January and 31 December 1994

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.70.

Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/967)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.50.

6

We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Terms of reference for the
Independent Audit Advisory
Committee
and
strengthening the Office of Internal Oversight
Services”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/275).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda items 116, 117,
127 and 132.

07-40479

A/61/PV.104

Agenda item 132 (continued)
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/968)
The President: The Assembly has before it four
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 14 of its report and an oral draft decision
recommended in paragraph 15 of the same report. The
texts of the four draft resolutions, for the time being,
are
contained
in
documents
A/C.5/61/L.49,
A/C.5/61/L.55, A/C.5/61/L.56 and A/C.5/61/L.71. The
text of the oral draft decision is now being distributed
to all Member States.
We first will take a decision on draft resolutions I
to IV and then on the oral draft decision.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Administrative and
budgetary aspects of the financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations: cross-cutting issues”.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
61/276).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy”. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
61/277).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Consolidation of peacekeeping accounts”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
61/278).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to
manage and sustain peacekeeping operations”. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
61/279).

07-40479

The President: The oral draft decision is entitled
“Closed peacekeeping missions”. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft decision without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
132.
Agenda item 133 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/547/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.57.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/9 B).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
133.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/621/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.52.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/247 B).

7

A/61/PV.104

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 134.
Agenda item 135
Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/969)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.58.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/280).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 135.
Agenda item 136
Financing of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/970)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.51.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/281).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 136.

Agenda item 138
Financing of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/971)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.59.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/282).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 138.
Agenda item 139 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/617/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.60.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/248 B).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
139.
Agenda item 140
Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/972)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee

8

07-40479

A/61/PV.104

in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.61.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/283).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
140.
Agenda item 141
Financing of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/973)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.62.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/284).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 141.
Agenda item 142
Financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/974)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.63.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?

07-40479

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/285).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 142.
Agenda item 143
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/975)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.64.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/286).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
143.
Agenda item 144 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces
in the Middle East
(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/976)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.65.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/287).
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who has
asked to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.

9

A/61/PV.104

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation joined the consensus in
adopting resolution 61/287, on the financing of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force. We did
so on the basis of a principle we have always
emphasized and to which we have always adhered,
namely, that the responsibility for the financing of the
Force should be borne by Israel, the aggressor party
and the occupying Power in the occupied Syrian Golan.
It was Israel’s occupation that led to the establishment
of the Force. We joined the consensus also in line with
fundamental principles reflected in General Assembly
resolution 1874 (S-IV), of 27 June 1963.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 144.
(b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/657/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.53.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon”.
I call first on delegations wishing to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to express its
support for the draft resolution on the financing of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
We will vote in favour of the draft resolution, in line
with principles that we have always affirmed: that
responsibility for the financing of this force should be
borne by Israel, the aggressor and the occupying
Power, which is responsible for the establishment of
the Force. Our country’s vote is in line with the general
principles contained in resolution 1874 (S-IV) of
27 June 1963.
During the first part of the resumed session of the
Fifth Committee, my delegation raised serious
concerns with regard to the logical framework of the
UNIFIL budget, in particular regarding the manner in
which expected accomplishment 1.1, which stipulates
the provision of a “Stable and secure environment in

10

southern Lebanon” (A/61/870, para. 10) was drafted.
My delegation indicated at that time that that
expression was not in line with the mandate given to
UNIFIL by the Security Council and that Council
resolution 1701 (2006), which strengthened the
mandate of UNIFIL — a mission established by
Council resolution 425 (1978) — could not be
interpreted in that manner. We have indicated that this
expression, the provision of a “stable and secure
environment” in southern Lebanon as an expected
accomplishment, could entail giving Israel the right to
enter Lebanese territory on security pretexts — a right
that is open-ended in terms of area and time. It could
also justify Israel’s continued violations of Lebanese
sovereignty by air, sea and land on the pretext that a
“stable and secure environment” does not exist in
southern Lebanon, as defined by Israeli criteria. As is
well known and as has been documented, those criteria
are not consistent with and do not respect the mandate
of UNIFIL or Security Council resolution 1701 (2006).
The General Assembly, in resolution 61/250 B of
2 April 2007, on the financing of UNIFIL, recognized
the concerns of my delegation and requested the
Secretary-General to measure the accomplishments of
the Force, including expected accomplishment 1.1,
fully in accordance with the Security Council mandate.
During the second part of the resumed session of
the Fifth Committee, my delegation once again raised
serious concerns about the manner in which expected
accomplishment 1.1 was drafted. This was because the
Secretariat did not reformulate that expected
accomplishment in line with the Security Council
mandate and in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 61/250 B.
My delegation would like to confirm once again
that expected accomplishment 1.1, which stipulates the
provision of a “stable and secure environment” in
southern Lebanon, is not linked to the two basic
objectives behind the enhancement of UNIFIL in
southern Lebanon, as set out in Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006). Those objectives are full
respect for the Blue Line by both parties, as called for
in paragraph 8 of the resolution, and the cessation of
hostilities between the two parties, as mentioned in
paragraph 11. We would like to indicate in this respect
that the insistence on mentioning expected
accomplishment 1.1 — a stable and secure
environment in southern Lebanon — would enable
Israel to continue to justify its failure to abide by

07-40479

A/61/PV.104

Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) and to
undermine the credibility of UNIFIL in southern
Lebanon. It would also give Israel a free hand to
continue its intervention and violations in southern
Lebanon without any control or accountability
whatsoever.
We recall that Israel continues to occupy parts of
southern Lebanon and that the Israeli air force still
violates Lebanese airspace. This constitutes a violation
of the Blue Line, which is monitored by UNIFIL, and a
real threat to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Lebanon, in violation of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006). Those Israeli
violations are confirmed in UNIFIL reports to the
United Nations and in official Lebanese letters on this
matter. I have before me 10 official memorandums sent
by the Permanent Mission of Lebanon on Israeli
violations of Council resolution 1701 (2006).
This matter is now well known, as is the fact that
Israel has targeted UNIFIL forces since the
establishment of the Force and up until this very
moment. We all remember the two Qana massacres, the
first in 1996 and the second in 2006. Those two
massacres are still fresh in the memory of the United
Nations. I would like to indicate that the Lebanese
letters and notes to which I have referred, between
14 March to 14 June 2007 — that is, over a period of
four months — enumerated 155 Israeli violations by
air, 34 by sea and 48 by land. All are violations of
Council resolution 1702 (2006). They encroach on the
mandate of UNIFIL and disregard the United Nations.
The General Assembly has once again recognized
our
serious
concerns
regarding
expected
accomplishment 1.1 by including paragraph 12 in the
draft resolution that we will adopt shortly. It reaffirms
paragraph 12 of resolution 61/250 B and requests the
Secretary-General
to
measure
the
expected
accomplishments of the Force fully in accordance with
the Security Council mandate.
On that basis, my delegation would expect the
Secretary-General
to
reformulate
expected
accomplishment 1.1 in a manner consistent with the
mandate of Security Council resolutions 425 (1978)
and 1701 (2006).
Mr. Ramadan (Lebanon): Today more than ever,
Lebanon is in need of the continued support of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in
the aftermath of the terrorist attack that on Sunday,

07-40479

24 June, targeted a Spanish battalion patrol in southern
Lebanon and resulted in the deaths of six UNIFIL
personnel and the injury of two others. The Lebanese
Government expressed its solidarity with UNIFIL,
denounced the attack in the strongest possible terms
and committed itself to bringing the perpetrators of this
heinous attack to justice.
The Lebanese people and the Lebanese
Government extend their sincere condolences to the
families of the fallen victims and to the peoples and
Governments of Colombia and Spain. The Lebanese
people and their Government also express their wishes
for the quick recovery of those injured.
The latest attack on UNIFIL underscores the
importance of maintaining a stable and secure
environment in southern Lebanon, as stated by the
Secretary-General in his report contained in document
A/61/870, on the budget for the Force for the period
from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2008. In this regard, we
reiterate our understanding, as well as that of all of the
States members of this Assembly that concur with the
conclusion of the Secretary-General, that expected
accomplishment 1.1 set out in the UNIFIL budget
report is fully in line with the mandate of the Force
under Security Council resolution 1701 (2006).
The General Assembly, in operative paragraph 12
of its resolution 61/250 B of 2 April 2007, on the
additional financing of UNIFIL, requested the
Secretary-General to continue to measure the
accomplishments of the Force, including expected
accomplishment 1.1, fully in accordance with the
Security Council mandate. In response to that request,
the Secretary-General, in his current report on the
budget for the Force, contained in document A/61/870,
reasserted
his
understanding
that
expected
accomplishment 1.1 is fully in line with UNIFIL’s
mandate.
The delegation of Lebanon emphasizes that
paragraph 12 of the current draft resolution, contained
for the time being in document A/C.5/61/L.53, on
which the Assembly is about to take a decision, only
ascertains that the expected accomplishment 1.1 is
fully in line with UNIFIL’s mandate.
We hope that future reports on the financing of
UNIFIL will continue to take into account the views of
my delegation, the delegation that is primarily
concerned with this issue, which concurs with those of
all of the members of the Assembly.

11

A/61/PV.104

Mr. Fluss (Israel): At the outset, let me express
our condolences to the families and fellow soldiers of
the members of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) who were attacked by terrorists at
the beginning of this week in southern Lebanon. We
also wish a speedy recovery to the injured.
It is with an eerie sense of déjà vu that we have
been forced to listen to manipulations by the Syrian
representative, who has tried to divert expected
accomplishment 1.1 entirely towards the Blue Line,
whilst he is hiding behind the fact that Syria is
undermining peace and stability in the region through
its blatant and dangerous violation of resolution 1701
(2006).
Members need not rely solely on my words here;
Syria’s interference in Lebanon is addressed in the
Secretary-General’s forthcoming report on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), which I
would like to cite, as the matter came up just yesterday.
“It is widely believed in Lebanon, including
by the Government, that the strengthening of
Fatah-Intifada and PFLP-GC outposts could not
have taken place without the tacit knowledge and
support of the Syrian Government. The Prime
Minister of Lebanon has recently stated publicly
that these outposts have been reinforced with
munitions, arms and fighters by the Syrian Arab
Republic.”
The Government of Lebanon, says the SecretaryGeneral, has reported seeing “two vehicles heading
from Al-Kafeer in the Syrian Arab Republic across the
Syrian-Lebanese border”.
In his conclusion, the Secretary-General writes
“I urge the Syrian Arab Republic to do more
to control its border with Lebanon. I am disturbed
by the persistent reports pointing to breaches of
the arms embargo along the Lebanon-Syria
border. I am disappointed that no further progress
has been made between the Government of
Lebanon and the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to take the necessary steps with
Lebanon to delineate their common border.”
Those are the words of the Secretary-General’s
report on Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
exposing Syria’s underhanded tactics, dangerous
meddling and malicious disobedience. Syria’s wilful
violation of Council resolution 1701 (2006) gravely

12

endangers the stability and security of Lebanon and the
region.
Nothing short of immediate action can change
this alarming situation. That is why Israel strongly
supports the logical framework, including expected
accomplishment 1.1, which is intended to provide for a
safe and stable environment in southern Lebanon. It is
not merely a question of the Blue Line; there are many
more implications. Violations are currently originating
from the Syrian-Lebanese border, as reflected in the
report we saw yesterday. The world knows that Syria is
behind the instability in Lebanon. Actually, Prime
Minister Siniora said just this week, referring to the
refugee camps where internal violence is taking place
within Lebanon, that “these camps have been
reinforced with munitions, arms and fighters. Everyone
knows that these groups are supported and armed by
Syria”.
So, everyone knows — and I think the Syrian
representative also knows — these facts. With these
words, I suggest that we not try to interfere in the
understanding and rationale of the mandate of
resolution
1701
(2006)
and
of
expected
accomplishment 1.1.
The President: We will now take a decision on
the draft resolution entitled, “Financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”. A single separate
vote has been requested on the fourth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 20 of the
draft resolution. As there is no objection to that
request, I shall now put to the vote the fourth
preambular paragraph and operative paragraphs 4, 5
and 20, on which a single separate and recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab

07-40479

A/61/PV.104

Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, United States of
America.
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Moldova, Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The fourth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 4, 5 and 20 of the draft resolution
were retained by 89 votes to 4, with
47 abstentions.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution as a whole. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,

07-40479

Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico,
Moldova,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
Australia.
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted by
141 votes to 2, with 1 abstention (resolution
61/250 C).
The President: I call on the representative of the
United States of America, who wishes to speak in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Hillman (United States of America):
Although my delegation strongly supports the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), the use of
a funding resolution to pursue claims against a Member
State procedurally is not correct. That is the reason that
we were unable to support this resolution, which
includes paragraphs that were objectionable to us. And
that is the reason that we requested that a vote be
taken.
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in exercise of the

13

A/61/PV.104

right of reply. May I remind members that, in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited
to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to five
minutes for the second and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My Government has officially expressed its
sincere condolences to the Government and the people
of Spain with regard to the deaths of members of the
Spanish battalion as a result of the terrorist act
committed in southern Lebanon. I also wish to express
my personal condolences to the Spanish Government
and to the United Nations.
The cowardly terrorist act targeting members of
the Spanish battalion occurred in an area 600 metres
from the Israeli-Lebanese border. Therefore, it could
have been carried out with special, by-remote
technology possessed by Israel.
The manner in which the representative of Israel
voted today — against certain paragraphs in the
resolution and against the resolution as a whole —
indicates
Israel’s
aggressive posture towards
international legitimacy. If Israel really had any respect
for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) and for international legitimacy, it would not
have voted against a resolution that was nearly
unanimously adopted. The Israeli representative cited a
number of paragraphs from the Secretary-General’s
report on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2007). He stated that the SecretaryGeneral says such and such, presumptuously supposing
what the Secretary-General has said. But what the
Secretary-General actually has said confirms that Israel
violated Lebanese sovereignty 33 times in only one
day. That is not a supposition, but a confirmation of
reports sent to the Secretary-General by UNIFIL
commanders.
The Israeli representative also referred to the
existence of Palestinian refugee camps and military
sites in Lebanon, as if those camps and sites had
nothing to do with Israel’s occupation of Palestine and
as if the Palestinian refugees had come from outer
space and not from Palestine, from where they had
been expelled, and as if those Palestinians had no
relevance to resolution 194 (III), concerning the right
of Palestinian refugees to return to the lands, villages

14

and homes from which they had been forcibly expelled
by Zionist gangs, first in 1948 and then in 1967.
The Israeli representative suggested that Syria
should not interfere with UNIFIL’s mandate. He should
give that advice to his own Government so that it stops
targeting UNIFIL forces politically, militarily and in
terms of security, and stops carrying out assassinations
and bombing of UNIFIL sites in Lebanon. Since the
establishment of the Force, the Israeli Government has
killed dozens of UNIFIL troops, including, most
recently, the four Chinese officers killed by Israeli
forces during the recent aggression carried out against
Lebanon last July.
The Israeli representative also said that Syria’s
position threatens stability in the Middle East. That is
his opinion and he is entitled to it, but he has forgotten
that a survey undertaken in Europe last year under the
aegis of the European Commission confirmed that 70
per cent of Europeans — Europeans, not Syrians —
consider Israel to be a threat to international peace and
security. He also neglected to mention that more than
1,000 resolutions have been adopted by the United
Nations since its establishment condemning Israel and
declaring it an aggressive occupying Power because it
continues to terrorize the Palestinian people,
preventing it from establishing its own State, and to
occupy the lands of others by force, including
territories of my country in the Syrian Golan.
How can the Israeli representative offer advice in
this context? His State is notorious throughout the
world, and over 1,000 resolutions of international
legitimacy have passed against it. Not one of those
resolutions, nor even a single paragraph thereof, has
been implemented. Israel takes “international
legitimacy” to mean the implementation of merely half
a resolution — resolution 181 (II), of 1947,
partitioning Palestine into two States. That resolution
referred to the establishment of two States in Palestine:
a Jewish State and an Arab Palestinian State. Israel has
implemented only that half of the resolution, one of as
many as a thousand, referring to the creation of its own
State. As for the other half, it can go to hell as far as
Israel is concerned. Israel is not concerned about
upholding justice or the establishment of the
Palestinian State in Palestine.
I do not wish to discuss this further. The story is
obvious and well known to all.

07-40479

A/61/PV.104

Mr. Ramadan (Lebanon): We take the floor to
exercise the right of reply under agenda item 144. My
delegation intended to limit its statement to the
budgetary aspects of the resolution. However, since the
Israeli representative made false accusations, we are
compelled to clarify the facts.
We also note that the Israeli representative did
not respect the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, because he spoke in exercise of the right of
reply when it was his turn to make an explanation of
vote before the voting. I think that only shows how
Israel does not in any sense respect the resolutions of
this Assembly; so why should it respect its rules of
procedure?
Lebanon highly appreciates the important role
that the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) plays in the southern part of my country, and
invites Israel to cooperate with UNIFIL as it pretends
to do. The reports of the lack of Israeli cooperation
with and even intimidation of UNIFIL are clear and
include low-altitude flights of Israeli warplanes over
UNIFIL that almost resulted in an armed retaliation by
the German and French contingents of the maritime
component of the Force. Also, recently, reports
attributed to the spokesman of the German command of
the maritime component of UNIFIL explained that
three new such incidents took place between the Israeli
army and the German ships, and that another separate
incident took place with a Swedish ship during the
months of April and May this year. This past
Wednesday, 27 June, Israel was yet again denounced
by a UNIFIL official for the lack of Israeli cooperation
with the Force, as it seems that Israel does not want to
establish a hotline of communication with the Force to
tackle arising security incidents.
We advise the Israeli representatives not to
interfere in issues that pertain to our relationship with
the Syrian Arab Republic. Syria is a brotherly Arab
country; Syria is not our enemy. We know very well
who our enemy is. It is only because we believe in
further strengthening the long-standing and strong
relations between Lebanon and Syria that we want to
resolve all the pending issues between our two
countries. It is for those reasons that we want to
establish diplomatic relations and delineate the
common borders between Lebanon and Syria.
If the Israeli representative is very interested in
the expected accomplishment 1.1, which calls for the

07-40479

establishment of a safe and secure environment in
southern Lebanon, we invite Israel to withdraw its
forces from occupied Lebanese lands. Lebanese lands
are occupied today as we speak, be it in Sheba’a, the
Kfar Shuba hills, or in the village of Rshaf. Thus, if
Israel is concerned about safety in the southern part of
Lebanon, we invite it to withdraw from our country.
Lebanon is thankful and appreciative to all the
friendly States that voted in favour of the resolution.
Specifically, we extend our thanks to the members of
the Group of 77 and China, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, and the States members of the
League of Arab States.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 144.
Agenda item 145
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/977)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.66.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/288).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 145.
Agenda item 146
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/978)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.67.

15

A/61/PV.104

The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.69.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/289).

The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 146.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/249 C).

Agenda item 147
Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/979)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.68.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
61/290).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
147.
Agenda item 151 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/644/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 151.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/667/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 5 of its report. The text of the draft decision,
for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/61/L.72.
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
decision, entitled “Questions deferred for future
consideration”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 116.
I wish to announce that the informal consultations
on revitalization will take place immediately after this
meeting, in this room.
On behalf of the Assembly, I would like to thank
Ambassador Youcef Yousfi, the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee and member of the General Committee, for
his dedication, his patience and his hard work.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

16

07-40479
