1'

General Assembly - Ninth Session

also tend to stimulate agricultural production and general economic development by an integrated approach
to the task of development,
Considering the important part played by programmes of land reform dec;igned to improve progressively the condition of the rural population and conditions of tenure, and, as appropriate, to facilitate the
ownership of land by the largest practicable number
of the rural population in under-developed countries
and territories,
Bearing in mind that the effective development of
land reform programmes in those countries is dependent in large measure upon the enjoyment of economic,
social and political equality, including the right to share
equitably the benefits of pu~li_c facilities,
1. Recommends that Member States, where appropriate, institute land reform measures to encourage,
among other things, the ·ownership of land by the
largest practicable number of the rural population and
pursue fiscal and investment policies with a view to
the expansion of the area under cultivation and the
improvement of the methods of agricultural production ;
2. Recommends that Member States, in implementing
land reform programmes in the process of their economic development, observe the principle of equitable
tre~tment in the economic, political and social fields
with a view to improving the condition of the rural
population; respect the free establishment of agricultural associations; promote the general welfare, including measures designed to provide agricultural
workers with the possibility of earning adequate remuneration ; and respect such institutions of the indigenous population as may be compatible with economic
and social progress and modern techniques ;
3. Endorses the recommendations of Economic and
Social Council resolution 512 C (XVII), section II,
concerning the formation and development of cooperatives ·
4. Endorses also the recommendation of the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 512 C
(XVII), section I, that the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development give sympathetic consideration to loan applications from under-developed
countries for development projects which are designed
to implement their programmes of agrarian reform,
including projects designed to bring new lands under
agricultural cultivation, and invites the Bank, consistent
with its maintenance as a self-suporting entity, to
consider making any such loans on terms of interest
and amortizacion designed to place the smallest feasible
burden on the borrowing countries ;
5. Expresses its support for Member States which
are carrying out land reforms in conformity with General Assembly resolutions and expresses the hope that,
in accordance with the recommendations of the Economic and Social Council, high priority will be given to
requests for United Nations technical assistance for
the purpose of studying or carrying out land reform
programmes ;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, the Food and
Agriculture Organization and the other specialized
agencies concerned, in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral, to consider the best methods for the further
implementation of Economic and Social Council resolution 512 C (XVII).
510th plenary meeting;
11 December 1954.

827 (IX). Establishment of a world food reserve

The General Assembly,
Being convinced of the need for continued national
action and international co-operation :
(a) To raise the levels of production and standards
of consumption of food in many areas of the world
where famine or chronic malnutrition is a major
problem,
(b) To prevent unduly large short-term fluctuations
in agricultural prices and to this end to promote the
rational disposal of intermittent agricultural surpluses,
Considering that in some countries a food reserve
has been established for various purposes and has
operated efficiently,
Recalling the various resolutions adopted by international instittttions on this subject in the past,
Considering that no factual report has been made
dealing comprehensively with the following:
(a) The feasibility of establishing a world food
reserve within the framework of the United Nations,
( b) The feasibility of such a reserve acting as an
institution which would contribute to relieve emergency
situations and to counteract excessive price fluctuations,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the valuable work
being done in these fields by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the Food
and Agriculture Organization, taking into account the
discussions at the ninth session of the General Assembly and the proposals previously made on this subject, to prepare a factual and comprehensive report
of what has been and is being done in this connexion,
for submission to the Economic and Social Council ;
3. Further requests the Economic and Social Council
to report upon this matter, with its conclusions, to the
General Assembly.
511th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
828 (IX). Report of the Agent General of the
United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency

The General Assembly,
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 410 (V) of
1 December 1950, 701 (VII) of 11 March 1953 and
725 (VIII) of 7 December 1953,
Taking note of the report 9 of the Agent General on
the work of the United Nations Korean Reconstruction
Agency for the period 1 October 1953 to 1 September
1954, and of the comments 10 thereon by the United
Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea,
Recognizing the particular importance of the continuation of the Agency's programme for the relief and
rehabilitation of the Republic of Korea and the urgent
need of additional contributions from Governments to
enable the Agency to continue the implementation of
that programme,
9 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Supplement No. 20.
10 Ibid., Annexes, agenda item 17, document A/2810.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1. Commends the Agent General , f the United
Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency for the excellent progress made by the Agency in pursuing its
mission of assisting the Korean people to relieve the
sufferings and to repair the devastation caused by
aggression ;
2. Stresses the desire that implementation of the
programmes of the Agency as approved by the General
Assembly in resolution 725 (VIII) of 7 December
1953 be achieved to the maximum extent possible;
3. Urges all Governments to give the financial support necessary for the continuation of the Agency's
programme, whether by the prompt payment of existing pledges or by the pledging of new contributions
to the programme ;
4. Expresses appreciation for the valuable and continuing assistance given to the Agency by United
Nations specialized agencies and by voluntary nongovernmental organizations ;
5. Requests the Negotiating Committee for Extra
Budgetary Funds, appointed pursuant to General Assembly resolution 861 (IX) of 29 October 1954, to
undertake steps designed to secure new pledges and the
prompt payment of existing pledges to the Agency.
511th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.

15

829 (IX). Full employmeu.t

The Genera/, Assembly,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council is
keeping under review the problem of promoting full
employment,
Endorses resolution 531 B (XVIII) adopted by the
Economic and Social Council on 4 Augm,t 1954, and
particularly the invitation to the International ~bour
Organization to continue its important work m the
field of employment problems.
511th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
830 (IX). Removal of Qhstacles to international
trade and means of developing international
economic relations

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the Economic and Social Council
is giving active consideration to the question of the
expansion of international trade and the development
of international economic relations,
1. Expresses its satisfaction with the Economic and
Social Council's decision to continue to study this
question at its twentieth session ;
2. Endorses resolution 531 C (XVIII) adopted
unanimously by the Council on 4 August 1954.
5.11 th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
