136

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

2. Recognizes that intergovernmental programming
exercises constitute a useful and effective modality for further promoting technical co-operation among developing
countries, and that the further strengthening and improvement of such exercises requires an adequate evaluation of
the execution of the agreed projects and activities;
3. Recognizes a/so that intergovernmental programming exercises for technical co-operation among developing countries should continue to be closely linked with national priorities and planning for national development
objectives;
4. Requests that regional, interregional and global intergovernmental programming exercises, sectoral and/or
comprehensive, for technical co-operation among developing countries continue to be held in accordance with the
expressed needs of the developing countries and that an
adequate evaluation of these exercises be made;
5. Recommends that the execution of the projects resulting from these exercises be incorporated, whenever
possible or appropriate, in the country, regional, interregional and global programmes of the United Nations Development Programme;
6. Encourages developing countries to support and
participate in intergovernmental programming exercises
for technical co-operation among developing countries
and to take appropriate follow-up action in accordance
with their own capacities and requirements;
7. Emphasizes the importance of the catalytic and promotional role of the United Nations Development Programme in these exercises and its role in the execution of
projects resulting from the exercises;
8. Requests the United Nations development system to
support actively, within their respective fields of competence, the implementation of the recommendations of the
Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Co-operation among Developing
Countries and to finance, with available resources, project
activities resulting from intergovernmental programming
exercises;
9. Encourages and calls upon the international and regional financing institutions to join in the efforts of the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to assist developing countries in their activities for
technical co-operation among developing countries;
10. Invites developed countries to continue to provide
support and financing for projects and activities resulting
from these exercises;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the General
Assembly at its forty-fourth session.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/180.

Technical co-operation among developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/ 134 of 19 December 1978, in
which it endorsed the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for
Promoting and Implementiny Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries, 4 and its resolutions 34/117
of 14 December 1979 and 35/202 of 16 December 1980 on
technical co-operation among developing countries,

Reaffirming the importance of technical co-operation
among developing countries and the catalytic role of the
United Nations system in supporting such activities in accordance with the Buenos Aires Plan of Action,
Reaffirming that developing countries have the primary
responsibility for promoting technical co-operation
among themselves, that developed countries and the
United Nations system should assist and support such activities, and that, in addition, the United Nations system
should play a prominent role as promoter and catalyst of
technical co-operation among developing countries, in accordance with the Buenos Aires Plan of Action,
1. Reaffirms the validity and pertinence of ali the
recommendations of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for
Promoting and Implementing Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries;
2. Endorses the decisions adopted by the High-level
Committee on the Review of Technical Co-of:eration
among Developing Countries at its fifth session; 2
3. Urges the Governments of developing countries to
give full support to the implementation of recommendations 1 to 14 of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action; 41
4. Urges the Governments of developed countries to
give full support to the implementation of recommendations 35 and 36 of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action;
5. Invites the developing countries to continue to
strengthen their focal points for technical co-operation
among developing countries with a view to promoting
their activities at the country leve!;
6. Recommends that the United Nations Development
Programme and other appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system continue to support ali coordinating activities for technical co-operation carried out
by developing countries among themselves, particularly
the biennial meetings of the heads of national technical cooperation organs, and to take appropriate follow-up action
on the recommendations adopted at such meetings relating to the support provided by the United Nations system
for the promotion of technical co-operation among developing countries;
7. Requests ali organizations of the United Nations development system to explore additional sources of financing for projects and activities for technical co-operation
among developing countries, including those of an interregional and global nature, and to allocate an increasing
proportion of their resources to activities and projects for
technical co-operation among developing countries;
8. Reiterates the need to make full use of the potential
of developing countries and, in this context, invites the organizations ofthe United Nations development system to
strive more actively to use the equipment, services, experts
and consultants available in the developing countries, in
keeping with existing rules and regulations, and to continue to review their procurement practices and policies;
9. Requests the Secretary-General and calls upon ali
organizations of the United Nations development system
to take the steps necessary, in keeping with existing rules
and regulations, to increase procurement of equipment
and services from the developing countries by, inter alia,
moving to obtain information about the procurement possibilities offered by those countries and by disseminating
information about the procurement possibilities and practices of the United Nations system;
10. Requests the United Nations Development Programme and the organizations of the United Nations development system to take the necessary measures to enable each developing country to have the choice of

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

executing eacb project on tecbnical co-~peration, tot~lly
or in part, witbin tbe framework of tecbmcal co-operatto~
among developing countries or according to tbe trad1tional metbod of tecbnical assistance;
11. Recommends tbat tbe Governing Council of tbe
United Nations Development Programme consider tbe allocation for tecbnical co-operation among developing
countries of at least 25 per cent of tbe regional, interregional and global indicative planning figures, and requests
tbe Secretary-General to include in tbe report called for in
paragrapb 18 of tbe p~esent resolution, tbe suggesti~n~ of
tbe Governing Councll on ways and means of acb1evmg
tbis goal;
12. Urges ali organizations of tbe United Nations development system, in tbeir relevant spberes of competence, to participate actively in support oftbe implementation of decision 5/9 of 27 May 1987 of tbe Higb-level
Committee;42
13. Emphasizes tbat tecbnical co-operation among developing countries is a means ofimproving tbe integration
of women in development, and requests tbe SecretaryGeneral, in formulating bis proposals on tecbnical cooperation among developing countries for tbe next
medium-term plan, clearly to specify measures to increase
tbe participation of women in ali aspects of tecbnical cooperation among developing countries in tbe major programmes;
14. Requests tbe organizations of tbe United Nations
development system to participate actively in tbe overall
review and appraisal of tbe implementation of tbe Buenos
Aires Plan of Action, to be carried out at tbe sixtb session
of tbe Higb-level Committee in 1989;
15. Requests tbe organizations of tbe United Nations
development system to take tbe necessary action, in tbeir
particular fields of activity, to ensure tbe implementation
of tbe decisions of tbe Higb-level Committee and tbe present resolution;
16. Requests tbe Governing Council of tbe United Nations Development Programme, at its tbirty-fiftb session,
to give tbe necessary attention to tbe implementation of
tbe resolutions and decisions oftbe Higb-level Committee,
including decision 5/2 of 27 May 1987;
17. Requests tbe Secretary-General, in formulating bis
proposals for tbe next medium-term plan, to give tbe
necessary priority to tecbnical co-operation among developing countries;
18. A lso requests tbe Secretary-General to report to tbe
General Assembly at its forty-fourtb session on tbe implementation of tbe present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

42/181.

Co-operation between the United Nations and
the Southern African Development Coordination Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/248 of 21 December 1982,
38/160 of 19 December 1983, 39/215 of 18 December
1984 and 40/195 of 17 December 1985, in wbicb it, inter alia, requested tbe Secretary-General to promote cooperation between tbe organs, organizations and bodies of
tbe United Nations system and tbe Soutbern African Development Co-ordination Conference and urged intensification of contacts in order to accelerate the achievement

137

of tbe objectives of tbe Lusaka Declaration of 1 April
1980, by whicb the Conference was established, 43
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Soutbern African Development Co-ordination Conference,44
Noting the significant progress made by the Conferen?e
in formulating concrete development programmes and m
implementing them under its Programme of Action, 45
Reaffirming its recognition that successful implem~ntation of these development programmes can be acb1eved
only if the Conference has adequate resources at its disposal,
Concerned that tbe gap tbat still exists between the
needs and the resources available to the Southern African
Development Co-ordination Conference continues to
widen,
Deeply concerned about the deteriorating econo~ic and
security situation in southern Africa and tbe parttcularly
difficult environment for regional co-operation caused by
acts of destabilization committed by Soutb Africa,
Reaffirming tbat increased self-reliance by States members of the Conference would contribute to tbe struggle
against the apartheid policies of South Africa,
Welcoming the progress made by sorne organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system in working out mechanisms for formulating and executing cooperation programmes with the Conference,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General44
whicb describes the progress made in the implementation
of the resolutions of the General Assembly dealing with
co-operation between the United Nations and the Southem African Development Co-ordination Conference;
2. Commends tbe Member States and organs, organizations and bodies ofthe United Nations system that bave
extended concrete assistance to the Conference and expresses appreciation to those that have established contacts and relationships witb it;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the considerable
achievements that the Conference has made since its
founding in implementing projects covering ali the major
sectors of co-operation, in spite of difficulties dueto South
African destabilization policies and acts of aggression;
4. Renews its appeal to tbe intemati\:mal community to
increase substantially its financia!, technical and material
support to the Conference in order to en~ble it to_ implement fully its expanded programmes, wh1ch now mclude
intra-regional trade and investment in production;
5. Also appeals to the specialized agencies and other
organs and organizations ofthe United Nations system to
continue to co-operate fully in the development programmes of the Conference;
6. Invites the donor community and other cooperating partners to participate at a high leve) in the
Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference Annual Consultative Conference, to be held at Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, in January 1988;
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with tbe Executive Secretary of the Conference, to continue to intensify contacts aimed at promoting and harmonizing co-operation between the United Nations and the
Conference;
43 See A/38/493, annex l.
44 A/42/452.
45 I bid., annex II.
