S/2016/847

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 October 2016
Original: English

Russian Federation: draft resolution
The Security Council,
Recalling its resolutions 2042 (2012), 2043 (2012), 2118 (2013), 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2175 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2209 (2015), 2254 (2015), 2258 (2015) and
2268 (2016),
Reaffirming its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria, and to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Gravely distressed by the continued deterioration of the devastating
humanitarian situation in Syria, and the fact that now more than 13.5 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance in Syria, and that about 6.1 million people
are internally displaced (in addition to the half a million Palestinian refugees who
had settled in Syria), several hundred thousands of people are suff ering in besieged
areas,
Expressing outrage at the unacceptable and escalating level of violence and at
the intensified fighting in recent days in Aleppo,
Strongly condemning the increased terrorist attacks resulting in numerous
casualties and destruction carried out by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL,
also known as Daesh), Al Nusrah Front (ANF) and all other individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities associated with Al Qaeda or ISIL (also known as Daesh),
and other terrorist groups, as designated by the Security Council, and reiterating its
call on all parties to commit to putting an end to terrorist acts perpetrated by such
organizations and individuals while reaffirming that terrorism in all its forms
constitutes one of the most serious threats to international peace and security, and
that any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, wherever, whenever, and by whomsoever committed,
Noting with appreciation the efforts undertaken by the Russian Federation and
the United States of America as co-chairs of the International Syria Support Group,
Reiterating that the only sustainable solution to the current crisis in the Syrian
Arab Republic is through an inclusive and Syrian-led political process based on the
Geneva Communiqué of 30 June 2012 as endorsed by resolution 2118 (2013), its
resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016) and relevant statements of the
International Syria Support Group,

16-17500 (E)

111016

*1617500*

S/2016/847

Gravely concerned at the lack of effective implementation of its resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), and 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2016) and recalling in this
regard the legal obligations of all parties under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, as well as all the relevant decisions of the Security
Council, including by ceasing all attacks against civilians and civilian objects,
including those involving attacks on schools, medical facilities and the deliberate
interruptions of water supply, the indiscriminate use of weapons, including artillery,
barrel bombs and air strikes, indiscriminate shelling by mortars, car bombs, suicide
attacks and tunnel bombs, as well as the use of starvation of civilians as a method of
combat, including by the besiegement of populated areas, and the widespread use of
torture, ill-treatment, arbitrary executions, extrajudicial killings, enforced
disappearances, sexual and gender-based violence, as well as all grave violations
and abuses committed against children,
Taking note of the decision of the Secretary-General to establish an internal
United Nations Board of Inquiry on the incident involving bombing of a United
Nations-Syrian Arab Red Crescent relief operation to Urum al-Kubra, Syria, on
19 September 2016, and urging all parties concerned to cooperate fully with the
Board and underlining the importance of completing the investigation without delay
with a view to hold the perpetrators accountable,
Strongly condemning the widespread violations and abuses of human rights
and violations of international humanitarian law, stressing the need to end impunity
for these violations and abuses, and re-emphasizing in this regard the need that
those who have committed or are otherwise responsible for such violations and
crimes in Syria must be brought to justice,
Emphasizing that the humanitarian situation in Syria continues to constitute a
threat to peace and security in the region, and will continue to deteriorate further in
the absence of a political solution to the crisis, and stressing in this regard that there
is no military solution to the conflict in Syria,
Reaffirming its intent, expressed in its resolution 2258 (2015) to take further
measures in the event of non-compliance with resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014)
and 2191 (2014),
Recalling that Member States are obligated under Article 25 of the Charter of
the United Nations to accept and carry out the Council’s decisions,
1.
Demands that all parties to the Syrian conflict, in particular the Syrian
authorities, immediately comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law as applicable, in particular in
all besieged and hard-to-reach areas, and fully and immediately implement all the
provisions of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014),
2199 (2015), 2254 (2015), 2258 (2015) and 2268 (2016), and recalls that violations
and abuses committed in Syria shall not go unpunished;
2.
Notes the Agreement between the Russian Federation and the United
States of America of 9 September 2016 (Annex) and calls upon all parties to be
guided by the aforementioned Agreement, including for the purpose of providing
immediate and unhindered humanitarian access, in particular through weekly

2/8

16-17500

S/2016/847

48-hour humanitarian pauses, and urges the co-chairs of the International Syria
Support Group to ensure the implementation of this Agreement;
3.
Urges immediate implementation of the cessation of hostilities, in
particular in Aleppo, stresses that any party can bring a violation or potential
violation of the cessation of hostilities to the attention of the Cessation of Hostilities
Task Force, and further urges immediate, safe and unhindered humanitarian access
throughout Syria consistent with the terms of the cessation of hostilities;
4.
Stresses the urgent need to achieve and verify separating moderate
opposition forces from “Jabhat Al-Nusra” as a key priority and demands that all
parties prevent material and financial support from reaching individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities associated with Al Qaeda, I SIL (also known as Daesh) or
“Jabhat al-Nusra”, and other terrorist groups, as designated by the Security Council,
and urges members of the ISSG to demand from any party to stop fighting in
collaboration with them, to separate from them and to formally sub scribe to the
Cessation of Hostilities;
5.
Demands all parties to comply with United Nations requests for
humanitarian access by observing the cessation of hostilities as described in
resolution 2268 (2016) and the Agreement of 9 September, 2016, including with
regard to the pullback from Castello Road and establishing checkpoints on that road,
and to facilitate evacuation of urgent medical cases and also to use for humanitarian
and medical purposes the Suleiman al Halabi corridor between Eastern and Western
Aleppo;
6.
Welcomes the initiative of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Syria of 6 October 2016 on normalizing the situation in Aleppo and requests the
Secretary-General to present to the Security Council a detailed plan for its
implementation in cooperation with interested parties for the purpose of the
endorsement by the Security Council;
7.
Reiterates that the only sustainable solution to the current crisis in Syria
is through an inclusive and Syrian-led political process that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people, with a view to full implementation of the Geneva
Communiqué of 30 June 2012 as endorsed by resolution 2118 (2013), as well as full
implementation of resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016) while acting
simultaneously and without preconditions on political, humanitarian and
counterterrorism parallel tracks;
8.
Deplores the protracted delay in all-Syrian political process, demands to
bring to immediate end further postponement of inclusive negotiations and
expresses in this regard its fullest support for the Special Envoy’s efforts towards a
full implementation of resolution 2254 and urges all parties to the Syrian conflict to
cooperate constructively, without preconditions and in good faith with the Special
Envoy to this end in his efforts aimed at an early resumption of the intra-Syrian
political dialogue, and reaffirms that the future of Syria should be decided by the
Syrians themselves;
9.
Requests further the Secretary-General to report to the Council in due
course on the implementation of this resolution by all parties to the Syrian conflict;
10.

16-17500

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

3/8

S/2016/847

Annex
Reducing Violence, Restoring Access and Establishing the JIC
Geneva, 9 September 2016
The Russian Federation and the United States (hereafter — “the Sides”) intend
to undertake joint efforts to stabilize the situation in Syria, with special measures for
the Aleppo region. Delineation of territories controlled by ISIL, “Jabhat Al -Nusra”,
and moderate armed opposition forces remains a key priority, as does separating
moderate opposition forces from Nusra.
The Sides will designate a date and time at which the following measures will
go into effect (designated as “Day D”).
1.
On Day D, all parties to the cessation of hostilities (CoH) in Syria wil l
recommit to the CoH and honour its terms in full, as set forth in the February 22,
2016 Joint Declaration of the Russian Federation and the United States, for a
48-hour period. In particular, these terms include: ceasing all attacks with any
weapons, including aerial bombardments, rockets, mortars, and anti-tank guided
missiles; refraining from acquiring or seeking to acquire territory from other parties
to the CoH; allowing humanitarian agencies rapid, safe, unhindered and sustained
access throughout areas under their operational control and allowing immediate
humanitarian assistance to reach all people in need; employing proportionate use of
force (i.e. no greater than required to address an immediate threat) if and when
responding in self-defence. The Sides will agree and inform all parties as to the date
and time for Day D.
2.
On D+2, if the CoH in Syria has continued to hold to the mutual
satisfaction of the Sides, they will extend it for a mutually agreed upon period of
time. Subsequently, the Sides may decide to extend the CoH indefinitely, under the
same terms. The Sides will use their influence with the parties to fully honour the
terms of the CoH.
3.
Special measures will also go into effect for the Castello Road area in
Aleppo (as defined by mutually determined coordinates), specifically:
a.
Beginning Day D, and even prior to the establishment of
checkpoints on the Castello road, humanitarian assistance will be delivered
consistent with the terms of the CoH and established UN procedures, an d in
coordination with relevant UN representatives. At the Turkish border, the UN
Monitoring Mission (UNMM) will continue to inspect and seal the trucks
designated for delivery of humanitarian assistance via Castello Road to
Eastern Aleppo. The seals will not be broken and the trucks will not be opened
by any authority between the point of their review and sealing in Turkey and
the point of their unloading at UN and its partners’ warehouses in east and
west Aleppo.
b.
The Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC) (or another agreed upon
third party) will operate as soon as possible two checkpoints (at agreed upon
locations) to verify that, until UNOPS checkpoints are established as described
in this very paragraph below, only trucks inspected by the UNMM are
transiting the road, and that the seals have not been broken. A small

4/8

16-17500

S/2016/847

detachment of no more than twenty armed personnel per shift provided by, and
mutually acceptable to, the government and opposition forces, will provide
security for the SARC personnel at the checkpoints on the western and eastern
ends of the Castello Road, respectively. The UN will monitor (by physical
presence or remotely) the activities of all personnel at the checkpoints. These
SARC-manned checkpoints and physical security for them will be handed over
to independent, international personnel under the direction of UNOPS (or
another agreed upon third party), as soon as they can be deployed. These
internationally managed checkpoints will provide for the phased -in
unrestricted movement of all humanitarian, commercial and civilian traffic on
Castello Road, as well as the non-use of the road for the transport of weapons
(in accordance with procedures to be developed). Phasing will proceed as
quickly as possible, when those managing the checkpoints a ssess, in
consultation with the UN and the Sides, that they have the capabilities to
accommodate the traffic in a safe and orderly manner.
c.
Simultaneous with the establishment of the SARC or another
agreed upon third party checkpoints indicated in 3 (b), pro-government forces
and opposition units will pull back simultaneously from Castello Road, and the
vacated area will be considered a “demilitarized zone.”
Specifically, pro-government forces will:
• Pull back heavy weapons such as armoured fighting vehicles and infantry
fighting vehicles (other than BTR-60 and BMP-1 without ATGM), tanks,
artillery, and mortars, to a distance of 3,500 m north of the road;
• Pull back crew-served machine guns, BTR-60 and BMP-1 without ATGM to a
distance of 2,500 m north of the road;
• Pull back all personnel, other than those present at two observation posts, to a
distance of 1,000 m north of the road armed with only small arms or light
machine guns;
• On the south side of the road, pull back all personnel, weapons and equipment
to a distance of 500 m from the road;
• Establish up to two observation posts no less than 500 m north of Castello
road. The locations will be mutually agreed upon, depending on terrain, with a
staff of up to 15 persons equipped with small arms only for self-defence and
observation equipment;
• Not impede any humanitarian, civilian and commercial traffic transiting
Castello Road; and
• Not occupy areas that opposition groups vacate or set up positions in the
demilitarized zone, other than the observation posts.
Opposition forces will simultaneously undertake the following actions:
• On the eastern end of Castello Road on the agreed-upon map (to be
determined), the opposition will operate depending on the actions of the
Kurdish militia units: if the Kurds are present north of Castello Road, the
opposition will remain in place; if the Kurds pull back 500 m south of Castello

16-17500

5/8

S/2016/847

Road, the vacated area will be considered to be demilitarized and the
opposition groups will pull back 500 m north of the road;
• On the western end of Castello Road (on the line of contact extending north
from the Castello shopping complex), the opposition pullback will be
conducted analogous to the withdrawal of pro-government forces enumerated
above;
• Opposition groups located in the 31/15 quadrant of the Russian-provided map,
to the north of the Castello shopping complex, will pull back heavy weapons
such as armoured armoured fighting vehicles and infantry fighting vehicle s
(other than BTR-60 and BMP-1 without ATGM), tanks, artillery, and mortars,
to a distance of 3,000 m north; pull back crew-served machine guns, BTR-60
and BMP-1 without ATGM to a distance of 2,500 m north; pull back all
personnel to a distance of 1,000 m north with only small arms or light machine
guns;
• Along the portion of the road that runs from the Castello shopping complex to
near the Layramoun Circle, the opposition groups will pull back personnel and
weapons to 500 m north of Castello Road. T his mirrors the pullback of
pro-regime forces to 500 m south of the Castello Road between those points;
• Not impede any humanitarian, civilian and commercial traffic transiting
Castello Road;
• Will not occupy areas that pro-regime forces vacate or set up positions in the
demilitarized zone, other than the observation posts; and
The opposition will make every effort to prevent Nusra forces from advancing
into the demilitarized zone from opposition-held areas adjacent to it.
d.
Any Syrians can leave Aleppo via Castello Road, including armed
opposition forces with their weapons, with the understanding that no harm will
come to them and they can choose their destination. Opposition forces leaving
Aleppo with weapons must coordinate ahead of time with UN repres entatives
as to the time they will be using Castello Road and the number of personnel
and weapons and military equipment departing. It is also understood that no
harm will come to civilians or to opposition forces who abide by the CoH and
who choose to remain in Aleppo.
e.
Any reported violations of the demilitarized zone by any party will
be addressed by the United States and Russia. In the event of a penetration of
the demilitarized zone by fighters from Nusra after the JIC has been
established, the United States and Russia will act in accordance with the
provisions of the JIC Terms of Reference (ToR).
f.
On Day D, both pro-government forces and opposition groups in
the Ramouseh gap will provide safe, unhindered and sustainable humanitarian
access to eastern and western Aleppo. They will also facilitate unrestricted
movement of all commercial and civilian traffic on the Khan Tuman Road in
the Ramouseh Gap in coordination with the UN and establish a monitoring
mechanism to be agreed to by the Sides and the UN as soon as possible to
ensure access is unimpeded. For this purpose, technical teams from the Sides

6/8

16-17500

S/2016/847

and the UN will convene by Day D+4. The delivery of humanitarian assistance
will be consistent with the terms of the CoH and established UN procedures ,
and in coordination with relevant UN representatives. Neither the opposition
groups nor pro-government forces will launch attacks within the area indicated
in the attached map, and according to the corresponding geo -coordinates
(hereinafter referred to as the “area”). Neither the opposition groups nor
pro-government forces will attempt to acquire new territory from the other in
the “area”.
4.
The Sides will confirm to each other that the Syrian government and
opposition have agreed to adhere to the applicable obligations in the JIC’s ToR,
including with respect to the Designated Areas (per geo -coordinates agreed upon by
the Sides) where Syrian military aircraft cannot operate, except f or agreed
non-combat flights, and where the Sides will develop targets for action against
Nusra.
5.
The Sides will announce the establishment of the JIC, on the basis of the
ToR and Designated Areas agreed by the Sides, once measures in paragraphs 1 -4
above (with exception of the deployment of UNOPS checkpoints and associated
movement of commercial and civilian traffic on the Castello Road and the
implementation of the monitoring mechanism referenced in paragraph 3 f) have
been implemented to their mutual satisfaction, including at least seven continuous
days of adherence to the CoH.

16-17500

7/8

S/2016/847

Ref A — Annex
• The Sides will commence preparatory work for the JIC, beginning Day D.
These preparations will include initial discussion and sharing of information
necessary for the delineation of territories controlled by Nusra an d opposition
groups in the areas of active hostilities for the purpose of ultimate operation of
the JIC. The more comprehensive process of delineation will be conducted by
experts once the JIC is established. Preparations for the JIC will also include:
identifying suitable interim and long-term premises; determining necessary
working procedures, consistent with the already agreed Terms of Reference
(TOR); and determining if there are mutually agreeable adjustments that
should be made, consistent with changes on the ground, to the already agreed
map of the Designated Areas, so that JIC can be fully functional as soon as
there are seven continuous days of adherence to the CoH and access to Aleppo
as per the terms of this understanding.
• In the period between Day D and the establishment of the JIC, the Sides will
each develop actionable Nusrah and Daesh (ISIL) targets so as to be in a
position to share them in a way that allows strikes to commence on the day the
JIC is established. Simultaneous with U.S. or Russian strikes on targets agreed
to within the JIC, all Syrian military air activities — fixed and rotary wing —
will be halted in the agreed designated areas pursuant to the agreed ToR.
• On Day D, government and opposition groups that are parties to the CoH shall
confirm to the Sides their commitment to the CoH. Any violation of the CoH
before or after the JIC is established will be dealt with in accordance with the
terms for the CoH agreed to in the Joint Statement of February 22, 2016 and
the Standard Operating Procedures to Support the Cessation of Hostilities of
March 28, 2016.
The Sides commit to expedite the deployment of UNOPS on Castello Road as
agreed in paragraph 3 (b).
Day D will commence at 19:00 Damascus time on Monday, 12 September,
2016.
• Each Side reserves the right to withdraw from this arrangement if they believe
the terms have not been fulfilled.

8/8

16-17500
