TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

I
th

MEETING: 28 SEPTEMBER 1971
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (SIAgenda/ 1585) . , . , , . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . , . , . . . .
Adoptionoftheagenda

..,.

. . . . . ,.,....,........

Page
1

.............

1

The situation in Namiüia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia,
the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar,Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and Zambia (S/10326);
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia (S/i 0330) . . , . . . . . . .

1

SJPV.1585

FIFI’EEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-FIFTII

Meld in New York on Tuesday, 28 Jeptember
President: Mr. TOIY NAKAGAWA

(Japan).

MEETING
l.971, at 3 p.m.

in the debateto take their seats,with the Conncil’sconsent,
in the placesreservedfor them,

Freserzt: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

2. 1 invite the representativesof Sudanand of Liberia to
take seatsat the Council table. 1 invite the representatives
of Ethiopia, South Africa, Guyana, Chad and Nigeria to
take the placesreservedfor them at the sideof the Council
charnber. I invite the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibiato take a seatin the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l%Lp)
A t the invitation of the President,Mr. M. Khalid (Sudan)
and Mr. J. R. Grimes(Liberia) took placesat the Security
Council table, and Mr. T. Makonien (Ethiopiu), Mr. H.
Muller (South Africa), Mr. S. S. Ramphal(Guyana), Mr. B.
Hassane(Chad), Mr. 0. Arikpo (Nigeria) and Mr. E. 0.
Ogbu, Presidentof the UnitedNations Councilfor Namibia
toJk the placesreservedfor thern in the Council chamber.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
(4 Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, the
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya,
Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger,
Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalis, the
Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/10326);
Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/10330).

3. The PRESIDENT: The first speakeron the list for this
afternoon is the distinguishedSecretaryof State of Liberia,
to whom 1now give the floor.
4. Mr. GRIMES (Liberia): May I expressmy appreciation
for the invitation extended me to participatein this debate
on the question of Namibia, which is not only of prime
importance to the people of Africa but may alsohave a
profound effect on the effectivenessof the Organization
itself?

5. After listening yesterday to a real display of legal
pyrotechnies during which we heard a rehashof all the
argumentsof the South African Governmentadvancedby
its Forei.gnMinister to becloud the issues
in this matter and
The agenda was adop ted.
to shroudits blatant defïance of the United Nations,1 am
convincedthat, more than ever before,thereis a compelling
The situation in Namibia:
need for a positive responseby the UnitedNationsto meet
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed ta the
the challenge posed by South Africa’s persistent and
President of the Security Council from tbe representaimpudent disregard of the Organization’s.authority to
tives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, the
superviseNamibia. The records abound with decisions
Central African Republic, L%ad, the Congo (Demotaken both by the General Assemblyandby the Security
cratic Kepublic of), Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, EthiCounciI, all of which have been adamantlydisobeyedand
opia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, the
Libyan AraI) Republic, Madaga,scar,Mali, Mauritania, ignored by South Africa, the Mandatory of what was
Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s formerly South WestAfrica.
Republic of tha Congo,Rwanda, Senegal,SierraLeone,
Somaba,the Sudan, Swaziband,Togo, Tunisia,Uganda, 6. As far back as9 Februsry 1946,the GeneralAssembly,
the United Republic of Tanzania, the UpperVolta and by its resolution 9 (Ij, invited all States administering
Zambia (S/10326);
Territories held under mandate to submit trusteeship
@j Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committeeon Namibia agreementsSOthat Mandate(1Territories could be placed
(SllO330)
under the United Nations trusteeshipsystem.All Mandatories except South Africa respondedby concludingsuch
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions agreementsor by bringing the Territoriesto independence.
taken yesterday 1 shallproceedto invite thoseparticipating Other decisionsby the General Assembly,too many to
Adoption of the agenda

‘.

.

;-

‘,’

enume~ate here nnd increasing Q;I gravit y according to the
contemptuous attitude of the South Afrjcan Government
ovcr a period of more than a qilarter of a centuly, bave
been taken wilhout success to assert the firganization’s
authority in respect. of Mamibia, a sacred trust of civilizetion.

accordance with the intention of the parties and the
provisionsof the Charter that, due to the dissolutionof thc
League, the United Nations is the appropriate forum for
supervidngthe fulfiltnent of the obligations of the Mandate.
12. ‘The intention of the League is no less clear. After
attributing to itself the responsibilitiesof the Council by
adoption of its resolution of 12 April 1944, the Assembly
of the League,on ! 8 April 1946, adopted a resolution for
the continuation of the Mandatesand the Mandate System,

7. As a resull: of South Africa’s recalcitrance as wcil as its
abject refusai to fuulfil its obligations in respect of the
administration of the Mandated Territory of South West
Africa and to ensure the moral and material well-being and
security of the indigenous inhabitanls of the Territory, the
General Assembly erentually decided, by its resolution
2145 (XXI), to terminate South Africa’s Macdate over
Namibia. Subsey«e:ltly, the Security Council, in its resolutien 276 (197Oj, reaffirmed General Assembly resolution
2145 @XI) and its own pravious resolulion 264 (1969), in
which it recognized the tarmination of the Mandate and
called upon the Covernmant of South Africa to withd.raw
itnmediately its administration from the Territory of South
West Af~$ca. The Sccurlty Council also declared the
continued presence of the South African aulhorities in
Natnibia illegal and that conseyuently ail acts taken by thc
Government, of South Rfriça 011 be!lalf’ of or conccrning
Namibia (aftcr the termination of the Mandate are illegal
and invalid.

13. South Africa itself h.asadmitted on several‘occasionsfor cxample, on 9 April, 17 October, 4 November and 13
November 1946-that its obligations under the Mandate
continuedafter the dissohltionof the League.
14. This Government also recognized the competenceof
th.e General Assembly for the Mandate of South West
Africa on 22 January 1946, even before the dissolutionof
the League,and later on 14 December 1946 during the
secondpart of the first sessionof the GeneralAssemblyof
the United Nations. In this connexion the Membersof the
United Natiol:s are bound also to take into account the
South African Government’sletter to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, of 11 July 1949,l illegal in character
though it is, in which that Government purported to
withdraw its recognition of the supervisoryauthority of the
United Nations in respectof the Mandate over South West
Africa.

8. For’most States htiving regard for the rule of law and
respecting the will of the international community, such
decisions made by the General Assembly as well as by the
Security Council, would bave hzd important repercussions
ti the mattar at hand. This, unfortum&ely, bas not becn ihe
case wlth thc Government of South A.fïica. Its position
with ragard to Namibia remained unchanged, and if
continues to üpply its heinous poliçy of frpartlzeid in
Namihla, coni.rary to the obligationsof tbe sacredtrust of
the Territory and its people. And, asif this sii’ualionwas
anticipate& the Sscurity Council declared in its rcsolution
276 (1970) that the defiant attitude of the Govornment of
South Africa towards the Council’s decisionsundertnéned
the authority of the United Nations.

1.5. The history of developmentsover the past yearsin the
General Assembly, aswell as the decisionsof the Seçurity
Courcil and the International Court of Justice on this
matter, a11support the United Nations successionto the
Leaguein respectof the Mandate, main’tninthe obligations
of the Manclatory and justify the power of lhe United
Nalions to terminate the South African Mandate over
Namibia.
1.G. Xt is therefore the obligation of this Organization and
its h/lembers,in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter-for example, Article 2, paragraphS--to take steps
to compel South Africa to respectits international obligationswith regardto Narnibia.

9. Tt cannot. be doubted that the [Jnited Nations as
successorto the keague of Nations has the right to
superviseand control the Mamdateof Namibis, formerly
Suuth West Africa. 1)evelopments over the past years
confirm this vies regarding Mandates in general ‘and
Mamibia in particular. Inherent in the establislunerltof the
system of Mandates by the League was jts power to
superviseand contrai the Mandates as a sacred trust of
civilisation, and safeguardsfor -theperfounance of this trust
were embodied in the League’sCovenatrl..Each agreement
defined the obligations of tho Mandatories. Thus the
pro-visionsof the Covenant and those of the respective
,Mandatesthemselvesprecluded any doubt asto the abject
of tlre Mandatory’s obligations.

17. Since 1949 South Africa has also introduced into and
applied in Namibia its diabolical policy of apartheid
contrary to the intention of the Leagueand the United
Nations and to the tenns of the Mandate front which it
derived its righ1.sand assumedobligations with respectto
the Territory and its people. The application of apartheid
to ihe Territory is inconsistentwith the obligations of the
Mandate and its purposes.Article 22, paragraph8, of the
Covenant of the Leagueprovided, inter alia, that “The
degree oÎ authority, control, or administration to be
exercisedby the Mandatory shall, if not previously agreed
u-on by the membersof the League, be explicitly defined
in each case by the Council”. No such agreementor
definition exists to authorize the application of apartheid
ta the Territory. Thus this illegal act is repugnant to the
----

10. There is also no doubt in my mind that the power to
supervise and control the Mandat,es of the League falls
within the competence, functions and powers of the
General Assemhly.
11. The General Assembly, the Security Councl! and the
International Court OF Justice bave a11decided both in

1 Sec Oflicinl Records of the Fourth Session of the General
AsSenlh!Y, Annex to the Fourth Committee, document A/929.

2

i
’

principle on which the syslem was established. ‘The International Court of Justice states in its 19.50 Advisory
Opinion2 that:

may l.erminatc its obligations at wili v&hout an express
provision Of the contract granting that right. Such a
contention is supported neither by international iaw, nor
by the interna1hw of South Afi-ica itself.

“The Mandate was crcated, in the interest of the
inhabitants of the territory, and of humanity in general,
as ,an international institution with an international
abject.-a sacred trust of civilization.”

22, On thc mattcr of un&nity in the I.,eagueof Nations,
arguing that lhe principie of unanimity would lrave prevented the Leaguefrom revok.ingthe Macdate would, in
our opinion, postulat? an impossibility. Thercfore, the
conient of the wrongdner-.in this caseSouth Africa-could
net
have been reyuired in the Leaguefoa a revocation of
the M[andate. It seemsto me ridiculous, if not downright
absurd,to argue that thé> keaguehad authority to confer a
hlandatc by an agreementvalidly executed,but surrendered
its power to revoke the agreementeven if it reachedthe
conclusion that the ten-ns of the agreernenthad been
violated by the nther party.

18. The refusa1 of South Africa to perîorm its obligations
under the Mandate, as well as its iIlega1 app!ication of its
policy of qarthaid, among other things, in the administration of the Territory constituie a fundamental breach of its
obligations under the Mandate. In view of South Africa’s
breach of its obligations under the Mandate, the United
Nations, by its resolution 2145 @XI) decided that the
Mandate was terminated and that South Africa had no
other right to administer the TeIritory.
19. Subsequently, the Security Council adopted several
resolutions, including resolution 276 (1970j, reaffirming
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI> which de&ayed
the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia to he
illegal. Objections have baen raised on several ,grounds 10
the power of the Gerieral Assembly to terminate South
Africa’s Mandate, objectionswhich, in my opinion, arenot
supported either by law or by practice. Yesterday, the
South African Foreign Minister dwelt at len& on the la&
of power to temlinate the Mandate.
20. The Government of Liberia has never acceptedthe
speciouscontention that the Covenant did not confer on
the L,eague--and
that, therefore, the United Nations,asits
successor,
could not have acqojred-the power to terminate
the Manda.te.It is a fundamental Princip!e of law that to
every right there is a correspondingduty, and the existence
or continuation of the right dcpendson the performanceof
the correspondingduty. The general principle of international law to terminate a treaty cannot be presumedto be
excluded, and it applies even if unexpressedin a treaty.
This is confirmed in Article 60, paragraph5, of the Vienna
Convention. Moreover, a. Mandate is inherently revocable,
and the revocability of the Mandate wasindeed envisaged
by the proposalmade concerning the system,It is interestingthat the South African Foreign Minister shouldrefeI
to The Lcape of Nations: A Pmctkal Suggestionby J. C.
S;nuts,publishedin 1918.3
21. The Government of South Africa hasclaimedthat the
General Assetnbly, as successorto the League,does not
have the power to terminate the Mandate becausethe
Leaguedid not have this power. Yet this sameGovernment,
as Mandatory, ascribedto itsel’ the right unilaterally ta
tenninate its obligation under the sameMandate,ascaribe
seenfrom its letter of 11 July 1949 referred to above, as
well as its subsequentrefusrtl to submit reports on the
Territory. In other words, this Government i’sarguingthat
amongcontractors the grantor may not terminate a given
right of the granteeasa result of breach of obligationsby
the grantee without the latter’s consent, but the grantee
2 Intwnati&al
I.c..t Reports

Satus of ,fJouth
1950, p. 128,

West Afkica,

Advisory

23, I was ~cally surprisedhy .ihe assertionof the South
Africau Foreign Minister yesterday that thr: GeneralAssembly 112s only ths power tu discussand the power to
recommend, and that it cannot make binding decisions.
Carried to its lngical concIusion,this argumeritwodd mean
that thc GcnerdlAssemblycanonly discussand rccommend
admissionof new Members, cari only discussand recornmend a budget, cari only discussand recommendthe
apportionment of cxpenres among Members,but cannot
decide any of Wesethings. No one herewould suggest
that
suchan argument could be takcn seriously.That anyjudgc
of the International Court could bave statedin dissentthat
there was no satisfactory answerto suchan argumentraises
seriousdoubts in rny mind as to his objectivity on this
matter.
24. Theseargumentsof South Africa areonIy examplesof
the hçade of legality behind which the Governmentof that
country has been attempting to deceivethe international
community. In its resol.ution 264 (1969), the Security
Council declared that as a result of the termination of the
Mandate of South Africa over Namibja “the continued
presenceof South Africa in Wamibiais illegalandcontrary
to the principles of the Charter and the previousdecisions
of the United Nations and isdetrimentalto the interestsof
the population of the Territory and those of the international community” and that “the Governmentof South
Africa has no right to cnact the ‘South WestAfrica Affairs
Bill’ designedto destroy the national unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia”.
25. The Security Council also deçided in its resolution
269 (1969) “that the contintled occupation of the Territory of Namibia by the South African authorities constitutes an aggressiveencroachment011 the authority of the
United Nations, a violation of the territorial integrity and a
denial of the political soveieignty of the people of
Namibia;“.
26. Fi&l~, jil its resolution 276 (1970), the Council
declared: “that the continued presenceof the South
African aulhorities in Namibia is illegal and that cons@
quently ail acts taken by the Government of South Africa
011bebalf of or concemingWamibiaafter the termination of
the Mandate are illegaland invalid;“.

Opinion;

3 Hodder and Stougjlton, London.

3

withdraw its administration from Namibia immediately
and thus put an end to its occupation of the Territory;

27. In accordance with the request for an Opinion on this
matter, the International Court of Justice had advised in
paragraphs 122 to 125 of that opinion,4 asbeing inconsistent with resolution 27U (1970) on dealingsby States
with South Africa asfollows:

“(2) that States Membersof the United Nations are
under obligation to recognize the illegality of South
Africa’s presencein Namibia and the invalidity of its acts
on behalf of or concerningNamibia, and to refrain from
any acts and in particular any dealingswith the Government of South Africa implying recognition of the legality
of, or lending support or assistance
,to, suchpresenceand
administration;

‘Member States [of the United Nations] are under
obligation [subject to paragraph 1251 to abstain from
entering into treaty relations with South Africa in ail
casesin which the Government of South Africa purports
to act on behalf of or concerningNamibia. With respect
to existing bilateral treaties, Member Statesmust abstain
from invoking or applying those treaties or provisions of
treaties concluded by South Africa on behalf of or
concerning Namibia which involve active intergovernmental co-operation.With respectto multilateral treaties,
however, the same rule cannot be applied to certain
general conventions such as those of a humanitarian
character, the non-performanceof which may adversely
affect the people of Namibia. It Will be for the competent
international organs to take specifiç measuresin this
respect.

“(3) that it is incumbent upon States which are not
Membersof the United Nations to give assistance,
within
the scopeof subparagraph(2) above, in the action which
has been taken by the United Nations with regard to
Namibia.”
30. As indicated above, suchdecisionswould be sufficient
in the case of most States to correct the situation in
Namibia, andfor all other Mandatories this courseof action
wasno,trequired.

‘Member States . . . are under obligation to abstain
from sending diplomatie or specialmissionsto South
Africa including in their jurisdiction the Territory of
Namibia, to abstain from scnding consular agents to
N‘arnibia,and to withdraw any suchagentsalready there.
They should also make it clear to the South African
authorities that the maintenanceof diplomatie or consular relations. . . does not imply any recognition of its
authority with regardto Namibia.

31. IL is no secretthat a variety of external influences,
economic, political and other, has encouragedthe South
African Government in its defiant attitude towards, and
contempt for, the world Organization. Equally significantis
the fact that this encouragementcornes chiefly from the
major Powers-particularly those States that have been
given primary responsibilityfor the maintenanceof international peaceand security,

“Member States [are under] obligation to abstaîn from
entering into economic and other forms of relationship . . . with South Africa on behalf of or concerning
Namibia which may entrench its authority over the
territoty.

32. In establishingthe United Nations Organtiation the
membersof the international community agreedto confer
on the Security Council the supremeand ultimate power to
ensurefaithful observanceof the agreed code of conduct
establishedamong themselves.Under these tules, it was
providcd in Article 25 of the Charter that, in general: “The
“[Hciwever,] non-recognition. . . shouldnet result in
depriving the people of Namibia of any advantages Membèrsof the United Nations agreeto acccpt and carry
out the decisionsof the Security Council in accordance
derived from international co-operation. In particular,
with the presentCharter.”
while officiai acts perfonned by the Govermnent of
South Africa on behalf of or concerningNamibia alter
the termination of the Mandate areillegal and invalid, the
33. No doubt was left as to the identity of those States
invalidity cannot be extended to those acts, such as,for
upon which final responsibilityfor the destiny of the world
instance,the registration of births, deathsandmarriages.” andits inhabitantswould rest.
28. I submit that this Advisory Opinion of the Intemational Court provides the basisfor action by this Organization to protect the interestsof the population of Namibia
and those of the international community in respect of the
Territory which is a sacredtrust of civilization.
29. The Court has submitted in responseto the question,
“What are the legal consequences
of the continued presence
of South Africa in Namibia, notwithstanding Security
Council resolution 276 (1970)“, the following Opinion, in
paragraph 133:
‘“(1) ,that, the continued presenceof South Africa in
Namibia being illegal, South Africa is under obligation to

31. It is in this light and on these grounds that the
Security Coud
must view the attitude of the Government
of South Africa and its own future. The defiance of ihe
South African Govermnent underminesin lilce degreethe
autholity of this Council and of the whole Organization, SS
the Council declaredin its resolution 276 (1970), and the
future 0’ the international legal order. It cuts at the very
roots of the systemin the establishmentof which SOmuch
time, money and effort have been expended and on which
the destiny of man SOmuch depends.
35. Yet it is inconsistent and paradoxical that the very
Powers to which primary responsibility for international
peaceand security hasbeenentrusted are thosewhich seem
to be indirectly supporting South hfrica, through investment and trade, in defying the will of the international
community.

1 Lq%l Consequences
for Skates of the Continued Pmsence of
South Africa in Namibia (SOU~?~ West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Couilcil rcsolution 276 (1970), Advisory Qpinion, 1.C.J
Reports 1971, p. 16.
4

36, Permit me to illustrate this point by reference to
quotations from the magazine Afrika, vol. 12, No. 4, 1971,
which shows that South Africa is actively assistedeconomicslly by the big Powers in its defiance of the decisions of
this Councll. It is reported, for example, that “total
American private investments in countries south of the
Sahara of about $1,500 million dollars include an estimated
$700 million in South Africa alone.” It goes on: “Although
the State Department of the United States does not
officially encourage investments in Namibia and supports
the 1963 embargo on arms to Pretoria, it has always been
opposed to economic sanctions.” “This”, it is added, “is
understandable if [it is] borne in mind, for instance, that
the American automobile industry controls 50 per cent of
South African production.” It is reported:

41. As indicated above, the Security Council, on 3 January 1970, made an important decision against the continued illegal occupation of Narnibia by the Government of
South Africa, and imposed definite obligations on the
members of the international community in an attempt to
give effect to its decision. But the support of ail Members
of the United Nations-especially that of the big Powers-is
indispensable for the effective implernentation of this
decision.
42. Non-compliance has been conveniently excused by
some on the ground of respect for the rule of law in
connexion with the jurisdiction of the United Nations in
this matter, and that is why the Security Council decided,
in its resolution 284 (1970), to request an advisory opinion
in accordance with Article 96, paragraph 1, of the Charter.

“The Soviet Union, according to South African trade
statistics, exported goods worth $500,000 to South
Africa in the first six months of 1969. Moscow even
supplied the South African army with auxiliary equipment such as instruments, electronic testing appliances,
spare parts and explosives following the arms embargo of
1963”.

43. It is important to note that, while the request made to
the Court was not directed to the question of the validity
of the General Assembly resolution and of the related
Security Council resolutions and while, therefore, the Court
did not presume to pronounce on that question, much of
the text of this opinion, as well as of the earlier opinions,
seems to bear out a clear inference in the affirmative.
Equally important is the size of the majority of the Court
in reaching this opinion.

In addition, the quotation continues:
“Paris assailed the South African market and took over
London’s traditional position in arms deliveries for the
South African anny. By the end of 1969 alone, it had
supplied raw material worth more than 3,000 million
francs”.

44. Finally, to quote the representative of Finland in the
Security Council debate on resolution 284 (1970), there is
the effect the opinion cari have of exposing the false front
of legality which the South African administration has been
using to neutralize hostile public opinion and cause a
stagnation of initiatives among countries that are committed to respect the judicial process, or otherwise conveniently claim or pretend to do SO.

It is further shown that “French ,trade with Pretoria
doubled between 1960 and 1969”.
37. Reference is also made to the United Kingdom
Govemment’s cal1 in March 1971 for a revision in the
House of Commons of the embargo resolutions of 1963 and
1964 “with the intention to resume arms deliveries”.

45. On the other hand, it is also to be noted that the
South African Government has already rejected the Ad+
sory Opinion of the International Court of Justice and
declared its intention to continue to administer the
Territory of Namibia.

38. Finally, reference was also made to the People’s
Republic of China, not a Member of the United Nations but
nevertheless bound by its decisions in accordance with the
provisions of Article 2, paragraph 6, whose trade with
Pretoria is reported to have reached in 1969 the value of
$US 15 million.

46. While, by its very nature, the Advisory Opinion of the
Court is not mandatory or binding upon States, 1 must
draw the attention of the Council to the wide degree of
accord and support that the members of the judicial organ
of the United Nations have given to the decisions taken by
the General Assembly and the Security Council in tbeir
attempt to promote achievement of the abjects and
purposes of the Charter in respect of Namibia and its
people.

39. There is no lack of competence on the part of the
Security Council to deal with the situation in Namibia, but
the effectiveness of the Council is being undermined by the
important Members of the United Nations, contrary to the
provisions of the Charter and the sacred obligations of
those countries. 1 submit that the obligation in Article 25 is
binding independently of the obligation connected with
specific decisions and actions made or taken by the Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter, and any violation thereof
is not only a breach of faith but also a breach of a
fundamental contractual international obligation on the
part of the Members of the United Nations.

47. Having regard to General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI), Security Council resolutions 282 (1970) and
283 (1970), as well as the Court’s Advisory Opinion of 21
June 1971, 1 cal1 upon the Secretary-General to collect and
circulate among States Members of the United Nations sll
data and information concerning fore@ economic, financial and other interests operating in Namibia which benefit
the South African Government and the investor Governments and companies and are detrimental to the interests of
th.e population of Namibia. The free and open circulation
of such information would focus attention on some of the
sources from which the South African Government receives

40. It is ah too clear how the arbitrary imposition by such
extemal forces of limitations on the effectiveness of the
Organization,, operates to ,the detriment of the Organizatioll
and of the international Eommunity.
5

55. The Council now has before it the submission of the
International Court of Justice on the status of the Territory
as well as the report of the AdHoc
Sub-Committee. It is no
secret that the Court concluded that the Mandate was
validly tenninated and that South Africa’s presence in
Namibia is illegal and its acts on behalf of or concerning
Namibia are illegal and invalid. It follows, therefore, that:

support in its defiance of decisions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, and in the face of the Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice and world
opinion asa whole.
48. This defiance shown by South Africa to pressure from
ail quarters of the international scene and South Africa’s
open determination to continue its illegal presence in
Namibia constitute an act of aggression and must be
regarded as satisfying one of the requirements of Article 39
of the Charter, by virtue of which the Security Council cari
take action to restore international peace and security.
Such action could include those measures listed under
Article 41 of the Charter.

(a) South Africa is under obligation to withdraw its
administration from Namibia immediately and thus put an
end to its occupation of the Territory;

(b) That States Members of the United Nations are under
obligation to recognize the illegality of South Africa’s
presence in Namibia and the invalidity of its actson behalf
of or concerning Namibia and to refrain from any acts md
in particular any dealings with the Government of South
Africa irnplying recognition of the legality or of lending
support of legality to such persons and administration;

49. This situation in Namibia also highlights the need to
devise some means of ensuring respect for the decisions of
the Organization, particularly those of the Security Council, when its permanent members are involved.
50. Africa calh upon the major Powers to respect their
obligations under the Charter and to prove themselves
deserving of the special stations that have been assigned to
them under the terms of Articles 23 and 27 of the Charter
for the protection and preservation of the international
community against arbitrary violations of the principles and
rules laid down in the Charter, including Me principle of
self-determination and the respect for fundamental human
rights.

(c) That it is incumbent upon States which are not
Members of the United Nations to give assistancewithin the
scope of(b) above in the action which has been taken by
the United Nations in regard to Namibia.
56. We are here to discuss in detail the report of the
Sub-Committee on Namibia together with whatever assistance we cari get from the report of the International Court
and not the provocative intervention of Mr. Muller of the
racist régime of South Africa. However, since he made scme
outrageous claims yesterday, the Security Council Will
permit me to mention and deal with a few of tbe legal
irrelevancies he tried to push down our throats.

51. We, in Africa, are convlnced that the cause of the
people of Namibia is a just one and Will prevail because it is
right. The Security Council has the great opportunity to
give immediate effect to the achievement of the rights of
these people. There may ‘be delays and there may be
obstacles, but nothing cari stop the ultimate achievement’of
these rights by the Namibian people.

57. First of ail, we must by now have realized that the
word “Namibia” is anathema to certain people. On page 68
of the Advisory Opinion, Justice Ammoun tells us something about Namibia:

52. Mr. President, in thanklng you again for the opportunity given me to express an opinion on this burning issue
on behalf of Africa, 1 wish tu reserve the right to intervene
further especially when a draft resolution on this matter is
introduced.

“Namibia, even at the periods when it had been reduced
to the status of a Gerrnan colony or was subject to the
South African Mandate, possessed a legal personality
which was denied to it only by the law now obsolete. It
was considered by the Powers of the day as a merely
geographical concept taking its name from its location in
the South-West of the African Continent. It nevertheless
constituted a subject of law that was distinct from the
German State, possessingnational sovereignty but lacking
the exercise thereof.”

53. Mr. PRAT’I (Sierra Leone): When the question of
Namibia was extensively diwussed in this Council last year
and the illegal occ+arion of that Territory by South Africa
exposed, the Council in paragraph 3 of its resolution
283 (1970) called upon ail States:
“ ..* to terminate existing diplomatie and consular
representation as far as they extend to Namibia, and to
withdraw any diplomatie or consular mission or representative residing in the Territory”.
54. It

further

58. Indeed, Justice Padilla Nervo goes a bit further still. In
his own comments at the very end of page 114 of the
report, Justice Padilla Nervo said:

decided in paragraph 1 of resolution

284 (1970) of the same day:

“Neither South Africa nor the United Nations has
possessedrights in Namibia for any purpose other than to
secure the rights and interests of the people of the
Territory. For the Mandate did not confer ownership or
sovereignty or permanent rights, but consisted only of a
conditional grant of powers for the achievement of a
purpose-not for the benefit of the grantee but for the
benefït of a third party, the people and Territory of
Namibia-which powers were to be relinquished as soon
asthe purpose was achieved.”

“to submit, in accordance with Article 96, paragraph 1,
of the Charter of the United Nations, the following
question to the International Court of Justice, with the
request for an advisory opinion which shall be transmitted to the Security Council at an early date:
“ ‘What are the legal consequences for States of the
continued presence of South Africa in Namibia, notwithstanding Security Council resolution 276 (1970)? ‘.”
6

And here 1 stress that there was no conferment of
ownership. What we are hearing today is the argument that
South Africa in practice possesses the Territory.

Those opinions would receive weight if they were logical.
They would become persuasive if they were objective. They
might even be legally admissible as case law if they
contained proper reasoning. But they must forever remain
sterile if they are subjective and time-serving. It is not for
me to suggest in what category the particular dissenting
Opinion falls. Far be il from me to wish to bore this
Council by an cxamination of legal principles when we are
not seated as an appellate court of the International Court
of Justice, and, indeed, we cannot be by vittue of Article
60 of the Statute of the International Court.

59. You Will remember, Mr. President, that after some
discussion yesterday, Mr. Muller of South Africa was
invited to participate on the clear understanding by
members that the letter of application was unfortunately
worded and that the opportunity
would, however, be
offered us to hear something constructive about the.
situation in Namibia. We were to bc disappointed.
60. At no time did Mr. Muller mention the word “Namibis”-at no tinte. He was always talking about South West
Africa. What does this show? I shah not give the answer.
The members cari draw the conclusions themselves. Further, during his discourse, Mr. Muller’sought to lay stress on
the contents of a particular dissenting Opinion of the
International Court of Justice. I have read through that
Opinion, which extends over some 110 pages. The subject
matter before the Court was Namibia. But how often did
that Word “Namibia” appear in those 110 pages? The
Council would be surprised. On only four pages of that
particular dissenting judgement-only
four pages; whereas
the term “South West Africa” appeared on no less than 86
pages. “What’s in a name? ” you may say. You cari guess
for yourselves.

65. However, to correct the records of the Security
Council, may 1 be permitted to show that the International
Court examined ail three arguments, and many more, put
forward by Mr. Muller, and that the great majority of the
Court?s members demolished those arguments one by one.
The first argument relates to the force and scope of the
General Assembly resolutions. Mr. Muller submitted that
the fundamental question in dispute before th.e International Court of Justice related to the basis of General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), and he went on, by
means of an irrelevant quotation, to adumbrate that the
Court did net advert itself to this question, but rather
evaded the issue.
66. Mr. Muller said that the General Assembly’s competente must be derived from the Charter, and ,then went on
to ask: why did the Court not make reference to the
appropriate Articles of the United Nations Charter? I bave
already stated that we are not sitting here as an appellate
court. Nor are we here in the Security Council to question
the International Court of Justice as to why it did not do
this or did not do that. But lest members may harbour the
erroneous idea that Mr. Muller’s charges are founded, let me
refer the Council to a few pages of the Court’s decision. Let
us turn to paragraph 89, which J shall quote:

61. Ever since 1945, nothing which the international
world says about Namibia has been acceptable to the racist
regime of South Africa-not
the earlier resolutions of the
United Nations, not the earlier decisions of the International Court of Justice, not the later resolutions of thc
United Nations, not the still later resolutions of the
Security Council, nor, should we expect, the present
Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice.
62. Mr. Muller’s negative intervention is thus not a
novelty. Again and again he reiterated that his Government
did not at ail accept the Opinion of the International Court
of Justice. What else did we expect. Mr. Muller based his
contentions of non-acceptability on three premises: tirstly,
that the powers of the General Assembly to adopt
resolutions with binding or executive force did not exist,
and that the General Assembly resolutions in relation to
Namibia were of no validity; secondly, that the Security
Council similarly had no such powers, and, worse still, that
the Security Council purported to derive powers from an
alleged invalid General Assembly resolution; and thirdly,
that in any case the nature of the League of Nations
Mandate in respect of South West Aftica was such that ii:
could not be validly terminated by the United Nations.

“The question of the validity or confomtity with the
Charter of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) or of
related Security Council resolutions does not form the
subject of the request for advisoly opinion. However, in
the exercise of its judicial function and since objections
have been advanced, the Court, in the course of its
reasoning, will consider these objections before determining any legal consequences arising from those resolutions.”
67. Therefore, we see here that the Court did refer to the
resolution, and, further, if we were to examine the sebarate
Opinions of the majority of the Judges, we would see that
each of them dwelt further on the competence of General
Assembly resolutions as regards Mandates. They a11agreed
that the resolutions of the General Assembly were not, in
respect of Mandates, limited only to the fonn of recommendations-and they formed the majority Opinion.

63. Mr. Muller then proceeded to find garments for these
threadbare premises by raking up certain discarded arguments appearing in the dissenting judgement, arguments
which have been effectively laid to rest by the binding
decision of the majority.

68. Mr. Muller further contended that General Assembly
resolution 21.45 (XXI) did not complain about South
Africa’s refusal to render reports; nevertheless, that was the
complaint on which the Court relied to base its findings.

64. It may perhaps be felt that dissenting Opinions of the
International Court of Justice should be given some weight,
particularly when those Opinions are expressed by juges of
international standing. 1 wouId agree. But there are certain
conditions which affect the force of dissenting opinions.

69. A close and detailed reading of paragraphs 87 to 105
inclusive of the judgement fa& to show any such lapse as
7

alleged. Iiather it is in the dissenting judgement favoured by
Mr. Muller, where, from paragraphs 11 to 61-that is to say,
throughout SO~I~36 pages, one fincls profuse references to
and arguments about what the dissenting Judge called
“reporting” and “accountability”.

made before the Court, as revealed by Sir Muhamma-d
Zafrulla Khan. That plea, on page 64, reads as follows:

70. Justice Petrén, while not completely accepting the
reasoning of his brethren in the majority decision, was very
clear about the scope of General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI). He explaias as follows on pages 132 and 133
of the report:

“ ‘In our submission, the general requirement placed by
the Charter on a11United Nations activities is that they
must further peace, friendly relations, and co-operation
between nations, and especially between member States.
South hfrica, as a member State, is under a duty to
contribute towards those ends, and she desires to do SO,
although she has no intention of abdicating what she
regards as lier responsibilities on the sub-continent of
southern Africa.

“Towards the close of his oral presentation the representative of South Africa made a plea to the Court in the
following temls:

“1 therefore consider that in the present case the Court
should have confined itseif to the finding that resolution
2 145 (XXI) is valid without examining the correctness of
the assessment of the facts upon which that resolution is
based. TO embark upon such an enquiry, as the Court has
done in the present Opinion, amounts to implying that
the Court could possibly have reached conclusions different from those of the General Assembly and could
therefore have declared the resolution invalid. But, in the
light of the foregoing, 1 consider that to be out of the
question.”
_ .

“ ‘If there are to be genuine efforts at achieving a
peaceful sohrtion, they will have to satisfy certain criteria.
They will have to respect the will of the self-determining
peoples of South West Africa. They Will have to take into
account the facts of geography, of economics, of budgetary requirements, of the ethnie conditions and of the
state of development.
“ ‘If this Court, even in an opinion on legal questions,
could indicate the road towards a peaceful and constructive solution along these lines, then the Court would have
made a great contribution, in our respectful submission,
to the cause of international peace and security . . .’ ”

71. The second argument of Mr. Muller related to the
nature and scope of Security Council recommendations. As
regards these, it appears that Mr. Muller was straining to
adopt a reasoning in the dissenting opinion which he
favoured, which reasoning is to be found on pages 291 to
295. The argument which Mr. Muller did not bother to give
runs as follows. If the Security Cour-mil has any special role
whatever in respect of mandates, it would be only for
peace-keeping purposes-that
argument will he found on
pages 291 and 292-and not for a disguised exercise in
“mandates supervision”:
“the various Security Council
resolutions involved did not, on their language, purport to
be in the exercise of the peace-keeping furmtion.” As a
result, ran the argument, “‘They were not binding on the
Mandatory”-that
is, South Africa-“‘or
on other member
States of the United Nations.”

[Those are not my words; those are the words of South
Africa.]
“ , . , to the cause of international peace and security and,
more, to the cause of friendly relations amongst not OI&
the nations but amongst a11men”.
And how cari Mr. Muller reconcile this plea with the
statement that the Court was nol seized of amatter which
involved international peace and security?
74. The third argument of South Africa is a little more
intricate and concerns the validity of the termination of
South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia. Here Mr. Muller
dwelt at some length, postulating that the South African
Govemment did not accept what it called “attempts” by
one or two of the majority Judges to apply their opinion to
South West Africa. He went near to charging the Court with
bias, suggesting that the Court had exceeded its own
jurisdiction, that the Court had relied on previous decisions
which had been hostile to South Africa, ignoring those
which supported the South African position. Indeed, the
first dissenting judgement devoted no less than 72 pages to
this contention.

72, The said dissenting Judge then based his reasoning on
paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 24 and on Article 25 of the
United Nations Charter. But the majority judgement
effectively exposed thc falïacy of the aforementioned
reasoning. I shah not read out paragraphs 107 to 116 of the
majority judgement. Suffice it to cite the beginning of
paragraph 109, which reads:
“It emeges from the communications bringing the
matter to the Security Council’s attention, from the
discussions held and particularly from the text of the
resolutions themselves; that the Security Council, when it
adopted these resolutions, was acting in the exercise of
what it deemed to be its primary responsibility, the
maintenance of peace and security , which, under the
Charter, cmbraces situations which rnight lead to a breach
of the peace. (Art. 1, para. 1.)”

75. We must realize that the Court dealt with this question
at length in the decision and, effectively, in my opinion,
demolished a11the arguments in that particular dissenting
judgement, appearing in paragraphs 42 to 69 of the report.
1 shall not be tempted by Mr.Muller to go through the
arguments; they are there in paragraphs 42 to 69.

73. South Africa rather wanted us to accept the thesis that
the situation in Namibia does no% constitute a threat to the
peace. I cannot understand how Mr. Muller could reconcile
this contention with the plea which South Africa itself

76. Eut let me analyse what the consequences of accepting
South Africa’s stance will be. South Africa, in effect, says
8

that it had a Mandate from the League of Nations. The,
League ceased to exist. The IJnited Nations then came into
being but did not enter into the League’s shoes in SOfar as
the Mandate was concerned. Even if th.e League had been in
existence, according to South Africa, it had no power to
terminate the Mandate Land, in any case, SO argues South
Africa, the United Nations also bas no power, either by the
General Assembly or by the Security Council, to terminate
the Mandate. Tbis appears to be thc reasoning of the
dissanting decision favoured by South Africa. And it is
interesting to look at that dissenting decision, particularly
on page 232, where a table prepared by that dissenting
Judge appears. The table shows a box in whicb appears
“VIII. Aim:” which indicates that that Mandate did not
aim at “Earliest possible bringing about of the independence of the Territory”, which is the aim of the United
Nations Trusteeship system, but at “Good administration
of the mandated territory”. The Mandate did not aim at
granting independence; the Mandate merely aimed at good
administration. In other words, South Africa is telling us
that under the League it had absolutely no obligation to
lead the peoples of Namibia to independence and, that
since the United Nations had no obligation or supervision
over it South Africa’s primary obligation merely of good
administration remained.

“ ‘In the years since 1915, South West Africa has
inevitably been integruted even more closely with the
Republic.
“ ‘In the light of this history, it is the view of the South
African Government that, if it is accepted that the
Mandate has lapsed, the South African Governrnent
would have the right to administer the Territory by
reasonof a combination of factors, being (a) its original
conquest;(b) its long occupation; (c) the continuation of
the sacredtrust basisagreedupon in 1920; and, inally
(d) because its administration is to the benefit of t.he
inhabitants of the Territory and is desiredby them. In
thesecircumstancesthe South African Governmentcannet accept that any State or organization cari bave a
better title’ that is the Word, net “claim”, ‘to the
Territory.’ ”
79. It is clear then that South Africa’s idea of Namibiais
one of a possession,suchasone possesses
someland in fee
simplein London.
80. Zafrulla Khan threw another light on South Africa’s
intentions at the top of page63 of the report:
“The representative of South Africa, while admitting
the right of the people of South West Africa to
self-determjnation, urgeclin his oral statementthat the
exercise of that right must take into full account the
limitations imposed, accorclingto him, on suchexercise
by the tribal and cultural divisions in the Territory. He
concluded that in the case of South West Africa selfdetermination ‘may wcll find itself practically restricted
to some kind of autonomy and 1ocaI self-government
within a larger arrangementof co-operation’(hearingof
17 March 1971). This in effect means a denial of
self-determination as envisagedin the Charter of the
United Nations.”

77. Mr. Muller wants us to accept tlzat the Mandate
survived the League and that the IJnited Nations has
nothing at ail to d.o with mandates or wit.1; Namibia. 1
understand this to mean that South Africa is claiming
Namibia as its private, persona1 property. This is alarming,
but it is not a new claim. In 1946 that claim was made.
South Africa wnnted to incorporate the Territoly into the
Union. This is shown on page 40 of the Advisory Opinion:
“ . * 1the representative of the Union of South Rfrica
submitted a proposal to the Second Part of the First
Session of the General Assembly in 1946, requesting the
approval of the incorporation of South West Africa into
the Union. On 14 Decembcr 1946 the General Assembly
adopted resolution 65 (1) notipg-‘. . . with satisfaction
that the Union of South Africa, by presenting this matter
to the United Nations, recognizes the interest and
concern of the United Nations in the matter of the future
status of territor.ies now held under mandate”

81. Ami Judge Ammoun puts the South African view in
technicalterms at the bottom of page84:
“South Africa ha3 not only contested the material
existence of the facts but also the interpretation placed
upon them hy thc General Assembly and the SecuritY
Council. Its point of view-rejected by a11States, even
those which question the validity of the measures
taken
againstSou& Africa-is that its administrationhasbeen
designedwith the preciseaim of realisingthe objectivesof
the Mandate, these being to promote thc well-beingand
socialprogressof the inhabitants; that accordinglyapartheid, or tn.e separatedevelopment of thesepopulations
was, givcn their stage of social evolution, instituted in
their own interest; that the measureswhich have been
deemedcontrary to the provisionsof’ the Charterand the
Universàl Declaration of Human Rights, in particular by
resolution 2145 (XXI) revoking the Mandate, were justitïed by the socio-anthropologicalcircumstancesand are
directed solely to the accomplisbmentof the mission
entrusted to South Africa.”

“and declared that it was ‘. . . unable to accede to the
incorporation of the territory of South West Africa in the
TJnion of South Africa.’ ”
78. Justice Padilla Nervo reveals this shocking piece of
evidence on pages 12 1 and 122:
“At the hearing of 15 March 1971, the representative
for South Africa stated:
“ ‘Against the background of the submission which we
had made in thc previous proceedings to the effect chat
the Mandate, as a whole, had lapsed, together with ail
obligations thereunder, the honourable President asked
the question “Under what title does the Government of
South Africa claîm to carry on the administration Of
Namibia? ” Our answer is as follows:

82. The civilized world hs never acceptedSouth Africa’s
claims.Those claimswere rejected aslong agoas 1950 by
the International Court of Justice itself. The Court then

” ‘South Africa cmquered the Territory by force of
arms in 1915, and administered it under military rule
until the end of the war.
9

said-and this ca11be found in paragraph 72), of the present
report:

which are embodied in the Charter and in the Univcrsal
Declaration of Human Rights.”

“ . . . the General A§sembly of the Uuited Nalions PS
IegalIy qualified to exercise the supervisory functions
previously excrcised by the League of Nations with regard
to the administration of the Territory, and that the Union
of South Africa is under an obligation to submit to
supervision and control of the Geueral Assembly and to
render annual reports ta it.

“The Court”, lie goes on, “is not a law-making body. It
declares the law, But it is a law discernible Dom the
progress of humanity, net an obsolete law, a vestige of
the inequalities between men, the domination and colonialism which were rife in international relationships up
to the beginning of this centuny but are now disappearing,
thanks to the stru@le being wagcd by the peoples and to
the extension to the onds of the world of the urtiversal
community of rnankind.”

83. Now Mr. Muller made some stattlhg propositions that
the International Court of Justice had exceeded itsjurisdiction and had applied wrong legal principles. Mr. Muller
evidently could not have grasped thc essence of Article 38
of the Statutes of the International CO-L&, which I quote:

It appears fhat South Africa would prefer the Court to
apply principles which operated in international relations
up to the beginning of this certtury.

“1. The Court, whose fonction is to decide in nccordance with international law such disputes as are submitted
to it, shall apply: (rr) international conventions, whcther
general or particular, establishing rules expressly recognized by the contesting States; (b) international custom,
as evidence of a general practice accepted as law; (c) t?le
general principles of law recognized by civilizcd nations;
(ci’) subject to the provisions of Article 59, judicial decisions
and the teachings of the most highly qualified publicists
of the various nations, as subsidiary means for the
determination of rules of law.

87. What was South Africa doing when it was raising this
spate of objections about the Court, of which Mr. Muller
has mentioned three? Sont.11Africa mentioned many more.
South Africa was in effect objecting to the jurisdiction of
the Court and it made this objection an issue, as an
examination of the report amply proves. But South Africa
forgot that Article 36, paragraph 6, of Ihe Statute made
adequate provision for such objections. That Article reads:
“In the event of a dispute as to whether the Court has
jurisdiction, the matter shall be settled by the decision of
the Court.” The Court considered the issue ,which South
Africa raised and decided against it in the matter of
jurisdiction. That decision of the Court was taken by a large
majority.

“2. This provision shall not prejudice the power of the
Court to decide a case es aequo et bono, if the partics
agree thereto.”

$8. Nov~, South Africa is saying, in effect, thut it does sot
subscribe to the provisions of Article 36 of the Court’s
Statutes, particularly paragraph 6. That, in effect, is what
Mr. Ml.lller is advocating before us: that South Africa still
says the Court has no jurisdiction and the Court could net
have given a decision on its jurisdiction, forgetting that it,
South Africa, cannot now renounce Article 93 of the
United Nations Charter. Article 93 of the United Nations
Charter makes il clear that: “Al1 Members of the United
Nations are ipso fucto partieS to the Statute of the
International Court of Justice.” You see, then, why we
Africans stitl say that we cannot trust the racist régime in
South Africa.

84. I wish to emphasize 1 (b), which relates to international custom, and 1 (c), which relates to the general
principles of law recognized by civilized nations, afld the
provision of paragraph 2 which alIows the Court to decide
cases on grounds of equity.
85. The Court expressed an opinion on the applicable
principles of law. In parngraph 53, the Court said:
“ . . . the Court must take into consideration the
changes which have occurred in the supervening halfCentury, and its interpretation cannot remain unaffected
by the subsequent development of law, through the
Charter of the United Nations and by way of customary
law. Moreover, an international instrument bas to be
interpreted and applied within the framework
of the
entire legal system prevailing at the lime of the interpretation. In the domain to which the present proceedings
relate, the last fifty years, as indicated ahove, have
brought important developments. These developments
leave little doubt that the ultimate objective of the sacred
trust was the self-detennination and independence of the
peoples concerned.”

89. Now, Mr. Mu&r cited a number of articles appearing
in certain British, Canadian and American newspapers.
Those quotations did not do him justice for two reasons,
Firstly, they were ail articles said to be written mainly
during the week of 20 to 26 June 1971. Why did these
articles a11appear during that particular week? Th& answer
is clear. Notices had been sent out previously, in accordance
with Article 58 of the Statutes of the International Court
of Justice, that the Court woüld deliver its Advisory
Opinion on 21 June 1971. One does not have to be a
moron to sense the feverish tremors throughout the world
on the part of the racist régime in South Africapractically
trying to obtain press opinion about the economic, social
and political consequences of South Africa’s remaining in
Namibia.

86. On page 72, Judge Ammoun has this to say:
“Again, the Court could no-t wmain an unmoved
witness in face of the evolution of modem international
law which is taking place in the United’Nations
through
the implementation and the extension to the whole world
of the principles of equality, liberty and peace in justice

90. The Security Council wanted a judicial opinion. South
Africa preferred press opinions and how well these press10

men played the game. But they ovcrplayed it writh injustice
to South Africa.

98. Mr. Muller clid not mention bis régime’spolicy of
estabhshingBantustans and the importation of apart,$eid
into South West Africa, as he called it, Namibja,as we
know it.

91. This brin@ me to the second reason. The Bible .tells us
about the voice of Jacob
and the hands of Esau. 1 venture
to suggest that those articles were, practically without
exception, dictated by the voice of South Africa, even
~~OU@I
they
appeared to be the hands of foreign correspondents.
92. Why do 1 say this’? Let us examine’them. But fïrst let
ns determine South Africa’s usual languagc and ter.minology. WC a.Il know that Soutlr Africa lias ncver acceptcd
the name Namibia-not even in this Council yesterday. To
South Africa the Territory has alwaysbeen, is, and ever Will
be South WestAfrica. TO the civilized world, to respectable
Americans, Canadians and l?,q$ishmen,
to those who
acknowledgerespectedprinciples of thc United Nations,
the Territory isNamibia.
93. Did it not strike you, Mr. President, that not a single
foreign correspondentcited by Mr. Muller called the Territory by the name of Namibia. Why did they use the
discarded name of South West Africa, which South
Africa-and South Africa alone-uses. Just listen to thcm.
94. Tkc Timesof London reported in ils issueof21 June
1971: “The basic policy holds in South West Africa-the
aimbeing to extend the franchise to a11groups.” The Daily
Expressof 22 June 197I pointed out: “there is no ‘people’
of South WestAfrica”. The I;iai& Exp~ss of 22 June 1971
&o said that: “Sou& West Africa is no threat to world
pcace. , .“, The Times of 21 June of this year saidthat:
“The future development of the tribes in South ‘West
Africa . , .“.

99. There is always another sideto the coin, Wecould tel1
Mr. Muller that in the areashe had been SOlucidly
describing a different tribe is forced to Iive in totally
separateareasoutsidethe city of Windhoek,Travelto these
amasand others throughout South WestAfrica-or Namibia-is prohibited. The South African Governmentfears
what peoplewould learn of itsapartkeid policies.
100. We could tel1 hirn that the South African Bantu
policy consists of creating artificial homelandsfor each
tribe. Usually thesehomelandshavc insufficient water and
vegetation to support either cattle or agriculture.
101. We could te11him that although the South African
Government claimsto be improvingthe waterconditionsit
is still truc that it is Forcingtribesmenoff productive land
,andonto homekurdsbefore the water projects are completed. We cari instance this by the Bantu administrationin
Windhoek, where the HererosIive on the homelands
aswell
asin scatteredunproductive reservationsthroughoutSouth
WestAfrica.
102. We could telI him that the Bantu administration,as
he says, hopes within the next year that aI1the Hereros
wauld be moved to the homelandseventhough the water
project is net scheduledto be finished within the next ten
years.
103. He talked about the Ovambo.Wecouldtel1him that
the hornelan& are insufficient to supportthe tribe, that the
menare forced to leavetheir familiesandcorneto the cities
asmigrant Iabourers,that Bantupolicy doesnot ailowtheir
families to accompany them to the City. In addition the
Ovambomigrant labourer is forced to work for slavewages
of $I 1 a month. He said that they wcre havingthe highest
wagesbut he did not quote their pay, did not saythey were
forced to live on $11 a month or that this in turn mustbe
sent baclc to the family who have little elseon which to
survive.

95. Who wrote those articles? You need net wasteyour
timc guessing,The hancls, 1 said, may be the British or
American Esau,but the voice i.sdefinitely that of the South
African Jacob.
96 Again, what does the civilized world cal1us-men of
colour. Would the distinguishedrepresentativeof Canadaat
this twenty-sixth sessionsay that his cducated and civilized
editors refer to us as “Blacks”. Or would the United States
ambassadoraccept the suggestionthat under the Nixon
administration.themal American editor would refer to us in
someway as “Blacks”, “the Black Government” or “Black
men”? But, these are the terms joyfully used and quoted
by Mr. Muller in gloating over the quotations he allegesto
have been made by fomign correqondents, glorifying the
wisdomof apartheid in Namibia.
97. Listen, again, to his quotations: “l%rticularIy is this
truc of unskilled workers, who form the bulk of wageearnersin Africa. The Canadian V&:ou~er Sun reported in
its issueof 23 June 1971 that “the journalists sawblacks
everywhereworking as nurses.” Again, Newsweekreported
to the sameeffect. It stated: “A so-calleddesert ‘death
facto@ near Tsumeb-where nuclear weaponsand lethal
gaseswere supposedlybeing manufactured to use against
black-governednations”. Going on, he said: “ ‘There is no
injustice againstblack men in my land. ” 1 repeat the hands
may have beenthose of British or American Esaus,but thc
voice is definitcly that of a South African Jacob.
11

104. We could teII him that outsidethe city the Ovarnbo
labourer lives in inadequatebarracks,crowdedwith 5,000
men. WCcould tell lrim muchmore: that the Africans in bis
South West Africa are given no voice in determiningtheir
destiny. They are told whereto Iive. Evenwithin their own
tribes they have no power, There is another sideto the
coin.
105. Even if it is a fact that all the hurriedly compiled
statisticsgiven by Mr. MulIer yesterday arebackedby the
viewsof foreign correspondents,even if theseare valid, let
me ask Mr. Muller this question: why then hasthe South
African Government not CmOperdted
with the United
Nations Council for Namibiain allowing the membersof
ChatCouncil to visit Namibiaand satisfythemselvesabout
thesewonderful facts? Shouldthe United Nationsdepend
on the newspapersof foreign correspondents
rather than on
its own Council?

that according to estimates the capital cosls of such
projects would amount to $3,766 million by the year 2000.
What conclusion must we draw from that statement? 1s it
not crystal clear that South hfrica intends, corne what rnay,
to keep hold of Namibia until thc next Century? 1s this net
a manifestation that South Africa does not intend to
comply with United Nations resolutions? And cari this be
consistent with seIFa,determination under the Mandate? TO
me his meaning was clear. When he concluded his speech,
Mr. Muller reminded us that South Africa had held on to
Namibia for half a Century now, that South Africs
considered itself to have been faithfully discharging a trust
in holding on to the Territory in amanner it considered ta
ensure peace, progress and self-determination, and that it
does not intend to fail in that trust. In short, South Africa
and South Africa alone is right-the rest of the world is
wrong.

106. And let us not forget the Advisory Opinion of the
Court on these allegedly wonderful matters of material
welfare. South Africa repeatedly tried to missionize the
Court about the advantages of the policy being followed in
Namibia, the advantages of the policy of ap@/Yhcid and
Bantustans. If we 1001~in paragraph 128 of the opinion, we
Will find this:
“In its oral statement and in written communications to
the Court, the Government of South Africa expressed the
desire to supply -the Court with further factual infonnation concerning the purposes and objectives of South
hfrica’s policy of separate develnpment or apartheid,
contending that to establish a breach of South Africa’s
substantive international obligations under the Mandate it
would be necessary to prove that a particular exercise of
South Africa’s legislative or administrative powers was
not directed in good,faith . . .“.

110. Having examined this, we ought to decide what
should be the course of action-and the course of action has
already been drawn up by my colleague, the Foreign
Minister of Somalis [IS84th meeting], with whom 1 agree,
Without the assistance of the permanent members of the
Security Council little or nbthirii cari be done. 1 am
therefore appealing to the permanent members of the
Security Council to realize that they should assist the world
and assist the Namibians to achieve independence.

107. Then, in paragraphs 129 and 130:
“The Government of South Africa having made this
request,“- that is, the request to explain the purposes and
objectives of apartheid-“the
Court fïnds that no factual
evidence is needed for the purpose of determining
whether the policy of apartheid as applied by South
Africa in Namibia is in conformity with the international
obligations assumed by South Africa under the Charter of
the United Nations. In order to detelmine whether the
laws and decrees applied by South Africa in Namibia,
which are a matter of public record, constitute a violation
of the purposes and princiiles of the Charter of thc
United Nations, the question of intent or governmental
discretion is not relevant; nor is it necessary to investigate
or determine the effects of those measures upon the
welfare of the inhabitants.

111. Part B of the report of the Ad Woc Sub-Committee
sets forth the important legal and other effects of South
Africa’s continued occupation. We appeal to the permanent
members and to the other members of the Security Council
to realize that part B represents only minimum reqnire.
ments of the AfroAsian group and that, if they cari only
agree ta sponsor part B, they would not subsequentiy Cal1
into the trap set by South hfrica of allowing Namibia to
remain for an indefinite tîme under South African rule SO
that South Africa cari manipulate a plebiscite that would
give the impression that the Namibians wanted to remain
united with i-t.

“It is undisputed, and is amply supported by documents annexed to South Africa’s w-ritten statement in
these proceedings, that the officia1 governmental policy
pursued by South Africd in Namibia is to achieve a
complete physical separation of races and ethnie groups
in separate areas within the Territory. The application of
this policy has required, as has been conceded by South
Africa, restrictive measures of control officially adop ted
and enforced in the Territory by the coercive power of
the former Mandatory.”

112. 1 shall not dwell on the question of the plebiscite.
Let us no-t be mistaken-the Sierra Leone delegation is net
saying that there ought to be no plebiscite or free electioas
in Namibia. We accept this as a precondition for self-determination and independence. But certain conditions must be
fulfïlled.

108. The Court went on, in paragraph 131:

113. First, South Africa has by its historical behaviour
forfeited ail claims to international trust with regard to the
holding of such a plebiscite or free elections. Therefore, we
csnnot agree to the holding of su& plebiscites while Soath
Africa is administering ,the Territory.

“Under the Charter of the United Nations, the former
Mandatory hed pledged itself to observe and respect, in a
territory having an international status, human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race. TO establish instead, and to enforce, distinctions,
exclusions, restrictions and limitations exclusively based
on grounds of race, colour, descent or national or ethnie
origin which constitute a denial of fundamental human
rights is a flagrant violation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter.”

114. Secondly, free elections or plebiscites must really be
free-there must be free politicai parties, acknowledging the
principles of democracy, freedom of opinion, freedom of
campaigning and the rclease of political prisoners.
11.5. Thirdly, free elections must be in accordance with
policies which are fotmed by the peoples themselves
through their own political groupings and Qeir political
leaders, not policies merely designed to answer questions

109. Mr. Muller made aa unconscious confession, relishing
in the thought of the millions of dollars to be spent in
providing bore holes and other water supplies. He intimated
12

posed by South Africa as to whether the people want to
stay with South Africa or with the United Nations,

dence, and implacable foes of the imperialists, colonialists
and racists.

116. WC appeal to the Security Council to realize that, if
we support thc part B set of resolutions, the objective
which South Africa desires Will not be attained, but the
freedom which the world requires will be given to the
Namibian people.

11s. The peoples of Africa also know what fury and
pathological hatred this poficy of the Soviet Union towards
the African peoples arouses among imperialists and racists.
In their impotent rage and hostility, the imperialists and
their supporters are prepared to resort to any kind of
ami-Soviet provocation to divert attention from their
policy of aggressionand of racist and colonial oppression of
the peoples. We do not have to searchfar for examples.

117. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
1 should Iike to express my
delegation’s views on this question at a later stage in its
consideration. But at this point 1 must draw attention to a
reference in the statement of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Liberia to some kind of trade relations that the
Soviet Union is alleged to have with South Africa. 1 cari
only express my regret that the Liberian Minister has fallen
victim to a false fabrication by some enemy of the Soviet
Union. History has witnessed not a few such anti-Soviet
fabrications put out by the foes of the USSR. Their aim is
to dis-tort and malign the policy of the Soviet Union, which
is a policy directed towards peace and the liberation of the
peoples. But these efforts are vain. The peoples and
Governments of Africa know full well that the Soviet
Union and its peoples have always been, are now and
always will be faithful friends of the African peoples and of
all other peoples struggling for their freedom and indepen(trartskztcd frein Russian):

119. 1 should also like to refer to a letter in the report of
the Ad HOC SubComn~ittee on Namibia. It contains the
reply of the Soviet Government to the note of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations concerning resoiution 283 (1970) on Namibia, which the Security Council
adopted last year. Tbis reply contains the following
statement:
the Soviet Union does not maintain diplomatie,
consular, economic, military or other relations of any
kind with South Africa, has no economic or other
interests in Namibia, and has concluded no bilateral
treaties with South Africa”/S/10330, p. 27/.
“

.

.

.

The meetingroseat 5.35 p-m.

13
