S/PV.8411

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8411th meeting

Thursday, 29 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Samson
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017) and 2401 (2018) (S/2018/1041)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-40524 (E)
*1840524*

S/PV.8411

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and 2401 (2018)
(S/2018/1041)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director of
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/1041, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017) and
2401 (2018).
I now give the floor to Ms. Ghelani.
Ms. Ghelani: I provide this update today on behalf of
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock.
I would like to start with the situation in northwestern Syria, where there have been reports of
mortars — including some shells reportedly containing
chlorine gas — hitting three densely populated
neighbourhoods in western Aleppo city: Nile Street,
Al-Khalidiyah and Al-Zahraa. People with respiratory
symptoms were rushed to the two main hospitals
in the area. The World Health Organization has
provided support to both hospitals and stands ready
to provide further public health support, as required.
As the Secretary-General has repeatedly stressed, any
confirmed use of chemical weapons is abhorrent and a
clear violation of international law.
We have also received reports of air strikes in
Idlib governorate on 24 and 25 November — the first
such air strikes in more than two months. Those latest
developments demonstrate the fragility of the situation
2/9

29/11/2018

and the urgent need for the sustained engagement of all
sides to preserve the gains of the agreement that was
reached between the Republic of Turkey and the Russian
Federation on 17 September. The stakes remain high, as
the alternative is humanitarian suffering on a scale that
would devastate a population of some 3 million people
in north-western Syria, who have known nothing but
war and suffering in recent years.
In Rukban, between 3 and 8 November, the
United Nations, together with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, was finally able to reach some 50,000
people — three-quarters of them women and children.
That aid operation, approved by the Government of
Syria and facilitated by the Russian Federation and the
United States, was the first major delivery of material
assistance to the people of Rukban since January, and
the first time that aid has been delivered from within
Syria. Our teams also vaccinated more than 5,000
children, together with officials from the Syrian
Ministry of Health.
Colleagues returned shocked by what they had
seen on the ground, reporting grave protection issues,
increasing food insecurity and no certified medical
doctors among the stranded population. Given the
gravity of the situation, the Secretary-General has
called for the deployment of a further convoy to the
area as a matter of priority. Without sustained access,
the situation of tens of thousands of Syrians, stranded
in the harshest desert conditions, will only further
deteriorate as the winter cold sets in.
Most people inside the makeshift settlement have
stated a desire to return to their homes, but many
are terrified of what the future may hold for them,
whether it is in Government areas or locations held
by non-State armed groups. A durable solution that is
safe, voluntary and dignified — one that adequately
addresses protection concerns — is urgently needed for
the population in Rukban.
We are seriously concerned about the increasing
number of reports of civilian casualties due to air
strikes and ground fighting in south-eastern Deir
ez-Zor governorate. Many civilians are reported among
the dead and injured. Some 6,000 have been displaced
from the Hajin enclave, controlled by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, since October, with an estimated
10,000 people remaining within the enclave. Most are
unable to access assistance and face severe protection
risks. Of those who have been displaced, many live in
18-40524

29/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

dire conditions in makeshift settlements, with some
dangerously close to the front lines.
Despite considerable challenges in accessing areas
of displacement due to insecurity and geographic
isolation, local United Nations humanitarian partners
have continued to provide assistance to internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in the Gharanij and Bahrah
areas. That includes multisectoral assistance provided
to 6,000 IDPs. We reiterate that under international law,
the parties to the conflict must protect civilians against
attacks, treat them humanely and allow and facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian relief.
We are also deeply troubled by reports of restrictions
in north-eastern Syria, where half of the some 100,000
children enrolled in Government-run schools are facing
impediments to accessing their schools, especially in
Qamishli and Al-Hasakah cities. An estimated 10,000
children have not been able to attend school at all
since late September. Vehicles, including school buses
and private cars, have been prevented from crossing
checkpoints if they are carrying children going to
schools that teach the nationally accredited curriculum.
Over the past weeks, the United Nations has
been engaged in efforts with all concerned parties to
advocate for children to be able to go safely to a school
of their choosing. Across Syria, the conflict continues
to have a devastating impact on children, including their
access to education. An estimated 180,000 teachers are
no longer in service. Some 40 per cent of schools have
been damaged or destroyed, and many others have been
used to shelter displaced people. All Syrian children
have a right to education without discrimination, and
that right must be protected, respected and fulfilled.
Despite the very difficult conditions, the United
Nations and its partners are committed to reaching all
those in need, wherever they are. Over the past year, an
average of almost 5.4 million people have been reached
with humanitarian assistance each month through all
possible avenues — from within Syria to areas under
Government control, from within Syria across conflict
lines, and from across the borders.
Cross-border aid remains a critical part of the
United Nations response in Syria. This month alone,
nearly 600,000 people in Syria have received United
Nations food assistance delivered across the border
with Turkey through the crossings at Bab Al-Salam
and Bab Al-Hawa. Cross-border deliveries also
included medicines, educational supplies and other

S/PV. 8411

non-food items for hundreds of thousands of people.
Humanitarian organizations have just completed
the vaccination of more than 12,500 children, aged
between six months and 15 years, against measles and
rubella in Idlib governorate, using supplies that had
been delivered across the border. Thousands more
benefited from education supplies and services, school
rehabilitation and textbooks.
United Nations cross-border assistance is checked
and verified by the United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic at designated
border-crossing points. Every truck is checked to ensure
that it contains only humanitarian supplies. Deliveries
are confirmed by United Nations-contracted thirdparty monitors upon arrival at warehouses inside Syria,
where they check the items being offloaded against
the waybill. Then there is post-distribution monitoring
again, including by independent third parties and
through feedback received from affected communities.
United Nations cross-border assistance is also subject
to the normal accountability mechanisms between the
donors and the delivery agencies, which also includes
another verification system.
Currently, some 4.3 million people in need live
in areas outside the control of the Government. That
accounts for more than one-third of all people in need of
assistance in Syria. It includes almost 3 million people
in need in areas reached exclusively through crossborder operations. The United Nations does not have an
alternative means of reaching those people, as access
from within the country is impeded. It is for that reason
that the Secretary-General has called for a renewal of
resolution 2165 (2014) for an additional 12 months. The
renewal of the resolution will continue to save lives.
Millions of people depend on the Council’s decision.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Ghelani for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Reena Ghelani,
Director of Operations and Advocacy Division in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), for her valuable briefing, which confirms the
continuation of the dire humanitarian situation in Syria.
I would also like to pay tribute to all humanitarian and
medical workers for their efforts in the field to alleviate
the human suffering in Syria.

18-405243/9

S/PV.8411

The situation in the Middle East

29/11/2018

I deliver this statement on behalf of the co-penholders
of the Syrian humanitarian file, Sweden and Kuwait.
I will focus on two points: the overall humanitarian
situation in Syria and access to humanitarian aid.

We are concerned by the continued danger of
explosives, mines and improvised explosive devices
in a number of areas in Syria, which poses a threat to
civilians and hinders the work of humanitarian actors.

With regard to the overall humanitarian situation,
the Syrian crisis is entering its eighth winter. We
must take a moment to review the humanitarian
situation on the ground. The statistics of the United
Nations confirm that the humanitarian situation in
Syria continues to deteriorate. There are 13 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance, of whom
more than 5 million are children. There are more
than 5.6 million registered refugees in neighbouring
countries, including 2.5 million children. More than
1 million people live in hard-to-reach areas. Behind
those alarming numbers are countless stories of human
suffering of Syrian civilians — children, women and
elderly persons — who have become victim to one of
the worst conflicts of our time.

With regard to access to humanitarian aid, there
are still significant challenges for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in Syria, as stated in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1041). While
we welcome the delivery of aid several weeks ago
to Rukban Camp and the 50,000 people living there,
after nearly 10 months since the last delivery, we stress
the need for sustained and unhindered humanitarian
access all across Syria, using all existing modalities,
including cross-border, cross-line and humanitarian
programmes. When it comes to the latter, we regret that
no inter-agency humanitarian convoys were deployed
in October and that the bimonthly inter-agency convoy
plan for September and October was not approved
by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. We
still see a situation where more than 1 million people
face a denial of access to humanitarian assistance,
which should be provided based on human principles
and needs.

The past few days and weeks witnessed a military
escalation following a period of relative calm as a result
of the Russian-Turkish agreement on Idlib. We reiterate
our call on the Astana guarantors to ensure that the
ceasefire in Idlib holds. The increase in military
actions and hostilities — as we have seen in Aleppo,
Hamah, Idlib and Deir ez-Zor — and reports of the use
of chemicals again, this time in Aleppo, remind all of
us of the fragility of the situation in Syria.
We renew our condemnation of the use of chemical
weapons, anywhere, at any time and by any party as it
constitutes a violation of international law and relevant
conventions. The use of chemical weapons in armed
conflict constitutes a war crime, and we stress that
those responsible for such crimes, whether they be
individuals, entities, non-State actors or Governments,
must be held accountable.
We also reaffirm that all parties must comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and ensure respect for it in all circumstances, including
by protecting civilians and civilian targets. This year
there have been over 130 attacks on hospitals and
health-care facilities in Syria. We strongly condemn
attacks against hospitals, as well as attacks targeting
vital civilian facilities. We also call on all parties to
respect international human rights law. There must be
accountability for those who have committed serious
violations of human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
4/9

Cross-border humanitarian assistance remains an
indispensable lifeline to millions of people throughout
Syria. It is a vital, important and complementary part
of the humanitarian response in the country. The
United Nations monitoring mechanism that monitors
international humanitarian activities is robust and
continuously strengthened.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment in
his monthly report on the importance of the renewal
of the provisions set out in resolution 2165 (2014) and
subsequent resolutions. They support the provision
of assistance to those in need through the most direct
routes — including across borders — especially as the
United Nations does not have an alternative means of
reaching people in need in those areas.
For the reasons I have mentioned here, and
because the reality on the ground confirms that the
humanitarian situation in Syria continues to be dire,
Sweden and Kuwait, as co-penholders, intend to
work to renew the resolution on humanitarian access,
including the cross-border assistance modality. We will
circulate the draft resolution soon and look forward
to having the cooperation of all Council members in
that regard. There is a critical humanitarian need for
a renewal of the provisions of resolution 2165 (2014),
18-40524

29/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

which represents the difference between life and death
for many people in Syria. The Council must not fail
those Syrians in need.
We stress the importance of ensuring a lasting
ceasefire in Idlib, and indeed throughout Syria, in
order to enable access for humanitarian assistance
and for evacuating the injured, in accordance with
international law and as stipulated in resolution 2401
(2018). We welcome the fact that many people who had
been detained by Government or opposition forces were
released on 24 November. That is an important first
step towards building confidence between the parties
to the conflict.
Lastly, without a political solution to the conflict
in Syria in line with the provisions of resolution 2254
(2015), the humanitarian situation there will continue
to deteriorate. As the last month of the year is almost
upon us, we emphasize that every effort must be made
to reinvigorate the political process, including the
establishment of a constitutional committee before the
end of the year.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Ghelani for her briefing and for the important work
that the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs is doing to support the
Syrian people.
We are grateful to the United Nations and the
brave workers on the ground who delivered critical
humanitarian aid on 3 November that included muchneeded vaccinations for 5,193 children and also
provided life-saving assistance to more than 50,000
internally displaced persons, most of them women and
children. The United States worked for months with
the United Nations and like-minded allies and partners
to secure a Russian agreement to support the United
Nations-Syrian Arab Red Crescent humanitarian
assistance delivery. We also worked together to extract
the necessary approvals from the Syrian regime to
allow the United Nations to make its first humanitarian
assistance delivery to the Rukban camp since January,
and the first ever from Damascus.
The humanitarian needs in Rukban remain
immediate and severe. A one-time aid delivery to
Rukban is a good start, but it is certainly not enough.
It is essential to provide United Nations humanitarian
workers with sustained access to the camp. The United
States has shown that it will do everything possible to
facilitate aid to areas in Syria where we have influence,

S/PV. 8411

and we remain ready to provide security for any future
deliveries of humanitarian aid through areas under the
control of the global coalition to defeat the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham. The Rukban aid delivery
is clear evidence that Russia and the United States can
work together to help the people of Syria and that the
Russian Federation can secure the regime’s approval for
humanitarian deliveries. There is no conceivable reason
for the Syrian regime to block future deliveries. We are
willing to work with Russia to keep the arrangement
going and we hope that the Russian authorities can work
with Damascus to facilitate more of those deliveries
in the future. We fully support the current United
Nations plan to make another delivery to Rukban in
mid-December, and we call on Russia and the Syrian
regime to do their part to ensure that that happens
without delay.
We must all continue to push for full, unhindered
and sustained humanitarian access throughout Syria
for the millions of people in need, including greater
access for those in eastern Ghouta and south-western
Syria. We urge Russia and Damascus to step up and
get humanitarian aid to all the 13 million Syrians
who need it. The Syrian regime has the opportunity
to demonstrate its willingness and ability to facilitate
aid deliveries throughout the territories it controls. But
humanitarian access has not improved in communities
that are firmly backed by the regime and under its
control, in places such as eastern Ghouta, just outside
Damascus. Why? Because the regime seeks to punish
communities that are outside or were formerly outside
its control for what they believe is a lack of loyalty to
Al-Assad. That is wrong-headed.
An unwillingness to approve facilitation letters
and other bureaucratic delays is essentially a denial of
access, and it continues. As access to people in need
across Syria continues to be severely constrained,
the United Nations and its partners are providing
life-saving aid to some 750,000 people every month
through cross-border operations. There is currently
no credible alternative for reaching those people. It is
therefore absolutely imperative that the Council support
the reauthorization of the cross-border humanitarian
aid delivery mechanism provided for in resolution 2165
(2014). The United States strongly supports its renewal
for an additional 12 months, as the Secretary-General
has called for. We look forward to working with our
colleagues on the Council to ensure that it is renewed.

18-405245/9

S/PV.8411

The situation in the Middle East

Humanitarian conditions in Syria will continue to
be dire in the absence of a credible United Nations-led
process. The formation of a constitutional committee
must move forward as quickly as possible. Despite the
relative calm afforded to the people of Idlib in the past
two months since the ceasefire agreement was reached
between Turkey and Russia, Idlib’s 3 million residents
live in daily uncertainty. What is certain, however, is
that any military escalation would have catastrophic
humanitarian consequences for millions of civilians
and for the stability and security of Syria’s neighbours.
We need only look at the events of the past weekend in
Aleppo, where there are reports from the Syrian regime
of an alleged chemical attack and Russian air strikes
inside the Turkish-Russian demilitarized zone. We can
all see how fragile the situation is and that millions of
Syrian lives are at stake.
Russia committed to a lasting ceasefire in Idlib
in the Istanbul summit communiqué of 27 October.
To date, that ceasefire has resulted in very substantial
reductions in violence. It is absolutely essential to ensure
that the Syrian regime does not seize on false pretexts to
undermine the ceasefire and launch a military offensive
in Idlib, which would not only lead to a resumption of
violence but would seriously jeopardize the prospects
for a political solution to the conflict. We continue to
engage with the Russian Government and military at
senior levels to make it clear that an offensive in Idlib
would represent a reckless escalation of the conflict
and would put millions of civilians in danger.
The instability for many civilians in Idlib is palpable.
Just last week, two of Syria’s most prominent peaceful
resistance activists, Mr. Raed Fares and Mr. Hamoud
Jneed, were assassinated there. I would like to express
our condolences to the families and friends of Mr. Fares
and Mr. Jneed on behalf of my Government. Their
selfless dedication to amplifying the voices of the
Syrian people and their desire for peace, justice and
dignity were sources of inspiration for so many. The
Syrian people have been silenced for too long, and the
prospect of a constitutional committee represents an
important opportunity to move the political process
forward in order to finally end the conflict. We ask
the Syrian regime to take this opportunity and to make
the move towards peace and stability in its country
and region.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Ghelani for her briefing.
6/9

29/11/2018

As the Council is aware, the capital of Kazakhstan
just hosted the eleventh international meeting in
the framework of the Astana process, in which the
issues of progress on a political settlement based on
the groundwork laid in Geneva and Sochi, further
improvements in the situation on the ground and the
development of confidence-building measures among
the Syrian parties were discussed. We thank our
partners in Kazakhstan for their unwavering hospitality.
As a result of the meeting, a joint statement was agreed
on in which, having emphasized their determination to
strengthen their trilateral cooperation, the guarantor
countries among other things repudiated all attempts
to create new realities on the ground on the pretext of
combating terrorism, and expressed their determination
to counter any separatist plans designed to undermine
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity or the
national security of its neighbours.
Iran, Russia and Turkey welcomed the success
on 24 November of the pilot project to exchange
people who had been forcibly detained, which was a
step forward in the work of building trust among the
Syrian stakeholders.
On the whole, the situation in much of Syria is
stable. While problems remain, there is clear evidence
that things on the humanitarian front are improving,
which is particularly noticeable in the areas controlled
by Damascus. It is perhaps premature to take stock
of outcomes for the year, but we believe that it is a
major achievement that the so-called besieged areas
have completely dropped off our agenda, for instance.
However, the growing number of violations of the
cessation of hostilities regime in the Idlib de-escalation
zone is worrying. There was a particularly alarming
incident last week when militants based inside the zone
fired shells containing toxic substances on resident
neighbourhoods in Aleppo, as has already been
mentioned today. There are casualties. We hope that the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
will undertake the necessary measures in connection
with the reports from Damascus as soon as possible.
Prior to that, there was an attack in the area of Jurin by
militants from Haras Al-Din, an illegal armed group
affiliated with Al-Qaida, in the repelling of which 18
soldiers were killed.
The Astana guarantor countries will ramp up
their efforts to ensure that the cessation of hostilities
is maintained and affirm their willingness to fully
implement the 17 September memorandum on the
18-40524

29/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

stabilization of the situation in Idlib. But it is important
to understand that however significant a sustainable
ceasefire is, it does not eliminate the need to continue
working effectively to combat terrorism. The flow of
refugees and internally displaced persons returning to
their homes is gaining strength, with an average of up to
1,000 people returning from Lebanon and Jordan every
day. To the extent that they can, the Syrian authorities
are making significant efforts to create favourable
conditions for their citizens. Helpful adjustments are
being made at the legislative level.
As we have repeatedly stressed, at this critical
juncture it falls to the international community to
collectively get behind the Syrian people in order to
repair the devastation as soon as possible and establish
normal life for those who have voluntarily decided
to return to their homeland. The guarantor countries
of the Astana process have urged the international
community, especially the United Nations and its
humanitarian agencies, to increase assistance to Syria,
including by expanding humanitarian deliveries and
rebuilding civilian infrastructure. Meanwhile, however,
we are obliged to assume that some Western capitals
have not grasped this and have made assistance in the
restoration conditional on political circumstances,
which is an inhumane approach. Sometimes they are
also intimidating others who might dare to circumvent
illegal unilateral sanctions, for example, and that is
also unacceptable.
Following the eradication of the terrorist presence
in the southern suburbs of Damascus, the Syrian
authorities have been developing a plan to restore the
Palestinian refugee camp in Yarmouk, and the streets
there are currently being cleared. We assume that
the foreign donors who are traditionally sympathetic
to the plight of the Palestinians might participate in
implementing those plans.
The situation in the health-care sector remains
very serious. According to the response plan for Syria
in 2019 prepared by the World Health Organization
(WHO) country office, humanitarian medical
assistance is still needed, especially in newly liberated
areas. More than half of the country’s medical facilities
are closed or functioning only partially. There is an
acute shortage of medicines for treating common
diseases, owing to disruptions in the supply chain. A
third of the population is using water from unreliable
sources. Over the past year all of these factors have led
to outbreaks of measles, leishmaniasis and diarrhoea.

S/PV. 8411

It is important for WHO to focus on restoring the
local authorities’ capacity to provide medical care. We
continue to highlight the inadmissibility of maintaining
unilateral sanctions against Syria, which significantly
limit the ability of the authorities to obtain medicines
and medical equipment.
Unfortunately, many questions remain about the
activities of the so-called coalition led by the United
States, which is present on Syrian soil in violation of
the basic principles of international law. We are deeply
concerned about the continued build-up of the United
States military presence on the left bank of the Euphrates.
According to the media, the total number of United
States military bases in Syria has already reached 19.
The speed of its occupation and consolidation of quasiState structures on the ground is growing, complicating
the prospects for a political settlement.
The military operation in the area of Hajin in
Deir ez-Zor governorate, which was announced as
being against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), has done no significant damage to the terrorists.
Instead, as we have heard, including from Ms. Ghelani,
time and time again its victims are civilians, and that
is ever more difficult to deny. The Syrians have been
sending desperate letters to the Security Council but
for some reason they seem to resonate very little with
the international community, just as we have seen no
reaction to the discovery of mass graves of victims of
the coalition’s air strikes in Raqqa. Incidentally, the
discrepancies in the statistics jump out at one. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/1041) speaks of
1,000 bodies exhumed, while according to the letter
from Syria to the members of the Security Council the
figure is four times larger. According to some reports,
the United States refuses to consider the possibility
of paying compensation for those killed in Raqqa.
Against that backdrop, we are genuinely shocked by the
details that have time and time again come to light of
some Western capitals’ support for Syrian opposition
armed groups, including the transfer of arms and other
material means to terrorists, while the public has been
kept in the dark or deliberately misled.
In our view, those with influence over the armed
groups controlling certain areas in north-eastern Syria
should convince their clients to address the situation
in which schoolchildren are not being given access
to educational institutions in Government-held areas,
which we also heard about in Ms. Ghelani’s briefing and
which can only be described as barbaric. In Damascus,

18-405247/9

S/PV.8411

The situation in the Middle East

29/11/2018

by the way, they are doing everything possible to ensure
uninterrupted schooling throughout Syria.

good idea to properly investigate what exactly is going
on in that grey area.

In general, it should be acknowledged that
the self-proclaimed local councils, which have the
support of external allies, have from time to time been
implementing discriminatory policies in the country’s
north-eastern areas that are changing the historical
composition of the population.

One extremely worrying fact is this year’s record
low wheat harvest in Syria, the worst in 30 years, which
is partly due to drought. In that regard, the United
Nations specialized agencies should help to support the
country’s food security, including by re-establishing its
stores of vital cereal grains.

The situation in the Rukban camp remains very
unfortunate. The humanitarian operation launched at
the beginning of November was inadequate from an
organizational standpoint. United Nations and Syrian
Arab Red Crescent personnel were not allowed inside
the 55-kilometre zone occupied by the United States
around the Al-Tanf base. Militants from the Maghawir
Al-Thawra armed group organized the distribution
of aid. Without the necessary oversight, a significant
portion of the humanitarian assistance failed to reach
those who needed it. Many could not get inoculated
because the vaccinations were being administered
at a distance from the camp. Considering such gross
errors, it would be difficult to expect that the Syrian
Government, which has no authority in the area of the
camp, to give instant permission for a new humanitarian
convoy to come in. It is the United States, which is
fully responsible for the plight of the civilians in the
area, that should ensure the security of humanitarian
operations in Rukban, not shift the fulfilment of the job
onto illegal armed groups.

There is continuing major uncertainty with regard
to cross-border deliveries of humanitarian assistance
to Syria under the interim mechanism introduced by
Council resolution 2165 (2014). Despite the persistent
assertions about its transparency, there is absolutely
no sign of it. Inside Syria, everything is farmed out
to various so-called third parties and partners, who
for some reason are reluctant to be identified to the
Council. There is evidence that part of the humanitarian
aid coming from outside is being confiscated and
stored by Jabhat Al-Nusra and its satellites in Idlib.
Armed groups are extorting at checkpoints along the
line of demarcation, and local authorities, escorted
by terrorists, are extracting tribute from farmers
and businesses.

It is important to ensure that United Nations
humanitarian personnel are involved in the delivery
and distribution of humanitarian aid, with the
assistance of reputable organizations such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent. We urge that the possibility
of organizing a permanent humanitarian corridor to
Rukban be considered. The bigger picture should focus
on gradually dismantling the camp and resettling its
residents. We are ready to continue consultations with
the United Nations, the Government of Syria and our
United States and Jordanian colleagues. However,
the only real way to solve the problem is by ending
the occupation around the Al-Tanf base, not through
one-off humanitarian initiatives. Incidentally, one
of the ISIL terrorists taken hostage during a special
operation to liberate Druze prisoners on the Al-Safa
plateau in eastern Suwayda testified that he and his
accomplices had received weapons, munitions and food
from the area around the Al-Tanf base. It would be a
8/9

The Secretary-General’s report briefly touches on
the problem in a reference to abuses at the Bab Al-Hawa
border crossing. However, the description does not
convey the scale of the manipulations, with Al-Nusra’s
participation. The data shows that in 2015 and 2016, the
forces controlling that border crossing from the Syrian
side were making $2 million a month. It is difficult to
believe that no one in the United Nations was aware of
the scale of these operations. The Secretary-General’s
survey of the situation has made none of it any clearer.
The reality is that the situation on the ground in Syria
has significantly changed, and that should be reflected
in a comparable way in the adjustment of the crossborder mechanism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning, as this is the last scheduled
meeting of the Council for the month of November, I
would like to express the sincere appreciation of the
delegation of China to the members of the Council,
especially my colleagues the Permanent Representatives
and their staffs, and to the Security Council Affairs
Division for all the support they have given us. It has
definitely been a busy month in which we have rallied to
achieve consensus on several important issues within our
18-40524

29/11/2018

The situation in the Middle East

purview. We could not have done it alone or without the
hard work, support and positive contributions of every
delegation and the representatives of the Secretariat,
including the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management, the interpreters, translators
and verbatim reporters, and the security staff. As we
end our presidency, I know that I speak on behalf of the

S/PV. 8411

Council in wishing the delegation of Côte d’Ivoire good
luck for the month of December.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

18-405249/9
