United Nations

A/RES/56/108

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 20 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/56/L.56 and Add.1)]

56/108. Economic assistance for the reconstruction and
development of Djibouti
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/96 C of 8 December 1999 and its previous
resolutions on economic assistance to Djibouti,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 1
Recalling further the Brussels Declaration2 and the Programme of Action for
the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010, 3 adopted by the Third
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries on 20 May 2001, as
well as the mutual commitments undertaken on that occasion and the importance
attached to follow-up and the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Aware that Djibouti is included in the list of least developed countries and that
it is ranked 137th out of the 162 countries studied in the Human Development
Report 2001, 4
Noting that the economic and social development efforts of Djibouti are
constrained by the extremes of the local climate, in particular cyclical droughts, and
that the implementation of reconstruction and development programmes requires the
deployment of substantial resources which exceed the capacity of the country,
Noting also that the situation in Djibouti has been made worse by the drought
situation in the Horn of Africa, and noting further the presence of tens of thousands
of refugees and persons displaced from their countries, which has placed serious
strains on the fragile economic, social and administrative infrastructure of Djibouti
and caused security problems in the country, in particular in the city of Djibouti,
Noting with satisfaction that the Government of Djibouti is continuing to
implement a structural adjustment programme, and convinced of the necessity to
support that financial recovery programme and to take effective measures to
_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
A/CONF.191/12.
3
A/CONF.191/11.
4
Published for the United Nations Development Programme by Oxford University Press, New York, 2001.
2

01 48086

A/RES/56/108

alleviate the consequences, in particular the social consequences, of that adjustment
policy, so that the country may achieve lasting economic results,
Noting with gratitude the support provided to relief, demobilization and
rehabilitation operations by various countries and by intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 5

2.
Declares its solidarity with the Government and the people of Djibouti,
who continue to face critical challenges owing, in particular, to the scarcity of
natural resources, harsh climatic conditions and the continuing critical situation in
the Horn of Africa;
3.
Notes with concern the cyclical drought phenomenon in Djibouti, which
is wreaking a major humanitarian disaster upon tens of thousands of people,
particularly those who are vulnerable, and requests the international community to
respond to the appeal launched by the Government;
4.
Encourages the Government of Djibouti, despite difficult economic and
regional situations, to continue its serious efforts towards the consolidation of
democracy;
5.
Notes with satisfaction the implementation of a structural adjustment
programme by Djibouti, and in that context appeals to all Governments,
international financial institutions, the specialized agencies and non-governmental
organizations to respond adequately to the financial and material needs of the
country;
6.
Also notes with satisfaction the general peace agreement concluded
between the Government and the opposition on 12 May 2001;
7.
Considers that the process of demobilization, reintegration and
employment of demobilized soldiers is essential not only for national rehabilitation
but also for the success of agreements with the international financial institutions
and for the consolidation of peace, and that it requires substantial resources that
exceed the capacity of the country;
8.
Expresses its gratitude to the intergovernmental organizations and the
specialized agencies of the United Nations for their contributions to the national
rehabilitation of Djibouti, and invites them to continue their efforts;
9.
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his continued
efforts to make the international community aware of the difficulties faced by
Djibouti;
10. Notes with gratitude Djibouti’s support for regional peace efforts and its
commitment to worldwide efforts to fight terrorism;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, in close cooperation with the
Government of Djibouti, his efforts to mobilize resources necessary for an effective
programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Djibouti;

_______________
5

2

A/56/264.

A/RES/56/108

12. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its fifty-eighth session on the progress made with regard to economic assistance to
Djibouti and the implementation of the present resolution.
87th plenary meeting
14 December 2001

3
