S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6757th meeting
Monday, 23 April 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Zhu Yanwei
Mrs. Escorcia
Ms. Legendre
Mr. Tillmann
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Ravindra
Mr. Erroja
Mr. Munir
Ms. Teixeira Coelho
Mr. Zhdanov
Mr. Klaas
Mr. Akpoto Komlagan
Mr. Day

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-30747 (E)

*1230747*

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Kazakhstan and Ecuador to
participate in today’s meeting.

December 2009, December 2010, May, July and
October 2011, and January 2012, as well as the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union to
the Security Council on 21 April 2011 (see S/PV.6520).
The European Union also reiterates its support for the
Arab Peace Initiative.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.

The European Union calls on the parties to
demonstrate their commitment to a peaceful solution
by taking actions that can build confidence and create
the environment of trust necessary to ensure
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas
meaningful negotiations leading to a comprehensive
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
and lasting peace. At this critical juncture, it is more
Union to the United Nations.
important than ever for the parties to refrain from
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I thank you, Madam President, provocative actions that undermine the prospects for
for giving the floor to the European Union (EU). The continuing the dialogue re-established in January, and
acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries the to respect their obligations under the Road Map. That
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro includes incursions by Israeli forces into Area A of the
and Serbia; the country of the Stabilization and West Bank, which put in jeopardy the success of
Association Process and potential candidate Albania; the Palestinian institution-building efforts and the mutual
European Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein, obligation to end all forms of incitement.
member of the European Economic Area; as well as
The European Union reiterates its support for the
Ukraine and Georgia align themselves with this
Palestinian Authority’s institution-building efforts and
statement.
its recurrent budget, to which the European Union is
While the Arab world is witnessing fundamental the largest donor. The continuing financial difficulties
change, the need to ensure meaningful progress on the of the Palestinian Authority risk putting in danger the
Middle East peace process remains as important as ever. major achievements it has made so far, not least in
The European Union wishes to stress once again the providing security in the West Bank. Therefore, the
central role of the Quartet in that context and to European Union underlines the necessity for other
express its full support for the ongoing Quartet process. donors to identify and transfer funds to assist the
It reaffirms its commitment to all elements of the Palestinian Authority.
Quartet statement of 23 September 2011 (see SG/2178).
However, the majority of the Palestinian
The Quartet, meeting on 11 April, renewed its call on
Authority’s budget is met by its own customs and
the parties to meet those objectives (see SG/2182).
taxation revenues. The European Union therefore
Negotiations are the best way forward if there is continues to urge the swift implementation of
to be a lasting resolution to the conflict. The European improvements currently being discussed between the
Union therefore welcomes the expected exchange of parties to the mechanism by which those are collected
letters between the parties initiated on 17 April, and and transferred, which should be transparent and
urges both sides to build on the momentum of the predictable. Furthermore, monthly transfers of those
current contacts in order to resume direct talks. A bold revenues are an obligation.
and decisive demonstration of political leadership is
Among the factors that will help the Palestinian
needed from both sides.
economy become sustainable is the relaxing of Israeli
The European Union reaffirms its commitment to restrictions on access to land, water, raw materials and
a two-State solution. The legitimacy of the State of export markets. Area C of the West Bank constitutes
Israel and the right of Palestinians to achieve statehood the largest area of land for the Palestinians. Ensuring
must never be called into question. The European access to that area will help the Palestinian Authority
Union reaffirms its clear positions on negotiations with achieve greater economic potential. The EU calls on
regard to parameters, principles and issues, including the parties to cooperate in order to facilitate the social
the conclusions of the EU Foreign Affairs Council in and economic development of Area C, which is of

2

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

critical importance to the viability of a future
Palestinian State.
The European Union reiterates that settlements,
the separation barrier where built on occupied land, the
demolition of homes and evictions are illegal under
international law, constitute an obstacle to peace and
threaten to make a two-State solution impossible. The
European Union urges the Government of Israel to
immediately end all settlement activities in East
Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank, including
natural growth, and to dismantle all outposts erected
since March 2001.
The European Union is deeply concerned about
the approval of new construction in a range of
settlements, such as Shvut Rachel, Gilo and Har Homa.
The European Union is also deeply concerned about
retroactive approvals that have been granted for
housing built without previous Israeli authorization in
settlements and outposts. The European Union is
closely following developments with regard to Migron,
the largest such outpost.
As regards Gaza in particular, the European
Union has followed with concern the recent escalation
of violence in Gaza and southern Israel. The situation
in and around Gaza will remain fragile and
unsustainable as long as the West Bank and Gaza are
not reunited under the legitimate Palestinian Authority,
adhering to the commitments undertaken by the
Palestine Liberation Organization.
The European Union calls for the complete
cessation of all rocket attacks on Israel and all other
forms of violence. The European Union calls for the
full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) and the
Agreement on Movement and Access, for the full
respect of international humanitarian law, and for an
immediate, sustained and unconditional opening of
crossings. Despite some welcome progress, Israel
needs to take further meaningful and far-reaching steps,
allowing for the reconstruction and economic recovery
of the Gaza Strip. The European Union calls for a
solution addressing Israel’s legitimate security
concerns.
The EU has consistently called for intraPalestinian reconciliation behind President Mahmoud
Abbas as an important element of the unity of a future
Palestinian State and of reaching a two-State solution.

12-30747

Finally, regarding Syria, the European Union
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2043
(2012) establishing the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria (UNSMIS). The EU calls for the
immediate implementation of resolutions 2042 (2012)
and 2043 (2012), and urges the Syrian Government to
ensure the effective operation and deployment of the
Mission and allow freedom of movement, access and
communication. The European Union reaffirms its full
support for the six-point plan of Joint Special Envoy of
the United Nations and League of Arab States,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and calls upon the Syrian Government
to immediately and visibly implement all elements of
the Joint Special Envoy’s plan, as it committed to do in
its 25 March and 1 April communications to Joint
Special Envoy Annan.
The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the situation in Syria and the fragility of the
cessation of violence, in view of reports of the use of
heavy weaponry in civilian areas. The EU calls on the
Syrian Government to show a visible change by
withdrawing all troops and heavy weapons from
population centres to their barracks in order to facilitate
a sustained cessation of violence. It calls upon all
parties in Syria to immediately cease violence in all its
forms.
The European Union reiterates its concerns about
the humanitarian situation in Syria and urges the
Syrian authorities to grant immediate, unimpeded and
full access of humanitarian organizations to all areas in
Syria to deliver humanitarian assistance, including
medical care.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): Madam President, I would
like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to
address the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East. Japan continues to be deeply concerned
about the evolution of the situation in Syria over the
past year. We condemn the Syrian authorities’ widescale use of force and violations of human rights
against their own citizens, and we profoundly deplore
the deaths of more than 9,000 people as a result of
violence.
Japan strongly supports the Joint Special Envoy
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and commends his mediation efforts.

3

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

We reiterate our call on the Syrian authorities to
unconditionally implement Mr. Annan’s six-point
proposal in its entirety in order to bring an end to all
violence and human rights violations, secure
humanitarian access, and facilitate a Syrian-led
political transition based upon the Syrian people’s
legitimate aspirations to democracy.
Japan welcomes the adoption of resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012) as important steps in the
international community’s concerted efforts to address
the situation in Syria, and highly commends the
dedicated work of all those concerned, in particular the
members of the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral and the Joint Special Envoy. At the same time,
we express deep concern over the escalation of
violence in recent days and the failure of the Syrian
authorities to fulfil their commitments. We call upon
all parties in Syria to refrain from resorting to force of
any kind, so that a complete cessation of armed
violence may be fulfilled and the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria may thereby carry out its
mandate fully and effectively. In this connection, we
underline the importance of ensuring the safety of
deployed observers, and call upon the Syrian
authorities to fully cooperate with the relevant United
Nations personnel in order to ensure the effective
operation of the Mission.
Japan is also concerned about the humanitarian
situation of the Syrian people, including internally
displaced persons and refugees in neighbouring
countries. For this reason, the Government of Japan
provided $3 million in emergency grant aid in March
through the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. We underline the
importance of allowing humanitarian personnel full and
unimpeded access to people in need of assistance.

Government of Jordan in advancing dialogue between
the parties. We strongly expect that the recent efforts,
including the correspondence from President Abbas to
Prime Minister Netanyahu, will lead to the early
resumption of direct negotiations.
Japan does not recognize any measures that
prejudge the outcome of final status negotiations, and
in order to build mutual trust calls upon both sides to
refrain from any provocative actions. Both parties must
abide by their obligations under previous agreements.
Japan reiterates its strong call on Israel to immediately
freeze its settlement activities in the West Bank,
including in East Jerusalem, which are a violation of
international law. At the same time, we call upon the
Palestinian Authority to continue its efforts to improve
security and fulfil its commitments to ceasing violence
and working against incitement.
Japan supports the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority towards establishing statehood. Prime
Minister Noda conveyed our commitment to
strengthening assistance in that regard directly to
President Abbas during his visit to Japan earlier this
month. Japan also calls upon the Government of Israel
to support the fiscal stability of the Palestinian
Authority, including by conducting sustainable tax
transfers to the Palestinian Authority.
The President: I
representative of Jordan.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We
meet today in exceptional international and regional
conditions, as the Arab world is experiencing serious
challenges and decisive transformations.

With regard to the Middle East peace process,
Japan firmly supports a two-State solution in which
Israel and a future independent Palestinian State would
live side by side in peace, security and mutual
recognition. A two-State solution can be achieved only
through sincere negotiations between the parties
concerned.

The situation imposes on us significant
responsibilities to our people and future generations.
On that basis and the basis of our principles in general,
my delegation believes that our responsibilities
requires us to condemn the massacre and targeting of
innocent civilians. These practices are prohibited from
a moral, humane and legal point of view. They are
banned by religious and secular law, run counter to
humanitarian international law and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, and must therefore be
subject to national and international legal accountability.

In this connection, Japan supports the elements of
the Quartet’s statement of 23 September 2011, which
was reaffirmed by the Quartet principals two weeks
ago. Japan also pays respect to the leadership of the

Jordan considers that, despite all of the current
developments in the region, the Palestinian question
remains the main and central issue in the Middle East.
That belief sparked the recent Jordan initiative to start

4

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

initial exploratory negotiations by bringing the two
parties together to support the efforts of the
international Quartet and to move on from the impasse
in which the negotiations are bogged down.
In that regard, Jordan welcomes the letter of
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas addressed to Mr. Benjamin
Netanyahu, the head of the Israeli Government. We
reaffirm by the same token the contents of this letter,
and we hope that there will be a positive response from
the Israeli side.
(spoke in English)
The Permanent Representative of Israel
mentioned in his statement this morning that the West
Bank was part of Jordan from 1948 to 1967 and that
“the Arab world did not lift a finger to create a
Palestinian State”. I regret that he made this remark,
which represents a sterile and somewhat dated
argument long put forward by the neo-revisionists in
Israel, which prompts me to note the following.
First, the act of union of 1950 was agreed to
without prejudice to the rights and aspirations of the
Palestinian people. Perhaps the clearest demonstration
of this fact was the attendance of his late Majesty, King
Hussein, at the opening ceremony marking the creation
of the Palestinian Liberation Organization in 1964.
Secondly, to cover the deeper implications behind this
Israeli assertion, I wish to state that what was
non-Israeli territory prior to 1948 remains non-Israeli
territory today.
Let us assume that the status of the territory from
1950 to 1967 remains in dispute — a dispute between
us, the Jordanians and the Palestinians. What is not in
dispute is that, however we argue about it, we all agree
that this territory was non-Israeli territory, and this
remains so today. In actual fact, there is no dispute.
The Security Council and the International Court of
Justice have affirmed repeatedly in the case of the
Council that the territory is and has since 1967 been
occupied Palestinian territory.
I also wish to deal with another incomplete
assertion. The Permanent Representative of Israel made
the point that we closed the holy sites in Jerusalem to
Jews during the period of Jordan’s administration, but
he did not say why. The action was taken by us because
Christian Palestinians had not been permitted by Israel
to travel to Nazareth. In other words, we responded to
a prior action undertaken by the Israeli Government. If

12-30747

the Ambassador of Israel wants to assert the truth, he
needs to assert all of it.
(spoke in Arabic)
As regards the prevailing situation in the
brotherly country of the Syrian Arab Republic, our
position is to find a political solution to the Syrian
crisis and to provide our support to the mission of the
former Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan. Jordan has
extended its hand to the brotherly Syrian people and
will continue to do so. We appeal for the Syrian people
not to be abandoned in this very difficult time. We also
call for an end to the targeting of innocent Syrian
civilians and the start of a serious dialogue between the
Government and the opposition to put an end to the
cycle of violence and destruction and to protect the
cultural and humanitarian heritage of the Syrian Arab
Republic for its sake and for the sake of humanity. The
Syrian Arab Republic is our neighbour, and so are its
people, with their deeply Arab roots. Syria’s security is
our security, and its interests are also ours.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this meeting. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing, and the Permanent Representative of Israel
and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for their
statements.
The past three months since the Council’s most
recent open debate on the situation in the Middle East
(see S/PV.6706) have been profuse in developments in
the region. Unfortunately, a great deal of these recent
developments have not brought about the long-awaited
solutions to current crises or shown a way out of the
present stalemates.
The Israeli-Palestinian peace process has seen no
progress, despite the latest efforts of the Jordanian
authorities, which had cast a ray of hope. On the
contrary, we have been watching with dismay and
serious concern the steady and unabated continuation
of illegal settlement activity in the occupied territories,
which puts in grave jeopardy the prospects for a
two-State solution.
Brazil considers the continuation of the illegal
settlement policy to be the most important single
reason for the long-standing and dangerous paralysis of
the peace process. The international community must

5

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

not allow this policy to turn the idea of peace between
Palestinians and Israelis into an ever-elusive goal. We
reiterate our call on Israel to stop and reverse
settlement activity. In our view, the recognition of the
Palestinian people’s legitimate right to sovereignty and
self-determination will contribute to Israel’s security.
In the present circumstances, it is high time that
the efforts undertaken by the Quartet yield concrete
and significant results so as to bring the peace process
back to life. The Council also needs to fulfil its Charter
responsibilities with regard to the question of Palestine
and act in order to avoid the prospects for peace
unravelling. A greater involvement of the Security
Council is past due. Brazil reiterates its proposal that,
as a first step, the Quartet regularly report to the
Council on progress that might have been achieved on
the commitments undertaken by the parties.
I now turn to the situation in Syria. It is vital that
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to
greater political participation, economic opportunities,
dignity and social justice be fully heard and realized.
Brazil continues to unequivocally condemn all violence
against civilians, in particular that committed by State
agents, and deplores all violations of human rights.
We welcome the display of unity that allowed the
Council to adopt resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043
(2012). We have always said that the Council could
best help if it were able to send clear and unified
messages to all relevant actors in Syria.
Brazil underlines the crucial role of Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan, in bringing about a political solution
to the crisis. We support and commend his six-point
plan. We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS). We
fully concur with the Secretary-General’s assessment
that the Supervision Mission can assist in the creation
of conditions for a comprehensive political dialogue in
Syria. Brazil fully supports the Supervision Mission
and expects the Government of Syria to ensure its
effective operation.
If UNSMIS is to be successful, violence must
stop immediately. The continuation of violence,
irrespective of its origin, is unacceptable. The Syrian
Government, which bears the greater responsibility for
easing tensions and stopping the violence, must fulfil
its commitments and fully implement all aspects of the
six-point plan. The opposition must understand that

6

dialogue, not armed struggle, is the means to advance
democracy, freedom and justice, and act accordingly.
In line with Brazil’s commitment to stability in
Syria, we are ready to do our part and to support the
United Nations efforts, including by contributing to the
supervision of the cessation of all violence, in
accordance with resolution 2043 (2012).
Before concluding, let me say that Brazil
continues to carefully follow the situation in Lebanon.
We have recently renewed our interest in maintaining
our current contribution of personnel and equipment to
the maritime task force of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, which constitutes further indication
of the Brazilian commitment to the success of the
United Nations efforts in Lebanon, to peace and
stability in the Middle East, and to the work of the
United Nations peacekeeping missions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate.
Australia, like all of us, shares the world’s
frustration with the lack of progress in the Middle East
peace process. Oslo was in 1993, and the historic Arab
Peace Initiative in 2002, 10 years ago. Like many, we
welcomed the Quartet statement of 23 September 2011,
but progress is stagnant. We applaud the efforts of
King Abdullah and Foreign Minister Judeh of Jordan to
kick-start direct dialogue, and we encourage them to
continue despite the obstacles.
We also welcome the meeting last week in
Jerusalem between the senior Palestinian delegation,
led by chief negotiator Erekat and Prime Minister
Netanyahu, and Mr. Netanyahu’s commitment to
responding within two weeks to the letter delivered to
him from President Abbas. We share the hope
expressed by Under-Secretary-General Pascoe this
morning that this exchange of letters will provide an
opening for peace, but we have to recognize that the
window is closing very quickly — closing on the
Palestinian inalienable right to self-determination and
on the best prospect for Israel’s long-term security.
As the Quartet noted in its statement of 11 April
(SG/2182), the situation on the ground is increasingly
fragile. The Quartet has repeatedly called on the parties
to refrain from unilateral or provocative actions that
prejudge the outcome of negotiations, but Israeli

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

settlement activity remains a very serious concern. My
own country has consistently called for this activity to
cease. Our Foreign Minister did so again on 10 April.
Settlements are directly corroding the viability of
a two-State solution. The most recent decisions are
contrary to commitments made by the Israeli
Government itself. It is also imperative that violence of
any kind targeting civilians, including rocket attacks on
Israel from Gaza, must stop. But, while we recognize
Israel’s legitimate security concerns, more must be
done, and quickly, to ease the humanitarian situation in
Gaza.
Australia is greatly concerned that, if direct
negotiations do not commence soon, the prospects for
peace and a two-State solution will simply disappear.
An early resumption of direct talks, on the basis of the
1967 boundaries and with agreed land swaps, is needed
urgently and we encourage both sides to resume talks
on that basis. We also call on international and regional
donors to continue to assist the Palestinian Authority to
ensure its financial viability, even during times of tight
global financial circumstances. It is essential that the
decisive gains made in building Palestinian institutions
not be reversed, if we are genuine about a Palestinian
State.
We admire the efforts of the Palestinian
leadership to create a strong base for statehood, and my
own country will continue supporting the Palestinians
in those efforts, including through our multi-year
partnership agreement. We will also soon sign a new
multi-year partnership with the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East with increased funding.
The stagnation in the Middle East peace process
between Israel and Palestine is, as we know, just not
sustainable. We must prevent a two-State solution from
slipping away. There must be an immediate end to
settlement expansion and an early resumption of direct
talks.
Turning very briefly to the situation in Syria, we
welcome the Council’s unanimous support, through
resolution 2043 (2012), to deploy a United Nations
observer mission to monitor a ceasefire and to support
the full implementation of Special Envoy Annan’s
six-point plan. It is essential that we continue to speak
with one voice against the serious atrocities that we
have been witnessing.

12-30747

But we have to be hard-headed about that. The
Syrian Government has yet to implement its
obligations regarding the actions of its troops and the
removal of heavy weapons. Violence continues, and
very little progress has been made on the ground.
Denial of humanitarian access is just unacceptable. We
urge Syria, in the strongest terms, to ensure the
effective operation of the mission, and we urge all
parties to honour the ceasefire.
We must also be concerned about the
approximately 40,000 Syrians who have fled to
neighbouring countries. My own country will continue
to play a practical role in helping to meet the immediate
needs of the Syrian people and those who have had to
flee, including to Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey.
To conclude, the situation in Syria is plainly
dangerous and that is obvious to all of us. The atrocities
committed within the country are unacceptable. The
regional implications are growing. The Council has
unanimously recognized the need for it to monitor very
closely how its own resolutions are being implemented
or how they will not be implemented or are not being
implemented. That need is as compelling as it is
obvious.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): As this is Indonesia’s
first opportunity to address the Council this month,
please allow me to congratulate the United States of
America and you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency, and we welcome the convening of this
open debate. Let me also take this opportunity to
express our gratitude to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement of the
Non-Aligned Movement delivered earlier by the
representative of Egypt, as well as the statement of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, which will be
delivered later by the representative of Kazakhstan.
Several previous speakers have alluded to the fact
that the current situation between the Palestinians and
Israelis is uncertain and difficult. Indonesia fully
concurs with that assessment, yet wishes to pose the
question as to what we have done to alleviate the
suffering of the people in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

7

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

Indonesia is deeply concerned that the
international efforts to meet and advance the issue have
failed so far to facilitate the resumption of direct talks
between the Palestinians and the Israelis, which would
shape a path to a negotiated agreement before the end
of the year. It is noteworthy that the need for both sides
to avoid provocations that would be detrimental to the
prospects of peace has been repeatedly expressed by
the majority of Member States. Despite that, not only
have settlement activities not subsided, they continue
before our very eyes to increase in volume and
intensity.
It has been widely reported recently that
Palestinian State-building efforts face an increased risk
of failing. The deterioration of the progress achieved so
far, coupled with the financial and political burden on
the Palestinian Authority, has truly hampered and
blocked any potential success.
Indonesia wishes to restate its strong
condemnation of all policies designed to whittle down
the authority of the Palestinian Authority or frustrate
the desires of Palestinians to build their capacity for
eventual statehood. We have repeatedly stated our
unwavering support of the efforts of Palestinians to
build such State structures, and we have in fact
committed ourselves to capacity-building efforts in that
regard.
In line with that, Indonesia yet again joins the
international community in declaring its untiring
support for and solidarity with the Palestinians in their
quest for the realization of their inalienable rights,
including their right to have an independent and
sovereign State. We reiterate our support for the vision
of two States living side by side in peace and look
forward to the eventual establishment of the State of
Palestine. As we focus on that objective, the international
community must move beyond rhetoric. We must
contribute in real terms to supporting the Palestinian
people in preparation for the day when they finally
exercise their right of sovereignty.
The resilience of the Palestinian people is worthy
of recognition. They have endured repression and
endless mayhem for decades. Despite that, they have
kept on moving towards achieving their dream of
independent statehood. The dream of our Palestinian
friends, brothers and sisters, is simply to have a State
they can call their own.

8

Unfortunately, the dream of the Palestinians and
their journey to an independent State have continued to
be beset by hurdles and setbacks. Israel, with infamous
ingenuity, continues to combine persistent hostility
towards the Palestinians with determined efforts to
frustrate the peace process.
Israel must recognize that we are living in an era
when human rights must be respected and protected
and that the will of the oppressed will prevail. No
country can have a clear conscience if it resorts to
brutal repression. No country can expect to wear the
mantle of dignity by ignoring universal democratic
values. It is, therefore, also the responsibility of the
international community to continue its efforts to
create conditions conducive to the early establishment
of an independent State of Palestine.
Finally, with regard to the situation in Lebanon
and in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, my
delegation calls upon Israel to fully respect Lebanon’s
sovereignty and stop violating resolution 1701 (2006).
We further urge Israel to immediately halt its actions
aimed at altering the legal, physical and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, and to
abide by resolution 497 (1981).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Let me first congratulate
you, Madam, on your presidency of the Council for
this month and, secondly, align my delegation with the
statements delivered by the representatives of Egypt,
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and
Kazakhstan, on behalf of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, respectively. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing earlier today.
Malaysia has been closely watching recent
developments regarding the Palestinian question. We
welcome all attempts by the international community
to find ways and means to resolve that long-standing
issue. Those efforts include the Middle East Quartet
meeting of 11 April, as well as the efforts by Jordan to
revive negotiations between the two States. Malaysia
also welcomes and fully supports the Palestinian
efforts to restart meaningful negotiations with Israel, as
conveyed in a letter from President Mahmoud Abbas to
the Israeli Prime Minister on 17 April. Malaysia also
echoes the Non-Aligned Movement’s call for
implementation of the recommendation made by

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

Ms. Valerie
Amos,
Under-Secretary-General
for United Nations humanitarian assistance. To alleviate the
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, suffering, Malaysia calls on Israel to unconditionally
to the Security Council on 18 January with respect to and completely lift the illegal blockade.
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
Obviously, the situation in the occupied
territory.
Palestinian territory is deplorable and appalling. In
In support of all of those efforts, Malaysia will order to salvage the two-State solution, where both
continue to urge Switzerland, in its capacity as Palestine and Israel can live side by side in peace and
depositary of the Geneva Conventions, in particular the security, it is important that the international community,
Fourth Geneva Convention, to convene a conference of particularly the Security Council, address the Palestinian
the high contracting parties, at the earliest opportunity, application for membership in the United Nations with
to discuss issues related to the Convention in the the appropriate urgency, and collectively strengthen its
context of the situation in the occupied Palestinian pressure for an end to Israel’s illegal occupation.
territory.
My delegation welcomes the recent adoption of
We have witnessed rapid and substantive resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012), aimed at
developments in the Arab world in the past 15 months, addressing the complex crisis in the Syrian Arab
which have become known as the Arab Spring. While Republic. We hope that, through the six-point proposal
there have been positive outcomes, we have indirectly of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and
and unintentionally neglected the people of Palestine, the League of Arab States and the Council’s resolutions,
who have been forced to live under the longest illegal the loss of life will end and normalcy will return to
military occupation in modern history. Palestine has Syria. Malaysia also seeks a peaceful settlement
recently been sidelined by other major events in the through an inclusive Syrian-led political process,
Middle East. In that regard, Malaysia calls upon where the rights of all parties are protected.
Member States to refocus their attention on Palestine.
In that connection, we also hope that the
While most of the world’s attention seemed to be international zeal that is visible on that issue can be
drawn to the Arab Spring, with particular regard to the replicated in efforts to end the illegal Israeli occupation
protection of human rights, the rule of law and of the Syrian Golan, in accordance with resolutions
democratic principles, Malaysia wishes to draw the 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).
attention of the international community to Israel’s
On a similar note, with regard to Lebanon, we
continued violations of international law, including
call on all concerned parties to fully implement
humanitarian and human rights law, even as I speak
resolution 1701 (2006).
now. The situation in the West Bank, particularly in
East Jerusalem, is dire, with the growing entrenchment
We wish to reiterate that addressing the
of illegal Israeli settlers and unprovoked violence Palestinian question requires that the international
committed by those settlers, often under the watch of community, particularly the Security Council, act
the Israeli authorities, who have themselves done little truthfully and sincerely to achieve a just peace in the
or nothing to deter such violence.
region. The Council should undertake immediate and
substantive actions to address the Palestinian question
I would not be doing justice to the Palestinians if
by upholding its own resolutions.
I failed to mention the illegal blockade of Gaza, which
is now entering its fifth year. Having witnessed its
To that end, Malaysia reiterates its call on
effects during my visit there last July under the auspices Member States that have yet to do so to recognize the
of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices independent State of Palestine. We cannot continue to
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People deny the right of the Palestinian people to establish an
and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories, the illegal independent State of Palestine based on the two-State
blockade is a cruel case of the deliberate economic solution, within the pre-1967 borders and with East
strangulation of Palestine and a form of collective Jerusalem as its capital.
punishment that fully violates international law. Seventy
The President: I now give the floor to the
per cent of the population of the narrow Gaza Strip, or
representative of Nicaragua.
1.1 million inhabitants, have become dependent on

12-30747

9

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Nicaragua aligns itself fully with the
statement made by the representative of Egypt in his
capacity as the Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM).
Once again, Nicaragua reiterates its strongest
condemnation of Israel’s illegal occupation of all
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories, and
demands its immediate withdrawal. We condemn the
Israeli policies and practices aimed at the construction,
rather than the dismantlement of, settlements, as well
as the inhuman blockade of Gaza and the policy of
dismembering the West Bank and other Palestinian
territories. We can no longer allow the logic of denying
the very existence of the Palestinian State to continue.
Such logic has also led to a true besiegement policy
that is based upon an undeclared determination to deny
each and every Palestinian citizen their fundamental
human existence.
Since the triumph of the Sandanista revolution, in
1979, Nicaragua has been a proud witness to the
struggle of the Palestinian people. We recognize the
substantial concessions made by Palestine in order to
achieve peace, although they have, regrettably, been
met by Israel’s continued illegal settlements, increased
humiliation, increased killings, growing instances of
systematic assassination of Palestinian leaders and
greater destruction of homes and more looting,
including in East Jerusalem.
Nicaragua reiterates the need to put an immediate
end to the Israel’s impunity, which has been
irresponsibly guaranteed to it by a permanent member
of the Council, in particular through the indiscriminate
use of the veto by that member, who has become
Israel’s major accomplice.
We all know that the Council has at its disposal
the mechanisms necessary to demand that Israel change
its policies and practices once and for all, that it be
held accountable for its actions and that it implement
the resolutions of the Organization.
It is time to recognize the Palestinian State within
the pre-1967 borders, as well as for everyone, in
particular the members of the Council, to set aside the
double standards of requiring some, but not others, to
comply with the obligations that we have entered into
as Members of the Organization. That is the only way
that we can achieve a firm and lasting peace that
allows both peoples to effectively exercise all of their

10

rights and makes it possible to ultimately end an
inexplicable injustice.
In addition to the dangerous stalemate that has
developed vis-à-vis the Palestinian question through a
lack of political will, we have also witnessed how the
situation in the Middle East and in the surrounding
regions has worsened every day as the result of a clear
tendency to resolve conflicts through the use of
weapons and war, rather than through dialogue and
negotiation.
During the 1980s, when the same protagonists we
have today were promoting regime change and calling
for war instead of dialogue and negotiation, the
Organization, the countries of our region and the rest
of the international community raised their voices in a
strong, firm and resolute manner to call for a halt to the
war machinery, to the flow of weapons and to terrorist
actions. We called for dialogue and negotiation to
prevail over the imposition of force. It is extremely
worrying to my country that conflicts are increasingly
being resolved through the use of force by the great
Powers and their armed wing, NATO. From the very
start, the warmongering calls that we have heard over
the past 15 months have undermined weak attempts at
a peaceful settlement of the crises emerging in various
parts of the Middle East and the Arab world and its
surrounding areas.
Instead of supporting aggressive rhetoric, the role
of the Organization and all its Members should always
be to support efforts for peace, to keep channels of
communication and dialogue open and not to isolate
itself through partisan positions that alienate one of the
parties to a conflict. True to the very essence of the
United Nations, born from the ashes of the Second
World War, calls emerging from the Organization
should be for peace, not for war.
In that respect, Nicaragua resolutely condemns all
those that have put their dangerous geopolitical
ambitions ahead of ending violence through the
provision of military and financial support to armed
groups classified as terrorist groups by the Security
Council. Such illicit activities affirm that any pretext or
instrument are welcomed in seeking to impose a
change of Government by force, irresponsibly
encouraging public opposition, violating the Charter of
the United Nations and threatening the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of its Member States.

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

Nicaragua urges that the joint efforts of Russia,
China and former Secretary-General Kofi Annan be
fully supported by the entire Organization and all its
Members. We cherish the hope that such efforts will
succeed and that reason and peace will prevail over
force and war, the consequences of which could be
devastating for the region and the world.
In that respect, I would like to end my statement
by emphasizing that global peace can be maintained
only if it is understood once and for all that the logic of
interventionism and hegemony can never be the basis
for a new world order in which true justice for all, free
of double standards or double morals, prevails.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending you, Madam President, for convening this
important debate.
The delegation of Sri Lanka associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The peace process in the Middle East is a matter
of intrinsic interest to us all. The Secretary-General
travelled to the region recently to see the situation on
the ground for himself, and strongly encouraged the
resumption of bilateral negotiations. We support and
value his efforts. The Quartet envoys have continued to
push on with their task, as has Jordan. Even though a
just and durable solution to the situation in the Middle
East continues to evade us, it is important to remain
engaged. We hope that, even in the midst of doubts and
frustrations, the parties will remain focused on the
need to achieve an enduring peace and to explore all
proposals on the main goals. We owe that to all the
people of the region.
The settlement activities by Israel continue to be
one of the main factors in the recurrence of violence in
the region. The Quartet and the wider international
community have repeatedly called for a freeze of
settlement activity and an end to the demolition of
Palestinian homes. As the Under-Secretary-General
said in his briefing on 28 February (see S/PV.6725),
incidents of settler violence against Palestinians
continue in the West Bank. We hope that the settlement
activity, which is a key source of human suffering and
continuing friction in the occupied territories, and the
resentment fuelling the conflict will be brought to an

12-30747

end, consistent with obligations under international law
and in line with the wishes of the wider international
community and, of course, this body. The law on that
matter is very clear: settlements in the occupied
territories are not legal.
Tolerance and understanding must be the key to
peaceful coexistence in the Middle East, which is
dotted with many religious sites that are holy to
Muslims, Jews and Christians. We encourage all parties
to exercise the utmost restraint for the sake of the
civilians and for the greater goal of a lasting peace.
We have often stated that the political unity and
economic advancement of the Palestinian people will
contribute to the viability of the two-State solution. In
that regard, it is notable that the President of the
Palestinian Authority and the leader of Hamas recently
agreed to form a transitional Government of
technocrats. We also look forward to the Palestinian
legislative and presidential elections.
We appreciate the ongoing efforts by
international donors, regional organizations and United
Nations agencies, such as the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, to alleviate the suffering of Palestinian civilians,
especially children. We also strongly urge the
occupying authorities to lift the restrictions on access
and egress to Gaza for persons and goods. That will
significantly contribute to the economic stability of
Gaza.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Sri Lanka’s
support for a peaceful and negotiated settlement of the
Palestinian issue, and call for the implementation of
the General Assembly resolutions on the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to statehood and the
attainment of a two-State solution.
Sri Lanka supports Palestine’s application for
admission to full membership of the United Nations. It
is our hope that it will also receive this body’s
favourable consideration. We also call for the
restoration of the Golan to Syria and the occupied
Lebanese lands to Lebanon.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for steering this very
important open debate on the situation in the Middle
East. I also convey our appreciation to Under-

11

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his insightful and
comprehensive briefing this morning.
I also wish to state that the delegation of
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. In addition, I wish briefly to
make certain points that Bangladesh believes to be of
importance.
A sustainable resolution of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, including the issue of Palestine, which is the
core of the long-lasting crisis, must be our collective
strategic objective. All Member States should pledge
complete commitment to that objective and throw their
full moral, diplomatic, political and economic support
behind its early realization. In that connection, we
continue to encourage the efforts of Jordan to ensure
peace between Palestine and Israel. Allow me to
highlight some of the recent developments following
our last quarterly debate on the issue (see S/PV.6706).
The Quartet last met on 11 April. However, there
has been little progress towards meeting the timeline
set out by the Quartet on 23 September 2011 for an
agreement by the end of 2012. In particular, the
deadline for parties to engage in direct negotiations and
to exchange proposals for border and security
arrangements by 26 January was missed. Only the
Palestinian Authority submitted the requested
proposals. IN that regard, we stress the need for the
Quartet to adopt a clear position on the 1967 borders,
including East Jerusalem, as one of the parameters for
direct negotiations. Let me urge the Quartet also to
ease the financial burden of the Palestinian Authority.
There should be renewed commitments to increase
financial assistance to Palestine.
It is encouraging to note that United States
President Barack Obama phoned Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas on 19 March, reaffirming the United
States commitment to the peace process and the
Quartet objectives.
On 27 March, Special Coordinator Robert Serry
briefed the Council (see S/PV.6742), reporting that
prospects for direct negotiations remained slim, and
that without a political horizon, the State-building
efforts of the Palestinian Authority were at risk.
On 22 March, the Human Rights Council adopted
a resolution establishing an independent international
fact-finding mission to investigate the implications of

12

Israeli settlements for the rights of Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. We hope that the mission will be granted
due access to the occupied territories.
One of the disturbing elements of the IsraelPalestine conflict is Israel’s utterance that it would not
negotiate with a Palestinian Government that includes
Hamas, although on 6 February Hamas and Fatah
agreed on an interim Government, led by President
Abbas, that would prepare for presidential and
parliamentary elections.
We are afraid that progress on implementing the
agreement will be slow as a result of such declarations.
Instead of a pick-and-choose mentality, respect for
democratically elected representatives should be the
norm across nations.
It is also disheartening to note the dim prospects
for Palestine’s application for United Nations
membership. The application was in effect put on the
shelf after the Admissions Committee reported that it
had been unable to reach a unanimous recommendation.
The situation of the approximately 4,400
Palestinian prisoners in Israeli detention centres, 300
of whom are under administrative detention, also
remains a cause of worry for those who believe in
human rights and the fairness of justice, in particular as
some detainees have continued to protest their situation
through hunger strikes. Those detained must either be
charged and face trial with judicial guarantees or
released without delay. The human rights of those
detainees should be honoured.
We believe that the best guides for achieving a
two-State solution are, inter alia, the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), the
principle of land for peace, the Madrid Conference
terms of reference, the road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
Achieving a lasting solution in the Middle East,
we believe, will guarantee the State of Israel its
national security and peace. However, achieving that
goal will require Israel’s complete and unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem.
Finally, let me reiterate Bangladesh’s full support
for a lasting peace for all inhabitants of the region,
both Arabs and Israelis, and our strong commitment to

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

the realization of an independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
living side by side and in peace and harmony with all
its neighbours.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam Diallo, Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, I thank you, Madam President,
for giving me the opportunity to address the Council. I
should like also to take this opportunity to congratulate
you on the outstanding manner in which you have been
guiding the Council’s work during the month of April
2012.
The
Palestinian
question
is
becoming
increasingly urgent as a major challenge to the world’s
conscience. Those who think they can ignore it may
well face a rude awakening, given the growing
deterioration of the situation, both on the ground and
politically.
As settlements continue to undermine efforts
towards a two-State solution, the recent launching of
projects and bidding for the construction of 1,121
residential structures is the latest instalment in the
vicious circle of Israeli decision-making, which has
dashed the tentative hopes of those who are intent on
achieving a negotiated solution. Our Committee
therefore calls upon the Security Council to act
resolutely in order to put an end to the construction of
settlements in Palestinian territory and to dismantle
them. We support the fact-finding mission recently
authorized by the Human Rights Council for that
purpose, and we call for a revitalization of the work of
the high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
This major concern is exacerbated by the fact that
the peace process has stalled, despite the exploratory
contacts made in Amman under Jordanian auspices.
While the setting for this enduring scene in the
diplomatic repertoire may vary with the circumstances,
the story, unfortunately, does not change at all.
Furthermore, the serious financial crisis affecting
the Palestinian Authority could stymie the progress
already made in its State-building efforts, unless an
outpouring of donor generosity can counter the policy

12-30747

of economic strangulation it is facing. In addition, the
agreement on intra-Palestinian reconciliation signed in
Doha should be implemented, and Palestine’s
application for membership in the United Nations
should be given proper and fair consideration.
It is easy to understand the deep frustration of the
Palestinian leaders, who cannot continue to accept the
unbearable status quo indefinitely. The international
community must therefore take bold and urgent action
to break the deadlock while the two-State solution can
still be salvaged. In addition, the Quartet and its
regional partners must remain firmly resolved to
enforce the deadline set for the end of 2012 to reach
the long-awaited agreement. We therefore call upon the
parties to return to the negotiating table, on the basis of
the guarantees clearly set out by the Quartet for a final
settlement based on the 1967 borders and minimal
confidence-building measures, including a complete
halt to settlement activities, the lifting of the blockade
against Gaza and the release of Palestinian political
prisoners.
The Committee, for its part, has continued to
make a constructive contribution to achieving our
shared aim of having two States living in peace and
security. In February, we convened in Cairo the
Seminar on Assistance to the Palestinian People with a
view to examining the cost of the Israeli occupation. It
was clearly shown that once there is an end to the
occupation, which costs at least $7 billion a year, the
Palestinian State will be economically independent and
will not become an assisted State or a bankrupt one.
The United Nations International Meeting on the
Question of Palestine, held in Geneva in April,
afforded an opportunity to review the humanitarian and
legal aspects of the critical problem of Palestinian
political prisoners held in Israeli prisons. It is
abundantly clear that no agreement will be possible
unless a just solution is found that will result in the
release of the 4,400 such prisoners. For that reason,
various remedies have been considered, including
appeals to the International Court of Justice and the
General Assembly to have them determine the status of
those prisoners under the Geneva Conventions, and the
sending of a United Nations fact-finding mission to
investigate the conditions of their detention. Indeed,
this problem — which remains in the headlines, as we
recently saw when 1,200 prisoners began a hunger
strike — will require the constant attention of the

13

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

United Nations, and in particular of the Security
Council.

demonstrate its willingness to study the situation first
hand.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.

At the moment, it seems that all avenues are
closed to the Palestinians. Their membership
application to the United Nations has been vetoed
beforehand. They have demonstrated their willingness
to negotiate on the basis of international law and the
Road Map, but negotiations are a difficult sell with
settlement activities continuing unabated. A draft
resolution on the settlements was vetoed last year, and
Palestinians continue to be illegally displaced from
their homes.

Mr. Jónasson (Iceland): These are disturbing
times in the Middle East. The situation in Syria
remains of great concern, and we call on all parties to
do their utmost to ensure that the Annan peace plan
will succeed. The international community, as well as
the actors on the ground, must do all they can to
prevent further conflict in Syria, while at the same time
taking steps towards achieving permanent peace. These
steps must necessarily address the legitimate
aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people.
I will focus my statement on the question of
Palestine, which Iceland would like to see receiving
more attention by the Security Council.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to be a
core issue for peace and security in the Middle East.
The changes we are seeing in the region must include a
solution to the conflict; only by addressing this core
problem can we expect changes to bring sustainable
peace. Continued and accelerated settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, remain the main obstacle to peace. The
request for the settlement activities to end cannot be
called a precondition. These are illegal actions, in
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention. According
to the Convention, all parties are obliged to ensure
respect for the Convention in all circumstances. This is
a question not only of politics; it is a question of
upholding international humanitarian law. Iceland
therefore welcomes the resolution adopted by the
Human Rights Council in Geneva on conducting an
international investigation into the settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
We urge Israel to cooperate with the fact-finding team.
We encourage the members of the Security
Council to accept the invitation of President Abbas to
visit the occupied Palestinian territory at the earliest
convenience. Such a visit would give members a chance
to see for themselves the situation on the ground and
how the settlements, the wall, the roadblocks and
checkpoints, the separate road system for settlers and
so on are systematically cementing the occupation and
seriously undermining the two-State solution. By
accepting the invitation, the Security Council would

14

The current situation reflects very badly on the
international community, and the Security Council
should renew its commitment to settling the conflict
and inform the rest of the membership on how it
intends to proceed. Palestinians are yearning for
freedom and dignity. They are looking to the United
Nations to help them realize their right to
self-determination and freedom from occupation.
Iceland fully supports the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and reiterates its call on
the Security Council to recommend to the General
Assembly that Palestine be accepted as the 194th State
Member of the United Nations.
The President: I
representative of Norway.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Wetland (Norway): The absence of resumed
real peace negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians is not tenable. Both parties have
responsibilities to achieve a comprehensive, just and
durable peace in the Middle East. Hostilities directed
against civilians in southern Israel continue from the
Gaza Strip and Sinai. This is totally unacceptable.
Nevertheless, the expansion of Israeli settlements in
the West Bank persists and is presently the most severe
impediment to peace.
Israel has to respond to the international
community’s continuous call for compliance with
international law and to abide by its international
obligations. We cannot accept the encirclement of East
Jerusalem by settlements, which is cutting off any
future capital of a Palestinian State and fragmenting
the Palestinian territory. Israeli settlements are illegal
under international and Israeli law and should be
demolished, as ruled by the Israeli High Court.

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

Current actions on the ground are not compatible
with the peace negotiations for the achievement of a
two-State solution to the conflict. These unlawful and
unilateral acts aimed at changing the situation on the
ground and pre-empting the outcome of negotiations
simply must stop. Both the territory and the borders are
to be decided through negotiations, as are other final
status issues.
The settlement expansion is currently inciting the
Palestinian side to respond by internationalizing the
conflict. It is also increasingly provoking public
opinion and contributes to isolating Israel within the
region and beyond. European leaders are constantly
being asked why nothing is being done to hold Israel
accountable. This threatens the stability of the
Palestinian Authority and Palestinian State-building
efforts. It may trigger waves of uncontrolled unrest in
the area and lead to a breakdown of the current security
mechanisms.
The donor support group for the Palestinian
territory met on 21 March in Brussels to address the
challenges to the Palestinian economy. It called for
increased budget support by donors to meet the
anticipated deficit in the recurrent budget. It also called
on both Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
implement improvements in the tax collection and
transfer mechanism. The donor group also called for
increased economic access for Palestinian authorities
and investors in the area that is still under Israeli
administration, which constitutes around 43 per cent of
the West Bank.
Important progress has been made in facilitating
the import of goods to Gaza, thereby improving living
conditions. However, more needs to be done if Gaza is
to realize its full economic and social potential. Within
the framework of resolution 1860 (2009), further steps
should be taken to lift the closure while taking security
challenges into account.
Finally, I should like to say a few words on Syria.
The cessation of violence remains incomplete. The
discredited Syrian authorities must immediately
withdraw their security forces and heavy weapons back
from populated areas to the barracks. Norway fully
supports Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan’s efforts to
stop the bloodshed in Syria and to facilitate a political
transition towards democracy. We welcome the
adoption of resolution 2043 (2012) and the deployment
of up to 300 military observers and civilian experts to

12-30747

monitor the full implementation of Mr. Annan’s
six-point proposal. We hope that these efforts will
contribute positively and create conditions for a
meaningful political transition in Syria.
The President: I
representative of Qatar.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and on your successful leadership,
especially with respect to the progress achieved on the
situation in Syria.
I also thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing this
morning.
I offer my deep condolences to the Government
and people of Pakistan on last week’s air disaster.
No matter what happens in the Middle East, the
question of Palestine remains the central issue affecting
peace and security in the region. The final months of
last year saw new momentum emerge towards an
agreement between the Israeli and Palestinian parties in
the wake of the statement issued in September 2011 by
the Quartet, in which it proposed a time line for
re-activating negotiations between the two sides to
reach an agreement by late 2012 that would address the
salient issues. This led to a return to negotiations after
a long pause as exploratory talks began under the
commendable auspices of Jordan.
The Palestinian side has shown the desire to
engage in direct, serious and productive negotiations.
In response to a Quartet request, Palestinians
demonstrated vision, in all negotiating rounds, to
resolve the two most prominent issues, namely, borders
and security. The Palestinian position was made clear
at the highest level in a letter sent last week by
President Mahmoud Abbas to his Israel counterpart.
That letter reaffirmed the principles of the peace
process, which are known and acknowledged by
everyone, and stressed the commitment of the
Palestinians both to those principles and to national
unity, so as to ensure respect for agreements signed by
Israel. The letter also explained how Israeli practices
aimed at stripping the Palestinian Authority of its
powers. On the other hand, the Israeli side did not
provide anything in writing, merely declaring its

15

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

determination to retain control of the Jordan Valley and
the eastern border.
On the ground, the Israeli Government has
continued to expand settlements at a significant pace,
even after the meetings at Amman began. The
international community has spoken with one voice
about the seriousness of the continuation of settlements
on the peace process, as it undermines the two-State
solution by imposing a fait accompli that makes it
impossible to build a viable Palestinian State in the
territory occupied by Israel in 1967, including East
Jerusalem. That renders negotiations meaningless and
pointless and serves to emphasize the absence of
sincere intentions on the part of the Government of
Israel, the occupying Power, to achieve peace. One is
inevitably led to the entirely objective conclusion that
the Israeli side bears full responsibility for the failure
of the talks and the freezing of negotiations, and
therefore for the standstill in the peace process.
Against that backdrop, we reiterate our demand
for the countries sponsoring the proposed Quartet
solution that believe in such a negotiated solution to
bring to bear the political pressure necessary to ensure
the success of that endeavour. We also call for support
for the latest resolution of the Human Rights Council,
which called for the deployment of an independent
international fact-finding mission to investigate the
repercussions of Israeli settlements on Palestinian
rights.
While the international community remains
unanimous about the basic aspects of an ultimate
solution — a two-State solution — insisting that the
Palestinian request that it be recognized as an
independent State be rejected does a disservice to such
a solution. We should like to take this opportunity to
renew our call on States that have not yet recognized
Palestine to do so. We also call on the Security Council
not to obstruct the Palestinian demand for full
membership of the United Nations, given that such
recognition could contribute to the achievement of a
peaceful, comprehensive, just and sustainable
resolution of the issue.
We would like to reiterate that a solution to the
crisis in the Middle East is contingent upon Israel’s
withdrawal from occupied Palestinian territories, the
occupied Syrian Golan and the remaining Lebanese
territory occupied by Israel. A solution also depends
upon Israel’s cessation of violations of Lebanese

16

sovereignty, including all ongoing violations of
international law and international legitimacy, as set
out in the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
especially resolution 1701 (2006). Nevertheless, Israel
has not stopped violating that resolution — by
violating Lebanese sovereignty in various ways, most
recently by building a road in the occupied Lebanese
Shaba’a farmlands.
The question of Jerusalem continues to be a
primary concern of the peoples of the Arab and Islamic
world, who are worried about the Israeli authorities’
escalation of illegal measures aimed at the Judaization
of occupied Jerusalem. The International Conference
on Jerusalem was held last February in Doha on the
initiative of His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa
Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, who emphasized
that Jerusalem, with its mosques and churches, will
remain an Islamic and Christian Arab city. He also
stressed that Israelis do not realize that there is no
Palestinian State without Jerusalem, and no Jerusalem
without the Al-Aqsa Mosque. He also urged the
international community to express its rejection of
attempts by the Israeli Government to desecrate the
sanctity of Islamic and Christian Holy Sites, to
demolish homes in the city and expel its Arab
population, and to withdraw the identity documents of
its inhabitants so as to Judaize Jerusalem. Such
attempts are in violation of the obligations of Israel,
the occupying Power, under international law. They
also run counter to the relevant United Nations
resolutions, in addition to undermining the prospects
for a peaceful resolution of the Palestinian question
and the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Since the outbreak of the peaceful uprising of the
brotherly Syrian people, in March 2011, the State of
Qatar has expressed its deep concern about what is
happening in a dear brotherly Arab country, and
demanded that the bloodshed among the Syrian people
and violations of fundamental freedoms and human
rights stop. The State of Qatar has strived to play a
positive role to resolve the crisis in a way that spares
the country future disasters. However, the Syrian
authorities unfortunately decided from day one to
resort to a repressive solution entailing killing,
detention and torture, in the hope of extinguishing
demonstrations. They also described unarmed
demonstrators as armed and terrorist groups. As a
result, some in Syria have had to resort to self-defence,

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

which is a legitimate right, especially given that it was the protection of Syrian civilians, the withdrawal of
in reaction to the negative acts of the Syrian authorities. military forces and the demilitarization of cities and
villages, as well as to ensuring the freedom of peaceful
The State of Qatar has repeatedly emphasized the
demonstration and the immediate release of all those
cohesion and unity of the Syrian people and the
detained in such events and allowing the free entry and
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity of sisterly
movement of the media, including the immediate
Syria and the principles of the Charter of the United
admission of humanitarian assistance provided by Arab
Nations. As we have supported the efforts of the Arab
and international relief organizations.
League to resolve the crisis, we continue today to
support the efforts exerted by the international
The representatives of the Syrian authorities have
community, led by the efforts of Mr. Kofi Annan, Joint directed several false accusations against my country,
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the Arab aimed at distorting the facts on the ground, in a
League. Those efforts are based primarily on the Arab desperate attempt to divert the attention of the
plan of action adopted by the Arab League on international community from the terrible massacres
22 January.
being committed by those authorities against the
brotherly Syrian people. We stood with Syria before
We also support the implementation of
the current crisis. Only an ungrateful party would deny
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012), on the
that fact. Here we ask, is there any worse terrorism in
deployment of an observer mission to Syria. In that
the world than bombing homes, mosques and churches
regard, we sincerely hope that the mission will succeed
with tanks, mortars, artillery and airplanes?
in its tasks. However, past experience has taught us
The President: I now give the floor to the
that granting the Syrian authorities one opportunity
after another only results in the Government reneging representative of Saudi Arabia.
on its promises and continuing to savagely crack down
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
on its people. Since the deadline to stop the violence
Arabic): First of all, I would like to congratulate you,
on 10 April, the Government has continued to violate
Madam President, on your assumption of the
its obligations to maintaining military forces in
presidency of the Security Council to guide the
population centres and by bombing cities with heavy
Council’s work for this month. We would like to thank
weapons and even by helicopter.
you for inviting us to participate in this open public
The Syrian Government has also continued to debate on the Middle East. I would also like to thank
arrest and torture people and to commit other abuses, Sir Mark Lyall Grant, Permanent Representative of the
confirming its non-compliance with any of the elements United Kingdom, for having presided over the work of
of the six-point plan of the Joint Special Envoy, as the Council last month.
indicated in the letter that the Secretary-General
My delegation supports the statements made on
addressed to the Council on 19 April (S/2012/238).
behalf of the League of Arab States, the Organization
None of that bodes well for the success of the Mission,
of Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned
and requires that the international community,
Movement.
including the Security Council, take firm action to
Today more thank ever, the situation in the
protect the Syrian people in the event of
non-compliance by the Syrian authorities with the Middle East is characterized by a feeling of profound
provisions of resolution 2043 (2012), as well as all the disappointment. That feeling is due to the continued
provisions of the Annan plan as an integral unit, within Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab territory —
the longest occupation that the world has seen since the
a specific time frame.
United Nations was founded. The Palestinian people
In spite of all of that, we are consistent in calling
have placed great hope in the United Nations to save
for a peaceful solution that meets the legitimate
them from that painful experience and from their
aspirations of the Syrian people and holds accountable
suffering. The Palestinian people are committed to
all those involved in the killings and the violations of
peace and to the olive branch, but their hopes depend
their rights, freedoms and dignity. To reach such a
upon the Security Council. The Council must deal with
solution, the Syrian Government must commit to the
the occupation in a serious and firm manner.
immediate cessation of all acts of violence and killing,

12-30747

17

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

It is deplorable that the occupying Power is
continuing its hostile practices, which are characterized
by the expulsion of civilians, detaining people,
torturing prisoners and expanding and building
settlements. Just yesterday, in the middle of the day,
Israel expelled two Palestinian families from their
homes in East Jerusalem, while more building permits
were granted to settlers. The aim is simply to Judaize
Jerusalem and to enshrine the status quo for the Jewish
inhabitants of the city.
Israel is also rejecting the work of the Quartet, in
particular with regard to the Quartet’s statement of
11 April (see SG/2182), which, in and of itself, does
not meet the aspirations of the Palestinian people.
Saudi Arabia, which has responsibility for the
holy places in Medina and Mecca, is very closely
following those attacks against East Jerusalem, and in
particular against Haram Al-Sharif. Saudi Arabia is
very concerned. There have been many attempts to
violate that site, undermine its foundations, burn it and
demolish it. We call attention to Israel’s plan to step up
its destruction and to increase the size of settlements.
The League of Arab States has endorsed the
Initiative put forward by Saudi Arabia to bring an end
to the Arab-Israeli conflict in all its aspects, including
by putting an end to the Israeli occupation of the
Syrian Golan Heights, the Shaba’a farmlands and the
remaining Lebanese territory. We seek to establish a
Palestinian State. Although it has been broadly
accepted by the international community, Israel has
rejected the Initiative.
We urge the Council to go beyond these routine
debates and to take the measures necessary to end the
blockade of Gaza, dismantle the settlements, bring an
end to the occupation and recognize an independent
Palestinian State, on Palestinian land, in line with the
4 June 1967 borders, with its capital in Jerusalem. We
urge the Council to accept Palestine as a full Member
of the United Nations and of its agencies — a matter
on which the Council has been very dilatory. We hope
that the Palestinian people and the world will have to
wait no longer to attain justice from the Council.
I would now like to refer to the Iranian
occupation of the three islands that belong to the
United Arab Emirates, namely, Greater Tunb, Lesser
Tunb and Abu Musa. That occupation is a factor
fuelling Iranian threats against the Arab Gulf States.
The visit of Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad

18

to the islands of the United Arab Emirates was
unacceptable and showed a lack of good intentions. We
support the United Arab Emirates in its efforts to
resolve this problem peaceably through negotiation,
arbitration and mediation. We call upon Iran to
preserve its good neighbourly relations, cooperate with
the United Arab Emirates and display wisdom in
addressing this issue.
With regard to Syria, we supported the adoption
of resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012),
concerning the deployment of a United Nations
Mission to monitor developments. We have also
supported the initiative to send Mr. Kofi Annan, Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and of the League
of Arab States, whose efforts we fully support. We call
attention to the fact that the Syrian Government is
nevertheless continuing its violence against its own
people, using heavy weapons to attack population
centres, including towns and villages.
Instead of prisoners being released, people
continue to be detained. It is clear that the Syrian
Government is not respecting the commitments it made
to the international community through Mr. Annan. It
is high time for the Syrian Government to put an end to
the use of weapons against its own people. The
aspirations and resolve of the people will prevail.
Repression and violence no longer have a place in the
modern world.
We urge the Security Council to ensure that the
Syrian authorities are not able to delay any further and
that Syria is no longer able to continue to ignore its
commitments, as it has with regard to the League of
Arab States Initiative. The Council cannot give the
Syrian authorities additional deadlines at the expense
of the lives of the women, children and young people
of Syria.
The world is watching events closely in the
Middle East. The international community, as
represented by the Security Council, is called upon to
uphold international law and to heed the aspirations of
the people of the Middle East to justice, freedom and
national independence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We listened with
interest to the briefing given to the Security Council by

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Political Affairs.

Under-Secretary-General

for

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela associates
itself with the statement made by Ambassador Maged
Abdelaziz, Permanent Representative of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People recently heard a
statement from Ms. Hanan Ashrawi, an outstanding
representative of that people, in which she told the
Committee that the window for building a PalestinianIsraeli peace based on a two-State solution was rapidly
closing owing to the voracity of the State of Israel,
which chooses expansionism and repression over
respect for human rights and international law.
The State of Israel engages in a regime of
exclusion.
Discriminatory
laws
proliferate.
Communication channels reserved for the exclusive use
of settlers, different rules for settlements on the one
hand and Palestinian villages on the other, deliberate
policies to abandon the Palestinian people to violent
attacks by settlers, segregationist controls and
checkpoints and arbitrary arrests of children, the
elderly and women — all of those are inhuman
practices on the part of a State that, paradoxically, calls
itself a democracy. There is no democracy when laws,
policies and the use of force privilege one group over
another, enforcing religious and ethnic separatism, and
when a people is subjected to oppression, exploitation
and discrimination, as is the heroic Palestinian people.
It is imperative to put an end to the Palestinian
tragedy by effectuating a peace that is comprehensive,
lasting and, above all, fair. Unfortunately, we currently
have a global power structure that, by abusive use of
imperialist military force, transgresses the principles of
the United Nations Charter and international law.
Israel, the occupying Power, means to impose
perpetual humiliation on the Palestinian people. The
whole world calls out to the Security Council to
implement the relevant resolutions on the Palestinian
situation. Venezuela also reiterates the importance of
convening, in accordance with United Nations
resolutions, a conference of the high contracting parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention, with a view to
identifying ways to ensure compliance with the
Convention in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem.

12-30747

The Security Council remains indifferent to the
systemic violations by the State of Israel of international
law, particularly international humanitarian law and
human rights law. Why such impunity? Why such
inaction by the Council? We deplore the fact that,
because of the complicity of one political and military
Power, all resolutions on the Palestinian question are
ignored.
In that context, the urgent need is clear to move
towards a new international order, genuinely based on
the legal equality of States, and in which the
fundamental principles of international law prevail.
Venezuela reiterates its support for recognizing the
Palestinian State as a full Member of the United
Nations.
Current attempts to violate the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic are causes
for concern. Syria’s legitimate aspirations to regain
control of the Golan Heights are eclipsed in favour of
Israel’s expansionist agenda in the Middle East. It is
painful and regrettable to see the deplorable conflict
afflicting the Syrian people — a people who love peace
and nobly defend their sovereignty and right to
self-determination. We are optimistic about the
facilitating work of the Joint Special Envoy for the
United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Kofi Annan. The Council must contribute
unambiguously to the implementation of the six-point
plan he has proposed, which was welcomed by the
Government of President Bashar Al-Assad.
We support a ceasefire and a political and
peaceful solution, through dialogue, to the conflict in
Syria, in order to move towards democratic reforms
without interventions imposed by imperialist interests.
My country recognizes the efforts made by the Syrian
Government to promote such reforms.
We hope that resolution 2043 (2012), adopted on
21 April, establishing the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria — which is to be composed of
unarmed military observers and which has been
welcomed by the Syrian Government — will contribute
to overcoming the crisis. The quest for peace must
never be abandoned. However, it is troubling that Kofi
Annan’s facilitation work and peace efforts by some
countries are intentionally being undermined. The
warmongers do not want peace in Syria; rather, they
want regime change, which, if it were to materialize,
would destabilize the Middle East and encourage the

19

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

State of Israel’s aggression against the Palestinian
people. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reaffirms that the Syrian people has the right to decide
its destiny democratically and without intervention. We
believe that the Government of President Bashar
Al-Assad is the legitimate representative of its people.

to threats, incitement and desecration by extremist
settlers, as well as constant provocation by Zionist
officials. That has led to escalating concern — not only
among the Palestinian people but among Muslim
people around the world — with respect to the
potential for further crisis at that holy site.

We also condemn the ongoing violations of
Lebanese sovereignty and the recurring violations of
resolution 1701 (2006).

Another source of extreme worry is the expansion
of illegal settlements, which continues to take place on
an unprecedented scale, with the number of housing
units being built in the West Bank having grown to
thousands during 2011 and the first quarter of 2012.
The eventual construction of thousands of housing
units will almost certainly change the geopolitical
reality on the ground. In addition to the unabated
expansion of settlements, Palestinian buildings and
residences in both the West Bank and East Jerusalem
are being demolished. Furthermore, the expansion of
settlements has been accompanied by a systematic
increase in settler violence against Palestinians and
their property. The result of those activities is the
continued suffering of the Palestinian people. While
morally wrong, the settlements are also illegal under
international law, as they violate article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and run contrary to the
obligations of the Israeli regime. In that connection,
the Islamic Republic of Iran supports the action taken
by the Non-Aligned Movement to request Switzerland,
in its capacity as depositary of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, to convene, at the earliest
opportunity, a conference of the high contracting
parties to the Convention, for the purpose of upholding
the obligations and responsibilities incumbent upon the
high contracting parties in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. That is in
accordance with recommendations contained in
General Assembly resolutions 64/10 and 64/254.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms
its commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of all nations and to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me, first, to congratulate you, Madam President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, as well as to thank you for
having convened this open debate on the situation in
the Middle East.
It is with deep concern and growing frustration
that we continue to endlessly address the situation in
the Middle East, particularly the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. Regrettably, the illegal policies and the
constant provocations and incitement by the Israeli
regime and its extremist settlers against the Palestinian
people, their land and their holy places continue to
exacerbate tensions and raise religious sensitivities,
risking further destabilization and tension on the
ground. An extremely worrying development in that
regard is the continuing illegal activity in the vicinity
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Qubbat Al-Sakhra, in
occupied Jerusalem, in which Israeli occupying forces
continue to storm the holy compound and to use force
against hundreds of Palestinian worshippers, in
particular during and after Friday prayer. According to
reports, Israeli occupying forces utilize tear gas, throw
grenades, deploy sound bombs and shoot rubber bullets
at the worshippers, causing fear and panic among them.
The Security Council and the world community
must pay heed to the escalation of tension and
confrontation in and around the Al-Aqsa Mosque, since
that holy place, along with other Muslim and Christian
holy sites in occupied Jerusalem and the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory, continue to be subjected

20

The situation in Gaza is no better than that in the
West Bank. In the past couple of months, the Gaza
Strip has witnessed bombardment and attacks by the
Israeli regime. Many civilians, including women and
children, were targeted, and several houses were
destroyed. The deprivation of more than 1.5 million
Palestinians of the basic necessities, including fuel for
electricity, continues. Thus far, the calls of the world
community, including the United Nations, to stop the
illegal activities continue to fall on deaf ears, as the
Israeli regime continues with its systematic violation of
human rights.

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

The Israeli regime must be held accountable for
all those war crimes, acts of State terrorism and
systematic human rights violations committed against
the Palestinian people, and the perpetrators must be
brought to justice. There is no justification for the
Council to remain silent vis-à-vis the perpetrators of
those crimes. The international community has the
responsibility to act and to put an end to the deliberate
violation of human and humanitarian rights.

the inaction of the relevant United Nations organs in
dealing with such Israeli policies and practices has
emboldened that dangerous regime. The question
remains how to establish peace and stability in the
Middle East when the massive Israeli arsenal continues
to pose a threat in the region and beyond.

Finally, the representative of Saudi Arabia made
reference to the visit to Abu Musa of His Excellency
President Ahmadinejad of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
It is our earnest desire that the prolonged conflict In that regard, I should say that the Iranian islands of
in the occupied lands of Palestine should give way to Abu Musa, Greater Tunb and Lesser Tunb are an
lasting peace and prosperity. That, of course, requires integral and eternal part of Iranian territory. We
the concerted effort of the entire international categorically reject any claim to the contrary. Moreover,
community for the restoration of peace and justice.
the President’s recent visit, and all other measures
taken by the Iranian authorities in those Iranian islands,
With respect to the situation in Syria, although
was based fully on Iran’s sovereign rights and on the
we are of the belief that the crisis in that country has
principle of its territorial integrity as enshrined in the
no relevance to the agenda at hand, since some
Charter of the United Nations and the provisions of
delegations have touched on the issue, I would like to
international law. We underline here the importance of
say that my country continues to follow closely
the brotherly and good neighbourly relations that exist
developments in Syria. We firmly believe that the
between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
current crisis should be resolved only through a Syrianneighbouring countries in the Persian Gulf. The
led political dialogue in a peaceful manner. About two
countries of the region share a common interest in
weeks ago, Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan visited
security and long-term stability. Our continued
Iran and met Iranian high officials, who assured him of
commitment to brotherly relations with our neighbours
Iran’s support for his mission and expressed Iran’s
and regional partners in the areas of security and
deep concern over the regional consequences of any
economic development has a regional perspective as
violations of Syrian sovereignty and territorial integrity.
well. We believe that constructive negotiation between
We are happy that the Syrian Government is
Iran and the United Arab Emirates will lead to the
constructively and actively engaged with Mr. Annan’s
further expansion of relations in various fields and that
mission and that it has taken positive steps in
it will help to remove any misunderstanding on that
compliance with his plan. On our part, we are also
issue.
interacting with some of the major players in the region
Mr. Sin Son Ho (Democratic People’s Republic
in the effort to ensure constructive and successful
United Nations involvement in defusing the tension of Korea): Allow me, first of all, Madam President, to
acknowledge your convening of this open debate of the
and restoring peace in Syria.
Security Council on the situation in the Middle East,
With regard to the baseless allegation levelled by
including the Palestinian question.
the representative of Israel against the peaceful nature
My delegation expects that today’s meeting will
of our nuclear activities, it is not my intention to delve
into a detailed response to such allegations. However, help bring about a practical resolution of the
suffice it for me to say that the Israeli regime’s Palestinian issue as soon as possible. We wish to thank
clandestine development and unlawful possession of Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
hundreds of nuclear warheads and a nuclear-weapons Political Affairs, for his comprehensive overview of
arsenal is a threat to the region as well as to the current state of the Palestinian question.
international peace and security. The Israeli regime has
We would also like to express our full support for
clearly defied the demand of the overwhelming
the statement made by His Excellency Mr. Maged
majority of the States Members of the United Nations,
Abdelaziz, Permanent Representative of the Arab
which have time and again called on it to renounce
Republic of Egypt, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
nuclear weapons and to accede to the Treaty on the
Movement.
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Regrettably,

12-30747

21

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

The establishment of an independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, has been
unanimously called for by the international community.
To that end, many resolutions have been adopted in the
United Nations and various proposals, including the
Arab Peace Initiative, have been put on the table, but
the prospects for success remain unclear.
The Israeli military occupation of Palestine and
East Jerusalem continues, as it does in other Arab
territories, and its settlement activities in particular are
expanding, posing a challenge to the international
community. The result has been a deadlocked peace
process and serious difficulties for, and threats to,
peace and security in the Middle East. This year alone,
the Israeli bombing in the Gaza Strip and its continuing
merciless use of force have killed many innocent
civilians, including women and children. The situation
in Lebanon and in the occupied Syrian Golan is the
same. That is entirely due to their continued occupation
by Israel and the prejudicial Middle East policies of the
United States, which sides actively with the occupying
Power. My delegation believes that the Security
Council should give those high-priority issues the
attention they deserve.
Establishing an independent State of Palestine is
an inalienable sovereign right of the Palestinian people.
We must put an end to the Israeli military occupation
and to the violations of human rights in Palestine as
soon as possible, in order to allow the Palestinian
people to exercise their full right to national
self-determination. The peace process between
Palestine and Israel should be carried out on the basis
of those principles.
It is also my delegation’s position that the
Security Council should pay due attention to the issue
of Palestinian membership of the United Nations,
which is on the international agenda, and make it a
reality without further delay, now that more than 130
countries have officially recognized Palestinian
statehood. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
recognized Palestine as an independent sovereign State
in 1988, and since then has given its unreserved
support and solidarity to the Palestinian people’s
struggle for statehood. In that regard, my delegation
firmly reiterates our continuing support for the just
cause of the Palestinian and Arab peoples.
My delegation takes this opportunity to clarify
once again the principled position of the Democratic

22

People’s Republic of Korea that all disputes should be
settled peacefully through dialogue and negotiation
between the parties concerned, without interference
from outside forces. In that connection, my delegation
is of the view that the Syrian issue should also be
resolved peacefully through dialogue, without any
foreign intervention, in conformity with the
fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter,
such as respect for sovereignty and non-interference.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): Canada applauds the
efforts of the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States to resolve the
crisis in Syria. We welcome Syria’s acceptance of his
peace plan, but we want to see its words backed by
actions. We are gravely concerned by the fact that
violent incidents have continued since the ceasefire
took effect, on 12 April, and we are disturbed by
reports of Government forces firing on peaceful
protesters, forcing United Nations observers to
evacuate to safety.
Canada welcomes resolution 2043 (2012),
unanimously adopted by the Security Council on
Saturday, which authorizes a United Nations Mission
to supervise the ceasefire. The presence of United
Nations observers is vital to helping stabilize the
situation on the ground. We encourage the SecretaryGeneral to deploy the Mission as soon as he judges
security conditions conducive to doing so.
We urge President Al-Assad to respect his
commitments to the Joint Special Envoy, withdraw
Syrian forces from populated areas, end the bloodshed
and honour his agreement to allow the United Nations
observers freedom of movement throughout the country,
including in the war-torn city of Homs. We also call on
the opposition to show restraint and respect the
ceasefire.
(spoke in French)
Up until now, President Al-Assad has cynically
exploited peace initiatives in order to stall for time,
rather than taking the opportunity to end this crisis by
acknowledging the legitimate demands of the Syrian
people. It is time for all Security Council members in a
position to influence Syria to urge him to fully honour
his commitments to the Joint Special Envoy. If he does
not, his lack of good faith will be clear to all, and the

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

Council should act decisively to end the bloodshed in
Syria. Canada remains unwavering in our view that
President Al-Assad must end the violence, relinquish
power and enable a peaceful transition to a free and
democratic Syria that respects the human rights of all
its people, including religious and ethnic minorities.
Turning to Iran, Canada welcomes the leadership
shown by the five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany (P5+1) in opening discussions
with Iran over its nuclear programme, and we
acknowledge Iran’s decision to engage in talks with the
international community without preconditions. We
view the first round of discussions between Iran and
the P5+1 as a constructive first step towards addressing
the international community’s outstanding concerns
regarding Iran’s nuclear activities.
(spoke in English)
With all eyes now on the second round of that
process, in late May, we urge Iran to engage in good
faith and take meaningful steps towards complying
with its international nuclear obligations. The Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons must
form the basis of any eventual agreement between Iran
and the international community. Iran’s full compliance
with its international nuclear obligations is the only
measure that will lead to the easing of international
sanctions against it. As Canada and others have stated
before, implementing international sanctions is not a
step we take lightly. Our desire is not to punish the
Iranian people, but rather to persuade the Iranian
leadership to abide by Iran’s obligations.
Canada also remains concerned by the failure of
the Iranian Government to take adequate steps to
improve the human rights situation there. We continue
to see reports of Iran’s failure to live up to its domestic
and international human rights obligations, particularly
with respect to deficiencies in its judicial system. We
will continue to work with the international community
to ensure that the rights of the Iranian people are not
forgotten or overshadowed by the nuclear issue.
Concerning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
Canada remains wholly supportive of the Quartet’s
efforts and we welcome its recent attempts to encourage
the parties to resume direct peace negotiations without
delays or preconditions, in accordance with the
Quartet’s statement of 23 September 2011 (see
SG/2178). We share the goal of a negotiated outcome to

12-30747

the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that can result in two
States living side by side in peace and security.
The Quartet is calling on donors to step up to
support the progress made to date by the Palestinian
Authority to build State institutions and provide
security. In that area, Canada remains committed to
implementing its assistance package of $300 million
over five years, in support of security and justice
reforms by the Palestinian Authority. We commend the
progress that has been made and encourage continued
reforms.
Canada urges both parties to take further
confidence-building
measures,
avoid
unhelpful
unilateral actions and combat violence and incitement
to violence in order to create an atmosphere conducive
to negotiating peace. We encourage both parties to stop
debating about the negotiations and sit down at the
table unconditionally and negotiate a final agreement.
There is no viable alternative to a negotiated two-State
solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to begin my statement by reading
out a sentence from the statement made by the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs at the beginning
of the meeting this morning. Mr. Pascoe said,
(spoke in English)
“Achieving a full and sustained cessation of
violence and seeking a peaceful resolution of the
crisis in Syria is at the centre of our efforts in the
Middle East.”
(spoke in Arabic)
That statement contains substantive and
procedural inaccuracies that highlight the fact that the
Secretariat’s representative does not fully understand
the very essence of the item on today’s agenda, namely,
“The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question”. When, only two days following
the adoption of resolution 2043 (2012), the
representative of the Secretary-General takes the view
that putting an end to the violence in Syria is the
priority under the agenda item, Mr. Pascoe has
declared his intention. This is a very dangerous issue
about which we cannot afford to remain silent.

23

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

There is a way to alter the truth and the nature of
the agenda item. It should be recalled that the
international community has agreed to address the need
to put an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory and on the establishment of a Palestinian State
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
My delegation remains concerned by the
deliberate attempts that have been made by a number
of delegations to divert the general discussion of the
situation in the Middle East away from the original
aims for which the agenda item was first established. It
is regrettable that the Under-Secretary-General has
chosen to follow that path — as it is that the SecretaryGeneral has also chosen to do so — as seen in
Mr. Pascoe’s decision to begin his briefing by referring
to the situation in Syria and focusing priority on
internal developments there while ignoring the actual
agenda item — “The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question” — which is
intended to put an end to the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian and Arab territories and to resolve the
Arab–Israeli conflict in keeping with the well-known
peace plan.
The situation has become highly dangerous as a
result of Israeli inflexibility, its systematic violation of
the rights of Arab citizens living under its occupation,
the country’s refusal to implement hundreds of United
Nations resolutions, and the crimes that have been
perpetrated against Arabs in Syria and Palestine.
Furthermore, the issue is an integral component of the
very responsibilities of the Security Council to
maintain international peace and security. Moreover, it
is why the item was established and included in the
agenda in the first place, where it has remained for
decades without a solution. Some are trying to bury
significant issues and conceal the failure of past
attempts at finding solutions by including irrelevant
internal problems in Security Council deliberations.

whatsoever to do with finding a solution to the ArabIsraeli conflict and putting an end to the Israeli
occupation of Arab territory. Those Arabs have thereby
participated unwittingly in the altering and
undermining of the agenda item.
What is strangest of all in that context is that a
number of States have demonstrated false enthusiasm
for the rights of peoples and the protection of civil and
human rights, shamefully and worryingly ignoring the
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and the need to put an end to the Israeli occupation.
The subject at hand is the Israeli occupation, which has
expanded and divided Palestinian territory into Areas A,
B, C, D, E, F, G, H — all the way up to the letter T.
Palestinian territories have become areas listed from A
to Z, all of which are under occupation. Those same
States see no wrong in the Israeli occupation stepping
up its systematic campaign to kill Palestinian civilians,
including women and children, in encouraging the
fanatical settlement campaign — which is undermining
attempts to establish a Palestinian State and achieve
peace in the region — or in encouraging the
destruction of holy sites.
As part of the same Israeli policy that flouts all
relevant resolutions of international legitimacy, in
particular resolution 497 (1981), which provides that
the Israeli decision to annex the Syrian Golan is null
and void and has no legal effect, Israel is continuing to
refuse to return the occupied Syrian Golan to its
motherland, Syria, and is pursuing its settlement
policies, terrorist actions, acts of racial discrimination,
attempts to humiliate Syrian citizens, divide the
occupied Syrian Golan and build a separation wall in
the Golan east of the village of Majdal Shams.

In that context, the aim of today’s debate is to
undermine the referential framework for the issue and
its relationship with putting an end to the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory and the
establishment of a Palestinian State on the basis of the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Moreover, this month, Israeli policy has
prevented apple farmers from transporting their harvest
to cities in Syria, even though the International
Committee of the Red Cross sought to intervene in
order to get permission for the trucks carrying the crop
to enter Syria. The trucks waited for three months to
obtain Israeli authorization, but the permits never came
through. We attempted to convey our complaint to the
Secretary-General and to the members of the Security
Council through formal letters. However, those
complaints have fallen on deaf ears.

It is regrettable that a number of Arab delegations
have also undermined that framework and fallen into
the trap of addressing issues that have nothing

The representatives of the Secretary-General have
not contented themselves simply with ignoring Israel’s
violations. As Mr. Pascoe did today, they have simply

24

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

ignored the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan
during their monthly briefings to the Security Council
under this agenda item. They are clearly shirking their
responsibilities and their duty under resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).
This demonstrates a dreadful lack of a sense of
duty on the part of the Secretariat to inform the
Security Council of the latest developments in the
occupied Syrian Golan. Failure to do so will encourage
Israel to pursue its aggressive policies and its flagrant
violations of all relevant resolutions of the United
Nations.
Even the customary phrases voiced by a number
of the representatives of the Secretary-General, to the
effect that there were no new developments in the
occupied Golan, were not to be heard today in the
statement of Mr. Pascoe, the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs. The Syrian Golan must fully
returned within the borders of 4 June 1967. This is a
non-negotiable right. We ask Israel not for concessions,
as has been stated here, but to fully restored rights and
lands to their owners.
Resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) call on
all countries to respect their provisions. What is
surprising is that only two days following the adoption
of resolution 2042 (2012), the Emir of Qatar made a
public statement violating the letter and spirit of that
resolution. This clearly revealed the hidden intentions
of the Qatari authorities, who are opposed to any
peaceful settlement to the crisis in Syria. Indeed, the
Emir of Qatar had already made his judgements and
appraisals prior to the arrival of the United Nations
monitors. He said,
“The likelihood of the successful outcome of
Annan’s mission is no higher than 3 per cent. The
Syrian people do not need peaceful support. What
they need is military support through arms.”
These remarks were made by the Emir of Qatar
just one day after the Council adopted resolution 2042
(2012). The Qatari authorities continued to use such
destructive language before and following the adoption
of the resolution in New York and participated in the
Istanbul meetings, as well as those in Tunis and Paris.
In that regard, we wish to recall that it was Qatar that,
in cooperation with Saudi Arabia, terminated the
mission of the League of Arab States to Syria. Having
been relieved of its responsibilities and duties, the
mission unmasked the policies of Saudi Arabia and

12-30747

Qatar, which continue to support and finance armed
terrorist groups and to promote terrorism and the
shedding of Syrian blood.
The Saudi authorities do not hesitate periodically
to kill peaceful demonstrators in Al-Qatif and
Al-Awamiya or to cordon off areas where there are
demonstrations in an attempt to intimidate and cow
civilians. More than 30,000 political detainees
currently crowd Saudi prisons. In addition to carrying
out arbitrary arrests and violating the freedoms of
movement and peaceful expression, some Saudi
sheikhs have issued religious edicts authorizing those
who participate in such peaceful demonstrations to be
killed.
I do not wish to go into greater detail because I
would thereby fall into the very trap that the
representatives of a number of other Member States
have fallen into. As to the Western countries that have
criticized the human rights situation in my country, it is
they that are to blame for the deterioration of that
situation, as it is their Governments that have imposed
unjust economic measures that have had a devastating
impact on the daily lives and livelihoods of Syrian
citizens.
Instead, they choose to criticize and blame the
Syrian Government for the lack of commodities and
essential foodstuffs for its citizens. It is regrettable that
the Governments of Saudi Arabia and Qatar have
participated enthusiastically in the imposition of these
shameful measures, and that their tireless efforts have
exacerbated the situation of some of the poorest and
weakest sectors in Syria. With regard to the
humanitarian situation, contrary to international public
opinion, the activities of terrorist groups financed and
protected by Qatar and Saudi Arabia persist, as
highlighted by their own media.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Finding a comprehensive
and just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a
requirement for stability, security and endurable peace
in the Middle East. The status quo is not viable. At a
time when the whole region is undergoing a structural
reformation, the conflict cannot remain at a standstill.
During the past three months, when the focus has
remained mainly on developments in Syria, settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories have

25

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

continued unabated. Such activities obstruct the
revitalization of the peace process and seriously
endanger the vision of a two-State solution, thus
destroying the basis of the prospects for peace.
The efforts of the Israeli authorities to legitimize
the settlements in the context of Israeli law do not alter
that fact. Moreover, at its most recent meeting on
11 April, the Quartet called not only for an end to
settlement activities and settler violence but also for
the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank. In any
case, resort to violence by any party can in no way be
tolerated as a way to overcome existing disputes.
The situation of Palestinian prisoners inside
Israeli prisons also needs urgent attention. The keeping
under arrest of elected members of the Palestinian
Legislative Council remains of significant concern.
Such policies of Israel raise further doubts regarding
its sincerity towards the peace process.
We deplore the dangerous escalation of violence
in the Gaza Strip in recent months due to Israel’s
attacks. Israel’s disproportionate and indiscriminate
retaliatory moves, causing civilian casualties and
injuries, cannot be accepted. I also recall the grave
situation of housing, health and other primary services
in Gaza, and reiterate our call for the lifting of the
illegal embargo.
The international community must ensure that
there is accountability, both for the blockade and for
Israel’s attack on the international humanitarian aid
flotilla on the high seas. In such circumstances, we
hope that the letter sent last week by President Abbas
to Prime Minister Netanyahu can pave the way for
sincere progress in the Middle East process. We hope
that Israel will seize the opportunity and contribute to
building a constructive atmosphere.
Concurrently, Turkey will continue to promote
efforts towards achieving unity in Palestine. Palestinian
national reconciliation is of critical importance in
terms of ensuring comprehensive and sustainable peace
and stability. For that reason, the reconciliation to be
concluded by and the holding of free, fair and
transparent elections in Palestine should be supported
without prejudice by all members of the international
community.
I would also like to refer to the grave situation in
Syria, which is yet another factor of instability in the
region. We attribute the utmost importance to the

26

immediate, visible, verifiable and indisputable
implementation of resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043
(2012), including all aspects of the six-point plan of
the Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi Annan, which has
offered a promising window of opportunity. We hope
that the Syrian Government shall immediately take all
the necessary steps. We call for an immediate end to
the violence. In this respect, the primary responsibility
rests with the Syrian Government. Turkey, together
with other members of the international community,
will continue to follow closely the developments in
Syria.
Turkey has, from the beginning, taken sides with
the democratic aspirations of the peoples of the Middle
East in their struggle for a better life and to live in
societies where human rights receive due respect, the
rule of law prevails, and the people take part in the
shaping of their destiny. It is our view that this same
principle must apply to the aspirations of the
Palestinians, which should not go unanswered any
longer. The Palestinian people must, as soon as
possible, be able to fully exercise their inalienable
rights in accordance with the numerous United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Road Map and
the Arab Peace Initiative. Palestinians must attain their
goal of an independent State based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side
by side with Israel in peace.
Turkey welcomes and strongly supports the
Palestinian application for full-fledged United Nations
membership submitted by President Mahmoud Abbas
on 23 September 2011, and believes that it is high time
for Palestine to take its rightful place in the
international arena among the community of nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We consider this meeting to be very timely, given the
deplorable situation that continues to prevail in the
Middle East. The deterioration of the situation since
the last time that the Security Council met to consider
this topic (see S/PV.6706) is evident. The Middle East
remains marked by instability and insecurity.
Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestinian and other
Arab territories remains the main obstacle to achieving
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution for the
region. Israel must immediately end its illegal presence
in the Palestinian territories that it occupies, ignoring

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

the calls of the international community. It must cease
building settlements in occupied Palestine. It must put
an end to its attacks and the indiscriminate use of
military force against the civilian Palestinian
population, and unconditionally and fully lift the cruel
and illegal blockade of Gaza.
Cuba reiterates its support for Palestine’s bid for
full membership of the United Nations. The Security
Council must pronounce itself without further delay in
favour of this matter, as it is the clear desire of the
overwhelming majority of the States Members of this
Organization. If this bid has been unsuccessful to date,
that is because of the threat of veto by one of the
permanent members of the Security Council, despite
the fact that the State of Palestine has already been
formally recognized by over 130 countries from all the
regions of the world.
The situation and humiliations of the more than
4,000 Palestinian political prisoners are unacceptable.
What is the Security Council going to do about this
situation? Why has this body not condemned the
situation immediately and clearly?
Cuba reiterates its rejection of the illegal building
and expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian
Golan since 1967, which are violations of international
law, the Charter and United Nations resolutions. We
reiterate our unconditional support for the just demands
and the right of Syria to reinstate its full sovereignty
over the occupied Syrian Golan.
Cuba rejects the policies of interference and
destabilization in the Syrian Arab Republic, which are
aimed at imposing regime change. The Security
Council was not designed to be — nor can it act as —
an instrument to foment regime changes in any
country. The mandate of the Security Council is to
promote peace, not violence. It is to prevent
destabilization and to protect the innocent, not to use
or manipulate them for geopolitical purposes. These
are also the responsibilities of the United Nations as a
whole.
We support the efforts being made to achieve a
peaceful solution to the situation in that country, in full
respect for its sovereign rights. Cuba shares the
concerns regarding the loss of innocent lives in Syria,
as anywhere in the world.
At the same time, we reiterate our categorical
rejection of any form of direct or indirect foreign

12-30747

intervention, including the provision of logistical
support to irregular armed groups. An intervention by
foreign forces in Syria would have serious
consequences for international peace and security, in
particular in the Middle East. Taking into account recent
experiences and the precedents set as a result — in
which we witnessed the manipulation of the Charter of
the United Nations, the application of double standards
and the flagrant violation of international law — we
reiterate our rejection of any attempt to undermine the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
The responsibility of the international community
towards a Member State in these difficult times is to
provide aid in order to uphold peace and stability in
that country. We reaffirm our confidence in the
capacity of the Syrian people and Government to
resolve their internal problems free from foreign
interference. We call for full respect for the
self-determination and sovereignty of that Arab
country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to convey my delegation’s most
sincere congratulations to the friendly delegation of the
United States on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
briefing this morning, during which he provided very
important information regarding recent developments
in the region.
My delegation also endorses the statements made
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Monthly briefings are organized on a regular
basis, open debates are held, meetings with influential
parties are organized, and initiatives are taken by
regional and international bodies and even some States,
and we continue to hope for positive change on the
ground. We hope to see encouraging signs of increased
effort to achieve the ultimate goal of peace through a
two-State solution, with both States living side by side
in peace and security, and to achieve the decades-old
Palestinian dream of establishing a recognized,
independent, sovereign State on its historical land, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

27

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

Unfortunately, the signs we see are dangerous
ones. Inflexibility on the part of Israel has become the
rule, as have the policies of equivocation in the
political approach to the Israeli-Arab conflict and the
Israeli-Palestinian question in particular. The signs on
the ground are not promising. Rather than a real desire
for peace, there seems to be an unfair settlement policy
that deprives citizens of their rights, restricts their
freedoms, causes them to be massacred, expels them
from their own houses and usurps their land.
Everybody in the world wants more justice and
more freedom. Those are legitimate aspirations to a
decent life in which rights such as those to gender,
racial and cultural equality may be enjoyed. Despite
the rising tides of liberation from injustice across the
world, the Palestinian people are still struggling for the
very basic rights enjoyed by States Members of our
Organization enjoy — the right to live on one’s own
independent, sovereign land. These very fundamental
rights are still inaccessible to the Palestinian people,
who are faced with daily suffering. There has been no
clear international condemnation of the ongoing
repression of the Palestinians. The principles of
international law must be respected.
My delegation reaffirms the legitimacy of
Palestine’s quest for full membership of the United
Nations. Tunisia recalls the historical, legal and moral
importance of that legitimate claim. It is the right of
the Palestinian people to enjoy their rights after a long
struggle. The Palestinian people have the right to
recognition of their independent sovereign State. They
have the right to live on their historic lands, based on
the June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as their
capital, in peace and security alongside the Israeli
people.
My country believes that due importance must be
attached to Palestine’s request. It is not an obstacle to
peace, but will promote peace. It is not a mere unilateral
act; far from it. The Palestinians have adhered to all the
relevant rules in their quest to achieve membership of
the United Nations, which enjoys broad international
support, as reflected in the acceptance of their
membership in UNESCO.
Over and above the recognition by such
organizations and international bodies as the World
Bank, we would like to see recognition of the right of
the Palestinian people to build their independent State
and of the progress that has been made in establishing

28

their institutions, the rule of law and economic rights.
That is important.
Israel’s settlement activities pose a serious threat.
Despite some differences of opinion, all States agree
that the settlement policy remains a significant obstacle
to relaunching the peace process. Tunisia firmly
condemns the ongoing settlement activities and their
intensification last year and this, which have led to an
alarming Shrinkage in the land area of Palestine and
will have a significant impact on the outcome of any
negotiations that might be undertaken to resolve the
conflict.
Israel’s settlement activities violate international
law. That is an established fact. They violate the Road
Map, as affirmed in the Quartet’s statements. Article 49
of the Fourth Geneva Convention declares such
settlement activities illegal. The advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice of 2004 addresses the
legal impact of the construction of the separation wall
in the occupied Palestinian territories. The Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs also
considers the wall to exacerbate the daily suffering of
the Palestinian people.
Tunisia calls for an immediate end to the
separation of families, the looting of lands and
expulsions being carried out by the settlers, the
Judaization of Jerusalem and the altering of its
religious and demographic composition. Tunisia fully
condemns any plan to change the demographic and
religious nature of that city by the occupying State.
Israel continues to impose such changes despite the
numerous appeals of the international community to
end such practices.
We call for an immediate end to the blockade of
Gaza, which is causing terrible suffering for more than
2 million Palestinians. Despite the claims of Israel, the
occupying Power, that recent measures have led to a
decrease to the humanitarian crisis in Gaza, official
United Nations reports note a strengthening of the
blockade.
Finally, the political stalemate in the occupied
Palestinian territories and the lack of hope for peace,
despite the commendable efforts of Jordan and the
latest statement of the Quartet on 11 April (see
SG/2182), cause my delegation to fear a new cycle of
tension in the region that could lead to a further
deterioration of the situation. My delegation reaffirms
its support for negotiations and dialogue to resolve the

12-30747

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

crisis, as well as the role of the international
community, which has a historic responsibility to
ensure the appropriate context for a settlement.

The United Nations also has a responsibility to
assist the Palestinian people in realizing their right to
self-determination, sovereignty and independence in
their own State in the territory occupied since 1967,
Tunisia hopes for a more effective role for the
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and in finding a just
influential partners, in particular the Quartet, and looks
solution for the plight of the Palestinian refugees, in
forward to specific measures to be taken by the Quartet.
line with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
Moreover, we want harsher positions taken with regard
to Israel. My delegation also reiterates the need to
The plight of thousands of Palestinian political
compel Israel to fully withdraw from the occupied prisoners in Israeli prisons represents a question of
Palestinian territories in Lebanon and Syria.
missing justice. They are victims of systematic
inhuman practices perpetuated through the enactment
The President: I now give the floor to the
and application of Israeli laws. Those political
representative of Kazakhstan.
prisoners are deprived of the basic human rights
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): I have the guaranteed by international law, such as the rights to
honour to address the Security Council on behalf of the education, medical treatment and communication with
Organization of Islamic Cooperation group in New the outside world, and subject to administrative
York.
detention without charges or trial. Therefore, it is now
time for international action to advocate their cause so
Israel’s military occupation of Arab lands,
that they may enjoy freedom, justice and dignity in
flagrant violations of international law and denial of
their homeland.
the national rights and aspirations of the Palestinian
people remain at the heart of unrest in the region.
We affirm that the international consensus to
Prospects for peace and justice in the region are realize a just and comprehensive solution to the Middle
damaged by Israel’s colonial and discriminatory East conflict requires the enforcement of international
policies in Arab occupied land. Israel, the occupying law and the implementation of legitimate international
Power, continues to approve settlement plans in the resolutions. Therefore, acknowledgement of and full
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, construct an support for Palestinian State-building efforts, and
apartheid wall, restrict Palestinian access to places of meeting and maintaining our obligations and political
worship, disregard acts of violence by extremist and financial commitments to the Palestinian Authority,
settlers against civilian Palestinians, deny the free are commendable actions at this significant juncture.
movement of people and goods, and further confiscate
I wish to reaffirm the full support and solidarity
Palestinian homes and lands. Such illegalities have
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation with the
become part of a daily cycle of oppression and
Palestinian people in their endeavour to regain their
aggression against the Palestinian people that
legitimate and inalienable national rights, including the
systematically undermine prospects for the two-State
rights of return and self-determination, and the
solution and destabilize the region.
establishment of the independent Palestinian State on
Similarly, Israeli practices in East Jerusalem — its national soil, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
including settlement construction, excavations under
In conclusion, the Organization of Islamic
the Al-Aqsa mosque, the depopulation of Jerusalem’s
Cooperation joins the international community in
indigenous Palestinian citizens, in addition to the
reaffirming that all measures and actions taken or to be
illegal appropriation of Palestinian properties, the
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the legal,
isolation of Jerusalem from its natural Palestinian
physical and demographic status of the occupied
environment, and the alteration of the city’s
Syrian Golan and its institutional structure, as well as
demographic composition and character — are more
Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
alarming than ever before. These illegal Israeli practices
administration there, have no legal effect. The
pose a challenge to the international community. The
Organization of Islamic Cooperation demands that
United Nations therefore has a special responsibility to
Israel abide fully and immediately by resolution 497
pressure Israel to put an end to these aggressions and
(1981) and, in implementation also of resolutions 242
respect international law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

12-30747

29

S/PV.6757 (Resumption 1)

(1967) and 338 (1973), withdraw fully from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967.
The President: I
representative of Ecuador.

give

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Lalama (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to express its point of view on the
situation in the Middle East and the Palestinian
question, particularly during these important times,
which require the Security Council to address the
situation. I would like to begin by thanking you,
Madam, for having convened this debate. My country
aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The Government of Ecuador respects the norms
and principles of international law, in particular in the
context of the pacific settlement of disputes, and
expresses its concern over the Council’s prolonged
management of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In our
desire to support stability in the region, my delegation
has recognized Palestine as a State.
Over the past months, relevant events, such as the
historic speech of President Mahmoud Abbas before the
General Assembly on 23 September 2011 (see
A/66/PV.19), as well as the support of 132 States
Members of the United Nations in recognizing
Palestine as a State, have strengthened the conviction
that the Palestinian Authority is able to govern a State.
It is therefore time to seek mechanisms to actively
support progress in the efforts for peace and to
strengthen the capacity of the Palestinian Authority to
meet the current and future security needs of the
Palestinian people.
Despite the reports of the Quartet and its call for
dialogue and cooperation between the parties in order to
facilitate social and economic development in Area C,
the latter has been undermined by 124 illegal Israeli
settlements that prevent the establishment of a viable
Palestinian State within pre-1967 borders. Area C
comprises 62 per cent of the West Bank and includes
the most fertile, resource-rich land, which the future
Palestinian State and its people could make use of in
living a life of dignity.

30

Palestinian construction is permitted on only
1 per cent of Area C, most of which has already been
developed. In that regard, my delegation calls on the
Council to demand that Israel halt its demolition of
homes and structures that were built without permits,
some 4,800 of which have been destroyed since 2000,
and instead to support Palestine with a programme to
construct schools and hospitals and provide water,
sanitation and other infrastructure projects.
The possibility of finding a solution to the
establishment of two States has diminished as a result
of Israeli settlement expansion, in addition to the
military separation wall, obstacles to free movement,
the denial of access to vital natural resources, and the
erosion of Palestinian ownership in the West Bank,
upon which the hopes of a Palestinian State are based.
There is no norm of international law that would
allow Israel to imprison a Palestinian suspect for an
indefinite period without informing the detainee of the
charges against him or her or providing any evidence.
The protest by 1,600 Palestinian prisoners who have
united on an indefinite hunger strike is part of their
broader struggle to attain an independent State.
The international community must continue to
pressure Israel to end its occupation and its violations
of human rights. It is Israel’s responsibility to promote
negotiations that will lead to a two-State solution in
accordance with all relevant United Nations resolutions.
To conclude, I consider it timely to remind the
Security Council once again of its responsibility in this
matter, which impedes peace and security in the
Middle East and, accordingly, the tranquillity of all
States Members of the United Nations. My delegation
calls for dialogue between the parties in order to ensure
that the two States, Israel and Palestine, can finally live
side by side in the region within safe and recognized
borders.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on my list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

12-30747
