44

General Assembly-Fifth Session

424 (V).

Freedom of information: interference with radio signals
The General Assembly,
Whereas freedom to listen to radio broadcasts regardless of source is embodied in article 19 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,8 which reads:
"Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and
expression" and whereas this right "includes freedom
to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any
media and regardless of frontiers",
Whereas article 44 of the International Telecommunication Convention, Atlantic City, 1947, 9 provides
that "AU stations, whatever their purpose, must be
established and operated in such a manner as not to
result in harmful interference to the radio service or
communications of other members or associate members . . . [ and that] Each member or associate member undertakes to require the private operating agencies
which it recognizes and the other operating agencies
duly authorized for this purpose, to observe the provisions of the preceding paragraph",
. Consid~rin[J that the duly authorized radio operat~ng a~enc1es m som_e countries are deliberately interfermg with the recept10n by the people of those countries
c~rtain radio signals originating beyond their terntones, and bearing in mind the discussion 10 which
took place in the Economic and Social Council and in
the Sub-Commission on Freedom of Information and
of the Press on this subject,
Considering that peace among nations rests on the
goodwill of all peoples and governments and that tolerance and understanding are prerequisites for establishing goodwill in the international field,
I. Adopts the qeclaration of the Economic and Social
Council contained in its resolution 306 B ( XI) of
9 August 19?0 to the _effect that this type of interf~rence constitutes a v10lation of the accepted principles of freedom of information;
2. Condemns measures of this nature as a denial of
~he right of ~11. persons to be fully informed concernmg news, opmmns and ideas regardless of frontiers ;
3 .. I mJites the governments of all Member States to
refram from such interference with the right of their
peoples to freedom of information;

o!

4. Invi,tes all governments to refrain from radio
bro~dcasts that would mean unfair attacks or slanders
agamst oth~r peoples anywhere and in so doing to
conform stnctly to an ethical conduct in the interest
of world peace by reporting facts truly and objectively;
~· 5. ln-z:i~es also Memb~r States to give every posJ!ble fac1hty. s?. that thetr peoples may know objectively the a';t1V1t1es_ of the Unit~~ Nations in promoting
peace 3:n~, m particular, to fac1htate the reception and
transth1ss10n of the United Nations official broadcasts.
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.
: See r~lution 217 A (III). .
Rad~ee CFi,r,al Act of the International Telecommunication and
011/e,.enc~s, Atlantic City, 1947, International Telecommumcaton Umon, Geneva.
10
See documents E/ AC.7 /SR.135 to 139, E/SR.4-05 and
E/CN.4/Sub.1/SR.68 to 86.

'° .

425 (V). Question of the freedom of information and of the Press in times of emergency

The General Assembly,
Considering that freedom of information and of the
Press is one of the fundamental freedoms and sh0uld be
advanced and safeguarded,
Considcring that limitations might be placed on t_his
freedom in emergencies or on the pretext of emergencies,
Recommends to all Member States that, when they
are compelled to declare a state of emergency, measures
to limit freedom of information and of the Press shall
be taken only in the most exceptional circumstances and
then only to the e..xtent strictly required by the situation.
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.
426 (V).

Draft

Convention on Freedom
Information

of

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 313 (IV) of 20 October
1949, the recommendation 11 of the sixth session of the
Commission on Human Rights regarding freedom of
information and the discussion 12 concerning that recommendation at the eleventh session of the Economic and
Social Council,
Considering that freedom of information and the
Purposes of the United Nations are indivisible,
1. Appoints a Committee consisting of the representatives of the following fifteen countries : Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, France, India, Lebanon, Mexico, the
Netherlands, Pakistan, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Yugoslavia, which shall
meet at the Headquarters of the United Nations as
soon as possible, but not later than 1 March 1951, to
prepare a draft Corwention on Freedom of Information,
taking into consideration the draft 13 approved by the
United Nations Conference on Freedom of Information held at Geneva from 23 March to 21 April 1948;
the text 14 voted during the second part of the third
session of the General Assemblv; article 14 of the
provisional text 15 of the draft Fir;t International Covenant on Human Rights; and the observations 16 contained in the summary records of the meetings of the
Third Committee dealing with the question;
2. Requests the Committee to report to the Economic and Social Council at its thirteenth session on
the results of its work and to submit recommendations,
in particular, with regard to the advisability of con11 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Fifth Year, Eleventh Session, Supplement No. 5, annex IV. '
12
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Eleventh Session, 404th meeting, and document E/ AC.7 /SR.
139.
13
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, Thi,-d Committee, Annex, documents A/961 and A/C.3/
518, and A/C.3/518/Corr.1.
H See resolution 277 A (III).
15
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifth Year, Eleventh Session, Supplement No. 5, annex I.
16
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Third Committee, 320th-324th meetings.

Resolutions adopted on reports of the Third Committee

vening a conference of plenipotentiaries with a view to
the framing and signature of a Convention on Freedom
of Information;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
Committee's report, together with the draft or drafts
of the Convention prepared by the Committee, to the
various governments concerned for their consideration;
4. lm.iites the governments so consulted to transmit their suggestions and observations to the SecretaryGeneral by 15 June 1951;
5. Recommends the Economic and Social Council
to consider the Committee's report at its thirteenth
session and if it thinks fit, in the light of the Committee's recommendations and the observations of governments, and also taking into consideration the General Assembly's wish that one or more conventions
to ensure freedom of information in the world should
be adopted as soon as possible, to convene a conference
of plenipotentiaries to meet as soon as possible and not
later than 1 February 1952, with a view to the framing
and signature of a Convention on Freedom of Information, based on the draft or drafts prepared by the abovementioned Committee and on the observations of
governments.
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 7950.
427 (V). Measures for the peaceful solution of
the problem of prisoners of war
The General Assembly,

Mindful that one of the principal Purposes of the
United Nations is to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of a humanitarian character and in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all,

45

above-mentioned international agreements and conventions which require that, upo11 th~ cessation of ac!ive
hostilities, all prisoners should, with the_ least poss1b~e
delay, be given an unrestricted opportumty of_ repatn
ation and, to that end, to publish and transrrnt to the
Secretary-Ceneral before 30 April 1951:
(a) The names of such prisoner~ still ~eld by them,
the reasons for which thev are still <letamed and the
places in which they are Zletained;
( b) The names of prisoners who have died while
under their control as well as the date and cause of
rleath, and the manner and place of burial in each case;

3. Nequcsts the Secretary-General to est<1:blish an
Ad I !or Commission composed of three qualified and
impartial persons chosen by the International Red
Cros,; or, failing that, by the Secretary-General himself. ,,·ith a view to settling the question of the prisoners , ,i \\'ar in a purely humanitarian spirit and on
terms acceptable to all the governments concerned.
The Commission shall convene at a suitable date after
30 April I <JS l to examine and evaluate, in the li~ht
of the information made available to the fifth session
nf the Ceneral Assembly, the information furnished by
governments in accordance with the terms of th~ p_receding paragraph. In the event that the Comm1ss1on
considers that this information is inadequate or affords
reasonable ground for believing that prisoners coming
within the custody or control of any foreign government as a consequence of military operations of the
Second \,Vorld War have not been repatriated or otherwise accounted for, the General Assembly:
(a) Re(]uests the Commission to seek from the governments or authorities concerned full information
regarding such prisoners;
( h) Requests the Commission to assist all governments and authorities who so desire in arranging for
and facilitating the repatriation of such prisoners;

Considering that the General Assembly may recommend measures for the peaceful adjustment of any
situation, regardless of origin, which it deems likely
to impair the general welfare or friendly relations
among nations,

( c) Authorizes the Commission to use the good
offices of any qualified and impartial person or organization whom it considers might contribute to the repatriation or accounting for of such prisoners ;

Believing that all prisoners having originally come
within the control of the Allied Powers as a consequence of the Second World War should either have
been repatriated long since or have been otherwise
accounted for,

( d) Urges all governments and authorities concerned
to co-operate fully with the Commission, to supply all
necessary information and to grant right of access to
their respective countries and to areas in which such
prisoners are detained ;

Recalling that this is required both by recognized
standards of international conduct and the Geneva
Convention of 194917 for the protection of war victims,
and by specific agreements between the Allied Powers,
1. Expresses its concern at the information presented to it tending to show that large numbers of
prisoners taken in the course of the Second World
War have neither been repatriated nor otherwise accounted for;
2. CaUs upon all governments still having control
of such persons to act in conformity with the recognized standards of international conduct and with the
17
_ See Ge-MVO Convention relative to the Treatment of
Pnsoners of War of August 12, 1949, International Committee
of the Red Cross, Geneva 1949.

( e) Requests the Secretary-General to furnish the
Commission with the staff and facilities necessary for
the effective accomplishment of its task;

4. Urgently requests all the governments to make
the greatest possible efforts, based in particular on
the documentation to be provided, to search for prisoners of war whose absence has been reported and
who might be in their territories ;
5. Directs the Commission to report as soon as practicable the results of its work to the Secretary-General for transmission to the Members of the United
Nations.
325th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.
