S/PV.8621

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8621st meeting

Wednesday, 18 September 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2019/722)
Report of the Secretary-General on future planning for the protection of
civilians sites in South Sudan (S/2019/741)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-28498 (E)
*1928498*

S/PV.8621

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2019/722)
Report of the Secretary-General on future
planning for the protection of civilians sites in
South Sudan (S/2019/741)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
take part in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. David
Shearer, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/722, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan, and
document S/2019/741, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on future planning for the protection
of civilian sites in South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Shearer.
Mr. Shearer: Just six days ago, we marked the first
anniversary of the signing of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. At the official ceremony last year, I witnessed
much jubilation and hope that the agreement signalled
an end to war and the beginning of a new era of peace.
The citizens of South Sudan had high expectations.
Over the past year, their political leaders have met
some, but certainly not all of those expectations.
The recent visit of Mr. Riek Machar to Juba,
at the invitation of President Salva Kiir, was
an
important
development.
The
face-to-face
meetings — which many of us believe are fundamental
to moving forward — provided an opportunity to
discuss critical unresolved parts of the peace agreement.
2/18

18/09/2019

Publicly, the demeanour of the two men appeared
conciliatory and they reportedly spent several hours in
formal and informal discussions. Those meetings need
to continue. Importantly, they recommitted to forming
the transitional Government — a positive step because
it maintains the momentum of peace and bolsters
confidence among the people of South Sudan. The
challenge remains, of course, to show tangible results.
Three areas, in particular, require progress.
The first is the unification of security forces. Of
the 35 cantonment sites planned, 23 are now occupied
by opposition forces and 10 by the Government. Troop
registration has begun. Food, water and other resources
are beginning to be delivered. However, many sites
lack amenities and protection risks may arise in nearby
villages if those shortfalls continue. More fundamental
differences also persist. The opposition foresees a newly
constituted security sector, whereas the Government
presumes that opposition troops will be subsumed into
existing forces. A strategy for a unified security sector
is therefore required. The United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) has contracted an experienced
retired general from the region to help parties determine
the future security policy, including the size and shape
of forces.
Secondly, the Independent Boundaries Commission
was unable to reach consensus on the number of states
and boundaries. Resolution via a referendum, we
believe, is implausible given the expense and time
required. Instead, political consensus is needed. The
Kiir-Machar dialogue last week called for a committee
to address that sensitive issue, and we hope that is able
to be resolved.
Thirdly, the agreement provides for five
vice-presidents, each leading a cluster of cabinet
portfolios. Two months out from a transitional
Government, these still need to be determined. Finally, I
should mention that the non-signatories to the agreement
need to move from violent opposition, in which they
have been involved, to constructive participation.
One year on, peace is beginning to pay dividends
for the citizens of South Sudan. First, and critically, the
ceasefire largely continues to hold. Political violence
and subsequent displacement have decreased markedly.
Opposition members are continuing to move and work
in Juba, alongside their Government counterparts, to
implement key parts of the peace agreement. There
have been more than 130 different rapprochements
19-28498

18/09/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

across the country at the grass-roots level, which
demonstrates confidence and commitment.
The latest Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification (IPC) report — a UNICEF, World Food
Programme and Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO) report that measures
food security — documents a slight improvement in
food security. There are now 5 per cent fewer people
facing crisis or acute food insecurity compared with
last year. This, the report notes importantly, is directly
attributable to peace.
The fact that displaced families and refugees
are returning home means that more crops are being
planted, and improved security has enhanced access
to markets and to humanitarian access. According to
the FAO, cereal production has increased by 150,000
metric tons in one year, an indication of what peace
can provide.
Still, 6.3 million people — or 54 per cent of the
population — remain food-insecure and have limited
access to health care. We have also noted that child
malnutrition has in the short term, we think, increased.
But we are seeing a change. The IPC severity map
is, at least, becoming more orange and yellow rather
than red. Humanitarian access has improved. Incidents
are down 30 per cent from last year, and humanitarians
are becoming more emboldened to reach out to
remote areas.
However, administrative impediments are still
too frequent. UNMISS has been blocked by the
Government from accessing areas where civilians and
convoys require protection, with 124 violations of the
status-of-forces agreement lodged just this year.
The relative calm has enabled more displaced
people to return home. The International Organization
for Migration has registered 594,000 returnees since the
peace agreement was signed. During the same period,
17,000 people left UNMISS protection-of-civilians
sites, while 180,000 remain.
At the Council’s request, as mentioned by the
President, we have reported back on future planning for
the protection-of-civilians sites, detailing the challenges
of prolonged displacement and the impediments to safe,
voluntary and dignified return. These impediments
include the lack of health-care and educational services
in return areas; obviously, perceptions of security; and
concern about the fragility of the peace process.

S/PV. 8621

The report’s findings drew from wide consultations
right across the community in Juba. It has enabled a
shared understanding of challenges and is forming
the basis of actions going forward, which are already
being developed.
To reflect the changing security environment,
UNMISS peacekeepers are rebalancing their
deployment, moving away from static type of
deployment protection at protection-of-civilians sites to
increase confidence-building patrols in areas to which
people will be returning.
However, the Government must take the lead in
creating a safe environment and support communities
so displaced refugees and others can come back with
confidence and be safe when they come back. I should
recall here that a South Sudan that is truly at peace will
no longer need United Nations protection sites.
The formation of the transitional Government
provides an opportunity to lift our gaze from immediate
challenges and look over the horizon towards the
elections that are expected at the end of the three-year
transition. Elections give the opportunity to resolve
differences through democratic rather than violent
means and to make a fundamental shift from deals
done between elites to a duty to deliver policies by a
Government that is elected by its people.
Holding free and fair elections is not just about
preparing logistically but will require the creation
of a political space where parties can form, discuss
policies and campaign freely. I say this because there is
mounting resentment among South Sudanese towards
elites amassing wealth while the people themselves
remain some of the poorest in the world.
The Government’s budget this year is 46 per cent
higher than last year, but with no indication of how a
$496 million financing gap will be funded. There is little
transparency about where oil revenue is being spent.
The Ministry of Finance reduced health-care spending
by 16 per cent this year, handing almost the entire
burden of health care to external donors, and reports of
Government expenditure have not been received since
the first quarter of 2017-2018. Meanwhile, the salaries
of civil servants, including teachers, health workers and
police officers, are often months late.
Criminality remains a serious problem, with
random attacks on civilians, most commonly by unpaid
soldiers and former combatants. The United Nations is

19-284983/18

S/PV.8621

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

also providing technical assistance to reform and rebuild
the justice system, not just to tackle criminal acts but to
address the more pervasive issue of impunity. Mobile
courts staffed by South Sudanese judiciary personnel,
which have done an excellent job, have expanded
beyond Bentiu and Malakal. In the next few weeks
they will try hundreds of serious cases, including many
cases of sexual and gender-based violence.
The bottom line is simply this. While the situation
for many South Sudanese citizens remains bleak, the
last year of peace has kickstarted a transformative
process that is improving people’s lives. This could not
have happened without the ceasefire or the confidence
generated by the peace process. The country’s leaders
and international peace partners deserve credit for this.
Across the country I have personally witnessed
former enemies once committed to killing each
other sitting amicably across the table planning a
future together. If South Sudan’s leaders ever needed
inspiration to reconcile and work in the country’s best
interests, they can find it under trees and in the tukuls
where communities are coming together to build peace.
I promise the Council that UNMISS is working
alongside them to lay strong foundations so that
peace can be sustained. As always, our efforts
are in partnership with the laudable efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union.

18/09/2019

violence has decreased, and local reconciliation efforts
have gained traction.
The decisions of President Salva Kiir and
opposition leader Riek Machar to meet in Juba are also
welcome developments. However, to build confidence
in the peace process, engagement focused on tangible
outcomes is still needed. Unfortunately, the peace
process in South Sudan has focused too much on
dialogue between political elites and too little on the
suffering of the people of South Sudan. Seven million
people face food insecurity; 185,000 seek refuge in
protection-of-civilians sites, and more than 4 million
are afraid to return to their homes.
While these numbers are shocking, they cannot
describe what it must be like to see another harvest
come and go without enough food to feed your family.
These statistics fail to capture the struggle of moving
from camp to camp fleeing outbreaks of violence, only
finally to return home and find your house burned to
the ground. Meanwhile, the Government and other
parties impede the flow of humanitarian assistance,
and opposition recruitment has been reported at
protection-of-civilians sites. These practices must
stop immediately.

Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Shearer for his
informative briefing.

The Government of South Sudan and other parties
continue to conduct military operations, particularly
in the Equatorias, that brutalize their own people. We
call on the South Sudanese parties that have not signed
the Revitalized Agreement to renounce violence and
seek political resolution. We call on those who have
signed the agreement to engage with such parties in
a non-violent manner. Despite ongoing activity that
contradicts the letter and the spirit of the Revitalized
Agreement, the United States believes there is still
time for the parties to move closer to peace before
November’s political deadline. To that end, we call on
South Sudan’s leaders to agree to terms for security
arrangements and to resolve the critical issue of the
number and boundaries of states in South Sudan. We
also urge them to formally establish the hybrid court,
in partnership with the African Union, whose role in
the peace process, along with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), we support.

One year ago, South Sudan’s leaders signed the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in South Sudan. Since then, the parties have taken
some meaningful steps towards lasting peace. Political

The people of South Sudan and key stakeholders
have stressed that durable peace is possible if women
play a central role in the peace process. We urge South
Sudan’s leaders to recommit themselves to ensuring a

The peace process remains precarious, but progress
is being made. Maintaining momentum is the absolute
key, and that depends very much on the continuing
goodwill of the parties as well as the collective and
unrelenting focus of international friends to support the
formation of a transitional Government.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Shearer for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.

4/18

19-28498

18/09/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

full and meaningful role for women in the mechanism of
the peace agreement and the transitional Government.
We endorse the call by the IGAD Council of
Ministers, on 21 August, for an ordinary summit
in September. We expect that such as summit would
address outstanding issues, including Mr. Machar’s
freedom of movement and the appointment of a
permanent chairperson for the reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission. We also
encourage all relevant parties to continue seeking a
sustainable path forward for the protection of civilian
sites, as well as for the safe, voluntary and dignified
return of internally displaced persons.
As a final word, I am pleased to share that, in
partnership with South Africa, the United States
plans to lead a Security Council visit to Juba in the
near future. I encourage all of my colleagues on the
Council to participate in the visit so that we can use the
opportunity to personally convey our joint desire to see
South Sudan usher in a new era of peace and stability.
Likewise, the visit will give South Sudan’s leaders the
chance to demonstrate to us that they have built the
foundation necessary to establish a credible, inclusive
and accountable transitional Government.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Mr. Shearer, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for South Sudan, for his
intervention. I shall comment on three points.
First, on the peace process, the current priority is
to form a transitional Government of national unity
by 12 November. France welcomes Riek Machar’s
visit to Juba last week. It is an important step that has
strengthened trust between him and Salva Kiir. We
encourage them to repeat such in-person meetings as
often as possible. Time is running out. The end of the
pretransition period is looming, in two months’ time,
and a further postponement would be unacceptable. The
top priority must be the formation of the Government
of national unity, but, in parallel, it is important,
as the Special Representative has stressed, to make
progress on the delineation of internal borders and on
security arrangements.
France welcomes the efforts of the countries of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
support the peace process. Indeed, the subregion’s
investment is absolutely essential to helping the parties
to move forward, and we encourage them to continue in
this direction. It is also necessary to respect the quotas

S/PV. 8621

for women provided for in the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan and to allow them to participate actively
and meaningfully in the peace process, at all levels
and on all issues. The visit to Juba by the Security
Council next month will be an opportunity to repeat
those messages.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation remains
alarming and can be improved in the long term
only through the creation of lasting peace. While
the increase in the number of voluntary returns is
encouraging and directly linked to recent political
progress, intercommunity violence continues to drive
people into exile. These forced displacements, it should
be recalled, take place in a context of extreme poverty,
characterized by particularly high food insecurity. All
parties must ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian
access throughout the country in order for growing
humanitarian needs to be met. Naturally, this involves
protecting humanitarian personnel, medical personnel
and civilian and humanitarian infrastructure and
equipment. It is an obligation on which we must
not compromise.
The fight against sexual violence must also remain
a priority. We commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, on her work in the field. As a
result of those efforts, the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement in Opposition has adopted an action plan
to combat sexual violence in its ranks. France is
also concerned about the human rights violations
reported by the commission mandated by the Human
Rights Council.
France reiterates its commitment to the fight
against impunity and the importance of prosecuting
and bringing to justice perpetrators of violations.
Accordingly, we call on all parties to establish the
hybrid court for South Sudan, with the support of the
African Union. The Security Council also has a role to
play and must systematically use sanctions to punish
and coerce those who commit such crimes.
Thirdly, France is committed to ensuring that the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
pursues its efforts to protect civilians, in particular
women and children, as that must remain the first
priority of the mission. France commends the Mission’s
efforts to ensure the proper functioning of protection
of civilian sites, whose opening in 2013 has undeniably

19-284985/18

S/PV.8621

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

saved thousands of human lives. But it is also essential
to protect all South Sudanese who need it, wherever they
are in the country. France supports the Mission’s new,
more robust and mobile stance and the strengthening
of early warning mechanisms. Those efforts must be
continued in order to make areas of return safer.
In conclusion, on behalf of France, I would like to
offer my sincere thanks to the United Nations teams
and humanitarian actors who are conducting, often in
difficult conditions, a vital mission in the service of the
people of South Sudan.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and thank
Mr. Shearer, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan, for his valuable briefing.
A few months from the beginning of the transition
period, we look forward to the implementation of
important pending agreements, particularly with
respect to the billeting and training of a unified
army and to the number and borders of states, which
will allow the revitalized transitional Government of
national unity to finally come to fruition. In the same
vein, we welcome the meeting, held last week in Juba
between the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, and
the Vice-President designate, Riek Machar. We consider
that gesture to be an important show of political resolve
that will provide the necessary impetus to tackle critical
issues and enable the establishment of the transitional
Government in November.
We note with satisfaction that the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan has resulted
in a considerable decrease in political violence in most
parts of the country. However, we regret that sporadic
attacks by non-signatory groups continue in regions
such as Central Equatoria, leading to a rise in internally
displaced persons.
We must reiterate our concern at the high rates of
crime, human rights violations and sexual violence
in South Sudan. Horrifying incidents continue to
be reported, as described in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/722). We hope that Riek
Machar’s endorsement of the action plan of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement in Opposition on
conflict-related sexual violence will result in specific,
effective measures that do not foster impunity for the
perpetrators of such crimes but, rather, enable them to
be held accountable for their actions.
6/18

18/09/2019

We call on non-signatory groups to join the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. The construction of
a stable and secure nation is dependent on the entire
population and on the support that the international
community can provide to achieve lasting solutions that
include the greater participation of women and youth in
decision-making processes.
We regret that the humanitarian situation remains
critical despite the abating conflict. According to
the Secretary-General’s report, the number of people
without food has reached an all-time high, severely
impacting the civilian population. Nevertheless, we
note that the report of the Secretary-General on future
planning for the protection of civilians sites in South
Sudan (S/2019/741) highlights the growing willingness
of populations to return to their homes. However, the
report also points out that there are various barriers that
delay return, such as the unpredictable peace process,
the lack of security and the absence of basic services
in places of origin. We hope that the Government and
international partners can help facilitate the peaceful
return of the population to their homes, including
laying the groundwork for them to do so safely and
voluntarily and enjoy access to basic services, such as
water, sanitation and health services, allowing them to
live a dignified life in their homes.
We support the reprioritization of the work of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
as suggested in the report on the protection of civilian
sites. We believe that the UNMISS mandate must reflect
the current situation, thereby allowing the Mission to
deliver on its principal mandate, that is, the protection to
civilians, through early warnings and greater mobility
on the ground. We hope that coordinated action by
the Mission together with humanitarian actors and
development agencies will lead to lasting solutions.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the work
and efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the African Union and the United
Nations, especially the valuable work of UNMISS,
in South Sudan. We reiterate the importance of
maintaining unity within the Security Council on the
political support and follow-up needed to continue
moving forward decisively in the South Sudanese
peace process.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates Mr. David Shearer, Special
19-28498

18/09/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), for his comprehensive and
informative briefing.
The hope engendered by the signing of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan seems to be fading owing to
the uncertainties surround the peace process. While
the Agreement helped significantly reduce political
violence, facilitate the return of displaced persons
and improve conditions for access to humanitarian
assistance, it is now clear that the stalled political
process, persistent ethnic violence and a stillalarming humanitarian situation have undermined the
positive momentum generated by the Agreement. It is
important to take urgent and concerted action to pull
the country out of this ongoing crisis, which has serious
repercussions on the civilian population, which wants
nothing more than peace, stability and development.
My country believes that the international
community should focus its efforts primarily on the
political, humanitarian and security fronts. On the
political front, the resumption of the peace process
remains the leading challenge to be tackled. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes the first meeting
in two years in Juba on 9 and 10 September between
President Salva Kiir and Vice-President Riek Machar,
under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development.

S/PV. 8621

On the humanitarian front, deteriorating living
conditions for displaced persons, persistent sexual and
gender-based violence and impunity for such crimes
remain matters of concern for my delegation. In addition,
there is a lack of progress on the implementation of the
transitional justice mechanisms.
At the heart of these challenges, unfortunately, is the
crucial issue of the protection of civilians. In that regard,
my country fully supports the recommendations of the
report (S/2019/741) of the Secretary-General presented
today, particularly with regard to the obligations
incumbent on the South Sudanese authorities, the
responsibilities of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and those of various partners, to enhance the
protection of civilians.
The protection of civilians must also encompass
a strengthening of the rule of law, respect for human
rights and the implementation of the principle of
accountability for crimes committed. My country
therefore urges the South Sudanese authorities to create
conditions conducive to the safe, voluntary, secure and
dignified return of displaced persons and refugees.
In addition, we are concerned at the persistence of
ethnic violence and call for the necessary measures to
be taken to ensure the physical security of displaced
persons and refugees.

In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire commends the
Ethiopian mediation for its efforts leading to the
holding of the meeting, which my country hopes will
catalyse the resolution of the pending issues, such as
the formation of a Government of national unity, the
cantonment of combatants and their reintegration into
the army. The question of the status of Vice-President
Riek Machar also requires special consideration.

My delegation also welcomes the joint action taken
by the signatories to the Revitalized Agreement for
the establishment of the Humanitarian Coordination
Committee under the auspices of the National
Pre-Transitional Committee. The Committee remains a
valuable mechanism for improving access to populations
awaiting humanitarian aid and for protecting the
rights of vulnerable people. In addition, Côte d’Ivoire
welcomes the ratification by the Government of South
Sudan of the Kampala Convention — the African
Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa.

Côte d’Ivoire believes that the Revitalized
Agreement of September 2018 remains, for the time
being, the appropriate framework for achieving a
lasting political solution, which is why we encourage
all stakeholders to engage meaningfully in the process
to give peace a chance. In that context, it is undeniable
that the support of the international community is
urgently needed in terms of capacity-building and
support for implementing the Revitalized Agreement,
which suffers from a deficit of resources.

My country welcomes the excellent work of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan in
providing assistance, strengthening its early-warning
capabilities and protecting civilians. I assure the
Special Representative of our full support and urge
him to continue his engagement, in coordination with
humanitarian agencies and development partners,
towards harmonized action in the areas of peacebuilding
and conflict resolution, security sector reform and
strengthening of the rule of law.

19-284987/18

S/PV.8621

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call
on the South Sudanese parties to step up their
engagement in the peace process, with the support of
the international community.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): There were important developments
for the process of implementing the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan during the period under review. We see as
positive the recent meeting between President Kiir
and Riek Machar, in which pending issues relating
to the formation of the transitional Government were
addressed. The commitment of both leaders to meet
regularly and participate in mediation efforts with
non-signatory rebel groups is an important step in
building trust towards lasting peace.
We hope that the mid-November date set for the
formation of the Government will be honoured, and
we urge the parties to resolve the critical matters
still pending, including the delimitation of states and
the cantonment and redeployment of combatants.
In that regard, we welcome the initiatives of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
international actors, which have allowed the peace
agreement to survive and created opportunities for
dialogue to make progress on pending issues.
Unfortunately, this very situation continues to be
threatened by unresolved cycles of violence, access
restraints on humanitarian personnel and the staff of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), as
well as delays in the granting of visas. The parties to the
conflict must allow unhindered access to humanitarian
personnel, and the Government must expedite the visaissuance process.
We are concerned at the seriousness of the
humanitarian situation. The number of people facing
food shortages is higher than ever: 54 per cent of the
population is in a situation of severe food insecurity and
an estimated 1.3 million children will experience acute
malnutrition by 2020. This insecurity is exacerbated by
the effects of climate change and floods in some areas
of the country. It is crucial that we reduce violence
and improve agricultural activities, which would allow
displaced people to return to their livelihoods.
Beyond the political and humanitarian crisis, we
are concerned about the vulnerability of the civilian
population, especially children and women. Continuous
reports of sexual violence by the parties to the conflict
8/18

18/09/2019

are unacceptable, as are those of the recruitment and
use of children. We call on the Government to establish
a process to hold perpetrators responsible, and we
advocate that comprehensive services be provided to
survivors of sexual violence. We also call for the setting
up of mobile courts and the deployment of prosecutors
in areas with insufficient prosecution capacity
to continue.
In that regard, we commend Riek Machar’s
endorsement of the action plan on conflict-related sexual
violence, which envisages that concrete measures be
implemented, as well as his orders to his commanders to
form committees to investigate acts of sexual violence
and to release girls and women held against their will.
We hope that those orders will be implemented and
replicated in other parts of the country.
It is imperative that the momentum be used
to strengthen political will and that reconciliation
and peacebuilding efforts be stepped up, with the
participation of women and young people.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our support and
appreciation to UNMISS personnel and to the agencies
present on the ground for their efforts to achieve the
peace that the people of South Sudan so desire. It is
a long road. Crucial issues remain to be resolved, for
which the commitment of the political leaders and the
support of the international community are necessary.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me join others in
expressing my appreciation to Mr. David Shearer, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan, for his very comprehensive briefing. We thank
the Secretary-General for his reports on the situation
in South Sudan (S/2019/722) and on future planning
for protection of civilian sites therein (S/2019/741). My
statement today will focus on three key issues, namely,
the political, security and humanitarian situations.
On the first issue, my delegation welcomes last
week’s meeting in Juba between President Salva Kiir
Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar and their commitment
to ensuring the timely formation of the revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity. The longawaited meeting was a significant step in the right
direction, especially as progress in implementing
critical provisions of the revitalized Agreement was
rather limited. As we approach the end of the extension
of the pre-transitional period, my delegation wishes
to recall that the revitalized Agreement is the only
option right now. We must make it work. To borrow
19-28498

18/09/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the language of the Special Envoy for South Sudan
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the remaining critical tasks of the Agreement
can be completed only with unity and compromise.
All parties must hold regular face-to-face dialogues
in order to maintain the positive momentum, reinstil
confidence and resolve outstanding issues, including
transitional security arrangements and the resolution of
boundary issues. We reiterate our call for the timely
and transparent disbursement of funds pledged for
the implementation of the Agreement. Indonesia fully
endorses the provision of technical assistance by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
support the implementation of the Agreement.
Secondly, we are encouraged by the fact that the
permanent ceasefire is holding across the country and
political violence has decreased. Confidence and trustbuilding continue at the subnational level, much of
which was facilitated by UNMISS. However, we regret
that sporadic clashes involving non-signatories to the
Agreement continue to take innocent lives in Central
Equatoria region. The importance of IGAD’s continued
efforts to bring non-signatories into the peace process
cannot be overstated.
Indonesia stresses the imperative of the full
protection of civilians and observance of international
humanitarian law. Accountability for human rights
violations must be upheld. Impunity will only prolong
the conflict cycle, thereby jeopardizing the credibility
of the peace process. That is not what we want at this
crucial stage of the peace process.
We commend the role of UNMISS to promote the
rule of law and capacity-building and to strengthen
the judicial presence in the country. Repeated access
restrictions against UNMISS potentially impede its
ability to implement its mandates, including to protect
civilians and to investigate human rights violations.
Thirdly, our collective efforts should always be
aimed at saving human lives. My delegation feels
compelled to bring to the Council’s attention the dire
humanitarian situation affecting people in South
Sudan. It is estimated that 6.96 million people are
severely food insecure, of whom 20,000 will likely be
in catastrophe. A durable solution is desperately needed
for the 1.83 million internally displaced persons and
2.3 million refugees.
The country is also struggling to acquire the funding
needed to meet the Ebola virus preparedness target.

S/PV. 8621

As of now, only 45 per cent of the 2019 humanitarian
response plan has been funded. The international
community needs to contribute more.
The operating environment for humanitarian
actors in South Sudan continues to be challenging
and dangerous. All sides must provide humanitarian
actors with the necessary space for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Representative David Shearer for his,
as always, very informative briefing.
Poland welcomes last week’s meeting between
President Salva Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar in
Juba, which we see as a step in the right direction. We
would like to encourage the political leaders to continue
to meet regularly so as to take the peace process forward.
We also welcome all confidence-building efforts and
peacebuilding initiatives that have been taking place at
the subnational level.
We continue to believe that the implementation
of the provisions of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan is crucial to the durable peace and long-term
stability of the country. Two months before the end
of the extended pre-transitional period, we see the
urgent need for the parties to accelerate the pace of
implementation of the Agreement, in particular with
regard to security arrangements and the number of
states and their boundaries.
We call on all the signatories to work together in
a spirit of goodwill and compromise and to spare no
efforts in stepping up preparations for the successful
transition and the formation of the transitional
Government in November.
Poland praises the regional efforts to build
durable peace in South Sudan and believes that the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and its
member States, as well as the African Union, continue
to play a critical role in terms of enforcement and
monitoring of the implementation of the Agreement.
We believe that the Security Council should stand
ready to support those efforts. We therefore welcome
the upcoming Security Council visit to Addis Ababa
and Juba, which should also serve that purpose. It is
our strong belief that only the collective and unified
approach of the international community can help to
maintain the positive momentum in the peace process.

19-284989/18

S/PV.8621

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Poland welcomes the fact that the permanent
ceasefire continues to be largely respected across South
Sudan. At the same time, we remain deeply concerned
about the persisting humanitarian crisis and the levels
of intercommunal violence, as well as the serious
human rights violations and abuses perpetrated by
Government forces and opposition armed groups. We
call on the authorities of South Sudan to do their utmost
to bring the perpetrators to justice and to fulfil their
obligations with regard to the protection of civilians.
Let me conclude by thanking the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan for its tireless efforts to bring
durable peace and stability to South Sudan.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I will be brief because I
think that all the most important points have already
been made.
To summarize what David Shearer said, we must
move from talk to action and ensure that what he said
with regard to the security forces, unification and
boundaries be finally implemented and that, most
important, the date of 12 November be respected for
the formation of the transitional Government.
There is a certain momentum, which we have to
preserve, and it is very important that the international
community continue to support that. I think it is very
good that we now have some stability in the Sudan,
which certainly helps. We need the African Union, we
need the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and we as a Security Council need to speak with one
voice on these matters and give support. It is very timely
that in October we will have the funds to travel to the
region and South Sudan just before the critical date.
I also think that it is very good what was said with
regard to the more flexible work of the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan — that it is
not remaining stationary but going out with greater
robustness to fulfil the actual mandate of protecting the
civilian population and providing greater prevention.
What is unacceptable, as Mr. Shearer mentioned at the
margins of his statement, is that there are still severe
violations of the status of forces agreement. That is
something that we have to look at and, like the South
Sudanese Government, we will have to respond.
Mr. Shearer mentioned some improvement on
the situation on the ground, but overall it is still very
bad: there are 1.8 million internally displaced persons,
2.3 million have fled the country, the security situation
10/18

18/09/2019

is still not where it should be, children are suffering. I
am also worried about the high level of violence against
civilians and sexual and gender-based violence. In that
regard, I can only echo — the representative of the
Dominican Republic stole my speaking points with
regard to this point — what he and the representative
of France said, namely, that violence against women
is unacceptable and perpetrators have to be brought
to justice. It is very good that they have their mobile
tribunals, but we have to go beyond them. There cannot
be impunity for perpetrators.
I would also like to pick up on what the
representatives of the Dominican Republic and Peru said
with regard to the participation of women. This is still a
situation where it is men — Kiir and Machar — talking
to each other. In the peace agreement there is the 35 per
cent quota for women, which should be implemented.
In all the Committees and all the talks women should
be participating. I count on Mr. Shearer on raising the
level of participation.
Let me conclude on a positive note. Mr. Shearer
mentioned many examples of people who had been
fighting each other but are now sitting together. That is
something to build upon.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I thank Special Representative David Shearer
for his briefing and for his exceptional work under
particularly difficult conditions.
Last week’s meeting in Juba between President
Kiir and Riek Machar is an important step in the
right direction, a step that was long overdue. Trust
between political leaders is essential for a successful
peace process. We also note as a positive development
that political violence has decreased even though
intercommunity violence, sexual violence and
crime persist.
We must now build on that positive momentum.
There are only two months left before the end of the
extended pre-transition period. All stakeholders must
therefore make rapid progress on a number of key
issues. I would mention in particular the establishment
of security arrangements, the status of Juba, including
the issue of the VIP protection force, the finalization of
internal boundaries, the development of a road map for
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and the full release of implementation funds
announced by the Government. Finally, the signatory
19-28498

18/09/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8621

parties must form a transitional Government by
12 November, as agreed in the agreement and publicly
reconfirmed by President Kiir and Mr. Machar last
week. As for the non-signatory parties, we urge them
to join the Revitalized Agreement. The commitment,
monitoring and support of the States of the region
are essential to ensure the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement.

work in peacemaking in South Sudan. We further
welcome the report (S/2019/722) of the SecretaryGeneral on UNMISS and on the protection of civilians
and its recommendations (S/2019/741). We also want
to welcome our friend and colleague the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan. We look forward to his
statement to the Council, which he will make in a few
minutes’ time.

The protection of civilians remains a daunting
challenge. Human rights abuses continue and sexual
violence continues, unfortunately affecting entire
communities. The protection of civilians and the
provision of services to the population are primarily the
responsibility of the authorities. We call on all parties
in South Sudan to address key protection risks, extend
the rule of law and invest essential funds in the setting
up of services throughout the country.

The decades of instability, conflict and
underdevelopment will continue to require our
collective and steadfast commitment to ensuring
that we put South Sudan on a trajectory of peace and
prosperity. I would like to limit my statement three
issues: the political process, the security situation and
the humanitarian situation in South Sudan.

Humanitarian access remains essential for the
South Sudanese people. As suggested by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2019/741), we encourage the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan to continue
to adopt a more mobile and robust approach and
to strengthen its early-warning and monitoring
capabilities, while continuing to ensure security in
and around civilian-protection sites. Any return of
displaced persons must be voluntary, safe, dignified
and well informed.
No lasting solution to the conflict in South Sudan
can be found without urgently and effectively addressing
the many abuses. We call on the Government to end the
culture of impunity, thoroughly investigate all cases
of sexual violence and other abuses and bring those
responsible for those crimes to justice. We call for
the establishment of transitional justice mechanisms,
including the Hybrid Court.
This conflict is the main factor behind the
humanitarian crisis and violence in South Sudan, a
crisis that is completely human-caused. The Revitalized
Agreement represents the window of opportunity
for lasting peace in South Sudan. Let us not lose
this opportunity.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We join other
delegations in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s meeting. We also express our heartfelt
gratitude to Special Representative David Shearer
for his briefing, which was, as usual, comprehensive.
We thank him and his team from the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for their tireless

With regard to the political situation, South Africa
welcomes the recent face-to-face meetings between
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar as a step in
the right direction. It was a much-anticipated meeting,
as there is a clear realization that it will help in unlocking
the political impasse that has stalled the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. South Africa
would like to thank the new authorities in Khartoum
for assisting their family in the south to meet and talk.
We also want to thank the Prime Minister of Ethiopia
for his ongoing tireless efforts to further peace and
stability in the Horn of Africa.
The road ahead has been charted. The
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan
is key in addressing a number of challenges that the
people of South Sudan continue to grapple with,
including instability, security and humanitarian and
human rights crises. We have to address the root causes
that led to the conflict. Otherwise we will continue to
deal with the perennial symptomatic features, which
include humanitarian challenges and conflict-related
sexual violence.
There are many grass-roots peace initiatives
throughout the country have been taken in earnest,
because the people of South Sudan are yearning for
peace. The leadership of South Sudan needs to redouble
its efforts and join with the people through action in
the form of the implementation of the Revitalized
Peace Agreement.
The inclusion of women and their meaningful
participation in the peace process remains an integral

19-2849811/18

S/PV.8621

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

part of ensuring that all citizens’ aspirations are
addressed. We are encouraged by the work already being
undertaken by women-led civil society organizations to
contribute to the peace process and rebuild the country.
By appointing a woman Foreign Minister, President Kiir
has acknowledged the capacity and capability of South
Sudanese women. We congratulate the Government for
taking that step.
South Africa appreciates the ongoing work by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
in conjunction with the African Union, to facilitate
and mediate the peace process in South Sudan. It is
important that the Council continue to support and
complement those efforts.
On the security situation, we are encouraged
that the cessation of hostilities continues to hold and
has led to a significant reduction in security-related
incidents, as Special Representative Shearer reported
this morning. However, we remain concerned about
ongoing violent incidents with opposition groups, as
well as the intercommunal violence that is taking place.
In that regard, we commend the work of UNMISS and
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism in their role to support the
Revitalized Agreement, to be signed and, hopefully,
implemented by 12 November.
On the humanitarian situation, the crisis unfolding
and the magnitude of the number of people in distress, as
highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report, is totally
reprehensible. Such human suffering is an indictment
of us all, as humankind. We urge the international
stakeholders to continue contributing to post-conflict
reconstruction and development programmes and to
support efforts to repatriate and resettle internally
displaced persons and returning refugees in South
Sudan — as they return in the thousands. South Africa
will continue to offer South Sudan humanitarian
assistance, especially as many communities return to
their villages and towns.
Lastly, we would like to echo my colleagues from
the United States and the public statements by most
Council members in welcoming the forthcoming
Security Council visit to South Sudan, led by
South Africa and the United States. We hope that
it will provide further impetus to the parties in the
implementation, without delay, of all the provisions of
the Revitalized Agreement.
12/18

18/09/2019

Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Shearer, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, for his briefing.
At present, the overall situation in South Sudan
continues to improve. Violent conflicts have decreased
sharply and the ceasefire has continued to hold in most
areas. The implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan has steadily moved ahead and progress has
been made in establishing a unified national army and
amending the Constitution. Thanks to the facilitation
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the Sudan and other countries, South Sudan
President Kiir and opposition leader Machar met in
Juba on 9 and 11 September, and the two sides reached
important consensus on advancing the peace process
and the forming of a new transitional Government
on 12 November, as scheduled. That demonstrates
the political will and determination of both sides to
achieve peace and invigorate the implementation
of the agreement. China appreciates and welcomes
that development.
At the same time, there are still obstacles to the
achievement of peace and stability in South Sudan.
Certain opposition parties have yet to join the agreement,
the humanitarian situation is grim and there are serious
food shortages. We hope the international community
will bolster its support for the peace process in the
country, consolidate the existing positive momentum
and provide assistance, as needed, by the country.
First, we must support the parties in South Sudan
in accelerating the implementation of the agreement.
Its effective implementation is the only way to
resolve the conflict in South Sudan. We are less than
two months away from the end of the pre-transition
period — 12 November. China hopes that the parties to
the conflict in South Sudan will seize this opportunity
to unite as one in accelerating the implementation of the
agreement and restoring peace and stability at an early
date so that the people of South Sudan can enjoy the
peace dividends as soon as possible. The international
community should provide financial and material
support to South Sudan for the implementation of the
agreement and the formation of a unified army.
Secondly, we should continue to support countries
of the region and regional organizations in their good
offices. It has been shown that greater knowledge of
19-28498

18/09/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the situation on the ground can help them in their good
offices. The international community should enhance
coordination with the African Union, IGAD and other
subregional organizations, as well as countries such
as the Sudan. It should also support their mediation
efforts and help the South Sudanese Government and
the opposition to consolidate mutual trust, maintain
dialogue and reach consensus as soon as possible
on issues such as the number of states and border
demarcations. Finally, it should urge the opposition
parties that have not yet subscribed to the peace
agreement to join the peace process soon.
Thirdly, humanitarian and economic assistance
should be enhanced. As mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/741), the current state of
affairs in the protection of civilian sites is untenable.
Those sites are not a durable solution to the problem
of displacement. The international community should
increase its assistance in the settlement of displaced
persons and facilitate their early return to their homes.
The number of people in South Sudan facing severe
food shortages — 6.96 million — is the highest ever
recorded. The country is also facing the risk of Ebola
spreading from other countries. The international
community should now focus on helping the country
address the food shortages and improve its capacity
to prevent the spread of Ebola, while increasing its
investment in agriculture, energy, infrastructure,
education, health care and other fields with a view to
helping the country achieve national reconstruction and
economic development.
China greatly appreciates the important contribution
of United Nations Mission in South Sudan to the
maintenance of peace and stability in South Sudan.
We support the Mission’s continued implementation
of its mandate of supporting the implementation of
the agreement and the protection of civilians, among
other things. We hope the Mission will continue to
strengthen communication and coordination with
troop-contributing countries, promote the security and
protection of peacekeepers and enhance their ability to
cope with complex situations.
China has always strongly supported the peace
process in South Sudan. Recently, in order to support
South Sudan’s efforts to implement the agreement,
the Chinese Government decided to provide material
assistance to the South Sudanese Government. The
first batch, which is 1,500 tons of food, has arrived
in South Sudan, and other in-kind assistance, such as

S/PV. 8621

tents, blankets and medicine, are in the pipeline. China
is willing to work with the international community
by continuing to play a constructive role in achieving
peace, stability and development in South Sudan.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Shearer for
his valuable and comprehensive briefing. I would
also like to very briefly touch upon three main
points — political developments, the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and
the humanitarian situation.
In relation to political developments, we welcome
the meetings between President Salva Kiir and
Mr. Riek Machar last week in Juba. We also welcome
the declaration on working towards the completion
of as many of the pre-transition steps as possible by
12 November, in accordance with the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
South Sudan.
We also welcome the declaration on the
reconfiguration of the Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commission and the continuation
of the ceasefire. In the meantime, we hope that the
containment and unification of forces will avert the
risks that usually accompany such processes. We also
look forward to seizing the moment and optimizing the
remainder of this sensitive and important phase. We call
on all the non-signatory parties to rapidly join the peace
process. Meanwhile, we welcome the positive signals
sent by some with regard to holding consultations in
this regard.
The progressive achievements being made need
follow-up by national and regional parties, with
the support of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the African Union and the United
Nations, taking into consideration the positive role
played by South Sudan in supporting the transitional
process. Transitional justice in the post-conflict phase
is of paramount importance to ensuring reconciliation,
accountability and the sustainability of peace.
In relation to the humanitarian situation, we
welcome the relative increase in the number of
returning refugees and displaced persons and hope that
the international community will step up its support in
order to alleviate the humanitarian burden borne by the
people. That can be done by promoting humanitarian
activities in South Sudan, especially in the areas of
health care, education and housing, thereby creating

19-2849813/18

S/PV.8621

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

an environment conducive for voluntary, safe and
dignified return.
Meanwhile, we emphasize resolution 2417 (2018),
on hunger and conflict, which reiterates that hunger
plays a key role in the resurgence of conflict. We
welcome the progressive decrease in South Sudan of
the number of people in protection of civilians sites of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
and reiterate that the protection of civilians remains
the primary responsibility of the Government of
South Sudan.
We reaffirm our condemnation of the recruitment of
children and conflict-related sexual violence, regardless
of who the perpetrators may be or their rationale. We
welcome the intercommunal reconciliation process,
which needs to be supported and emulated at all levels.
In relation to UNMISS, we appreciate its important
role and commend its good offices, as well as its health,
humanitarian and legal services, which contribute
to the consolidation of peace by prioritizing political
solutions. We also call for ensuring the freedom of
movement of UNMISS and of humanitarian aid,
pursuant to the status-of-forces agreement and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
In conclusion, South Sudan is at one of its most
critical phases in its history — one that will have very
serious repercussions for present and future generations
if not addressed effectively and seriously. We hope that
the vicious circle of war and destruction will come to
an end, leading to security, stability and prosperity in
the friendly South Sudan.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me at the outset to express my
gratitude to Mr. David Shearer for his efforts in
promoting the peace process as part of his remit as well
as for his outstanding briefing, which clearly illustrated
the manner in which the situation in South Sudan
has evolved.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the progress made in implementing
the political and security tasks that have been achieved
during the period covered by the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/722) during the six-month
extension of the pre-transition period. These include the
submission of the report of the Independent Boundaries
Commission, the drafting of key legislation, the
planning of transition security measures, and the trips
14/18

18/09/2019

made by President Salva Kiir and the signing of bilateral
agreements with his counterparts in Kenya and in
Uganda. All of these are important steps forward on the
path towards the country’s return to peace and stability.
We also believe that this period of transitional
Government has been a successful stage in the peace
process and therefore urge the parties to step up their
efforts to achieve a general agreement on security and
on the cantonment and unification of the security forces.
We would like to remind the parties to the conflict
that the time has come for them to assume their
responsibilities and demonstrate the political will that
is necessary for the full and timely implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan, as it has been made clear on
other occasions that an inclusive political solution is the
only way to achieve peace in South Sudan.
My country maintains the hope that the parties
will make concrete and rapid progress in resolving the
necessary transitional arrangements during the allotted
period. We deplore the persistence of sporadic fighting
between Government forces and the opposition, in
particular in Central Equatoria, as well as among
opposition groups. We also deplore the continued
prevalence of sexual violence and violence against
civilians, and we therefore urge the parties to spare no
effort to bring to justice all those who are responsible
for such atrocities.
We are also concerned about the humanitarian
situation. The attacks against humanitarian workers
and United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
personnel are unacceptable. That is why we would urge
all the parties, in particular the Government, to ensure
a more secure and propitious environment for personnel
who are working tirelessly to provide assistance to the
most vulnerable civilians in South Sudan.
Given the concerns that I have just set out, it should
also be noted that some events there give us reason for
hope, such as the recent visit by Mr. Riek Machar to
Juba a few days ago to meet with President Salva Kiir.
Direct contact between these two leaders gives rise
to hope that the agreement could be implemented in
its totality.
With this in mind, we are encouraged to know that
during their meeting the two leaders reiterated their
commitment to the agreement and to the formation of
a transitional Government of unity during the month
19-28498

18/09/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8621

of November. Following through on this commitment
will be an important sign of real progress in the peace
process in South Sudan.

of South Sudan have set a genuine example in their
country, in their region and for their own leaders of the
importance of peace.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea appreciates the
mediation and commitment of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to United Nations personnel,
UNMISS and non-governmental organizations for all
their efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to the
people and commends the African Union Commission
on its active involvement in the collective efforts in
favour of peace in South Sudan.

We are very grateful to Mr. Shearer and his team
for their work in facilitating reconciliation efforts,
including, of course, civilian-military dialogue and the
peace conference between states but also, crucially,
the subnational rapprochement between Government
and opposition. I note from the Secretary-General’s
report on future planning for the protection of civilians
sites (S/2019/741) that there have been at least 128 such
subnational rapprochement initiatives between the
Government and the opposition since the signing of the
peace agreement in September 2018. Again, this is very
much to be welcomed. It is not all about the big men
meeting in choreographed ways in smoke-filled rooms.
Community action and grassroots reconciliation are
vital and should be encouraged by all of us in the
Council, all in the region and all in South Sudan.

I wish to conclude my statement by appealing to the
international community to back the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations and neighbouring
countries in order to support the political actors in
general and in particular leaders Salva Kiir and Riek
Machar, so that they can move forward resolutely
and without setbacks to achieve a definitive peace in
South Sudan.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me, too, thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Shearer for his briefing.
As my colleague from Equatorial Guinea just said,
we very, very much welcome the meeting that took
place between President Kiir and Mr. Machar. This
was a necessary step for the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan and for the formation
of a transitional Government of national unity by the
already extended deadline of 12 November. I commend
both men and their teams for taking that crucial step
forward, which gives us hope here in the Council. The
November deadline is fast approaching, so I would
urge, today, that both parties ensure that theirs was the
first of many, forthcoming meetings going forward.
We have been discussing the conflict in South
Sudan for some time now; it has taken a huge toll
on civilians in that country. During the worst of the
conflict, we saw atrocities carried out against civilians;
we saw attacks on humanitarian workers and health
clinics; we saw food and humanitarian assistance used
as weapons of war. It was a grim conflict for the people
of South Sudan. And yet, since the peace agreement,
one of the most inspiring things that I have seen in the
Council has been the response of the people of South
Sudan to the peace. People came out in their hundreds
and thousands to celebrate and welcome the decision
made by their leaders. I really believe that the people

The United Kingdom does not yet believe that
conditions in South Sudan are conducive to the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of internally displaced
persons and refugees. We need all parties to play
their parts in establishing a secure environment for
the people of South Sudan. Accountability will be
a vital element of that. We urge the parties to the
revitalized agreement to fulfil their commitments to
establishing transitional justice institutions and to sign
the memorandum of understanding with the African
Union on the establishment of the hybrid court. Again,
we have talked about that court in the Council for some
time now; surely it is time to see it established.
Those institutions are desperately needed. We have
heard from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict that reports of
sexual violence increased in 2018, in an environment,
I am afraid to say, of near total impunity. The people
of South Sudan need to see safety and security
developing. They need to see credible action taken to
end acts of sexual violence and ensure the protection
of civilians. They need to see the demilitarization of
towns and public buildings being taken forward. As
such, all parties to the revitalized agreement need to
allow United Nations Mission in South Sudan and
humanitarian actors to carry out their work unimpeded.
Although the ceasefire has held, which is very
much to be welcomed, a serious humanitarian crisis
remains. Six and a half million people suffer food

19-2849815/18

S/PV.8621

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

insecurity; 1.7 million are on the edge of famine. The
United Kingdom remains one of the largest donors in
South Sudan; we have spent $135 million dollars in this
financial year. That is our national contribution; we give
more through the European Union and development
assistance. We remain committed to the people and the
country. But all humanitarian actors must be able to
play their part in helping the people of South Sudan
rebuild their country.
There will be many more opportunities for dialogue
between now and November. We urge the parties to
continue to meet and the region to retain its focus on
South Sudan, and very much hope that the Ministers
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
will be able to meet before November. As my colleague
from the United States has said, the Council will have
an important opportunity to engage with the parties in
a visit to Juba in late October, co-led, I believe, by our
South African presidency. I hope that we will have an
opportunity at that time to meet with all the parties to
the revitalized agreement. I hope we will be able to meet
with representatives of women, youth and civil society.
I hope we will be able to see grass-roots reconciliation
happening. I know that the Church and other actors
have been involved in reconciliation. I think this could
be a great opportunity, as a Council, to give a timely
boost to the efforts of the South Sudanese parties and
people. And that is how it should be of course.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for South Sudan, David Shearer,
for the information he has provided on developments
in South Sudan and on progress in the peace process
in that African country. We commend the role played
by the Blue Helmets at this pivotal time in South
Sudanese history.
We would like to point out the notable progress
in the implementation by the parties to the conflict
in South Sudan of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, of 12 September 2018. It is important that
they have demonstrated their willingness to engage
in dialogue and to overcome their differences by
finding compromise solutions. In that regard, the
significance of the three-day talks between President
Salva Kiir and former First Vice-President Riek
16/18

18/09/2019

Machar in Juba, facilitated by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and Khartoum,
cannot be overemphasized. We are confident that the
meeting will give new impetus to the South Sudanese
reconciliation process.
The decision of the South Sudanese parties to
the conflict to extend the pre-transition period to
12 November was difficult but justified. We sincerely
hope that the parties to the revitalized agreement will
make additional efforts to meet the agreed deadlines
and form a transitional Government of national unity.
As for the non-signatories, we call on them to join the
State-building process as soon as possible.
We consider it important that regional actors to the
South Sudan settlement maintain a united approach. We
welcome the efforts of IGAD and Khartoum to closely
accompany the peace process as it demonstrates once
again the implementation, in practice, of the principle
of African solutions to African problems. Furthermore,
there is still potential for effective cooperation among
the United Nations, the Security Council and regional
organizations. We believe that this can only benefit the
national reconciliation process.
We also note that the structures and mechanisms
provided for in the revitalized agreement are functional.
We are pleased that the level of armed violence is
decreasing, as is the number of human rights violations
in the country. An increasing number of refugees and
internally displaced persons are returning to their
places of permanent residence. We link this to the rollout of confidence-building measures and to contact
between the opposing parties on the ground.
We share the concern expressed in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2019/722) about the diversion
of peacekeeping forces to the protection of civilians
sites. We believe that as we move forward on a political
settlement, it will be possible to ensure that those South
Sudanese who wish to return home enjoy the necessary
security conditions and that the social contract is
restored. We believe that only full and comprehensive
implementation of the commitments undertaken by the
parties will help to increase mutual trust and prevent
the mistakes of the past from being repeated.
We are convinced that progress on the settlement
in South Sudan was not facilitated by greater sanctions
pressure on the country or by the imposition of an
arms embargo. The most important element was the
contribution of regional mediators. Moreover, at some
19-28498

18/09/2019

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

stage the embargo made it more difficult to implement
regional security initiatives in support of the settlement
process. We trust that the South Sudanese will soon
agree on the entire range of issues, which will give us
every reason to review the sanctions regime with the
aim of adapting it to the realities on the ground.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
accession to the presidency for the month of September
and looks forward to working closely with you during
your tenure. We would also like to take this opportunity
to welcome Ambassador Kelly Craft. Although she
is not in the Chamber, I know that our words will be
reported to her. We hope to have a more positive and
productive working relationship with her and her staff
in the months to come.
Moreover, Mr. President, with your permission
I should like, through you, to thank the Ambassador
of South Africa for his kind words of welcome to me
and for highlighting the correct role of the women
of South Sudan in the process. I am always truly
dismayed when some members of the Council do not
do their homework in reading up on the role of the
women of South Sudan. The team of opposition leader
Riek Machar in Juba — and I think Ambassador
David Shearer will attest to what I will say later to
Council members in their closed session — is led by
Ms. Angelina Teny. She is a tough negotiator. The new
Foreign Minister, Ms. Awut Deng Achuil, has always
participated in the peace negotiations and is also a very
tough negotiator. Thus, when some Council members
claim that it is only men who are doing the talking, that
is misleading information.
I therefore thank Ambassador Matjila for doing
his homework. This is not just men talking. The
requirement of 35 per cent female representation is set
down in the Constitution of the Republic of South Sudan
and is being implemented. I should like to repeat myself
again — 35 per cent is better and far more progressive
than what many countries represented in this Chamber
are doing for their women.
The Government of the Republic of South
Sudan acknowledges and welcomes the report of the

S/PV. 8621

Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2019/722) for the
period 29 May to 27 August. In this regard, we would
like to acknowledge the presence of Ambassador David
Shearer, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan. We appreciate his updated
briefing on recent developments in South Sudan that
are not included in the Secretary-General’s report.
While we welcome this quarterly report, we would
like to highlight two recent developments in South
Sudan: the visits of Mr. Riek Machar and Mr. Abdalla
Hamdok to Juba. The meeting between President Salva
Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar, as all members
know, was long time in coming, especially after a gap
of four months in the extended period. Mr. Machar’s
visit to Juba on 8 September was therefore welcomed
with high expectations, as there are only two months
left in the six-month extended period. President Salva
Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Riek Machar held a series of
discussions for two days concerning a wide range
of ideas on how best to implement the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. The most important outcome
of the two-day discussion is that both sides agreed to
form a transitional Government by 12 November.
In the Sudan, we are happy that the efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union, in which President Salva Kiir Mayardit
played an important and positive role, succeeded in
stabilizing the revolution in that country. The regional
mediations in the Sudan, as we all know, resulted in
the establishment of the Sovereign Council headed
by Lieutenant General Abdel-Fattah Al-Burhan, and
a hybrid civilian/military Executive Cabinet led by
Mr. Abdalla Hamdok as Prime Minister of the Republic
of the Sudan. On 12 and 13 September, South Sudan was
honoured by the first visit of the new Prime Minister of
the Sudan to Juba. During that visit, President Kiir and
Prime Minister Hamdok discussed matters of security,
border issues and economic cooperation that would
ensure peace and prosperity in and between the two
sisterly countries.
We have thought to highlight these two visits to
Juba over the past few days because they both impact
the peace implementation, new constructive relations
and economic engagement between the Sudan and
South Sudan. In the margins of the high-level General
Assembly next week, our Head of Delegation and our
new Foreign Minister will brief many Council members
in further detail concerning these visits.

19-2849817/18

S/PV.8621

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We would like to conclude by thanking those
countries that have responded to our call for help with
technical and material to meet the challenges of peace
implementation in South Sudan. We would like to thank
Japan, South Africa, China and Egypt for supplying
material for cantonment. We also thank the countries
that have decided to help with our humanitarian needs.

18/18

18/09/2019

Their actions are all highly appreciated by the people
of South Sudan.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

19-28498
