A/66/PV.61

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

61

st plenary meeting
Friday, 18 November 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Draft resolution (A/66/L.8)
Amendments (A/66/L.11, A/66/L.12, A/66/L.13
and A/66/L.14)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Saudi Arabia to introduce draft
resolution A/66/L.8.

A few weeks ago, a heinous plot to assassinate
Saudi Arabia’s Ambassador to the United States was
revealed. One person was arrested and charged with
participating in that conspiracy, while another was
charged but is still at large. A few days ago, authorities
uncovered another plot, to assassinate Saudi Arabia’s
Ambassador to the Kingdom of Bahrain, destroy the
Saudi Embassy headquarters there and blow up the
King Fahad Causeway linking Saudi Arabia and
Bahrain.

Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): The Government of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia is introducing draft resolution A/66/L.8, entitled
“Terrorist attacks on internationally protected persons”,
which has been sponsored by 50 Member States from
around the world.

Accordingly, the draft resolution before the
Assembly today was introduced to say that “Enough is
enough” — “enough” to terrorism, “enough” to
attacking diplomats and endangering their safety,
“enough” to attacks on diplomatic missions, “enough”
to conspiracies and to the use of assassination as a
means to extend influence, intimidate, impose one’s
will or divert attention from internal power struggles.

The draft resolution comes after we all witnessed
the increasing number of attacks and assaults on
diplomatic missions and on individuals who enjoy and
are protected by diplomatic immunity in several parts
of the world, including missions to the United Nations
themselves. Saudi diplomatic missions and diplomats
have faced several direct and indirect attacks in various
locations, including attacks on Saudi consulates in the
Islamic Republic of Iran a few months ago. At that
time, my Government sent a note to the SecretaryGeneral to inform him about the incident and to
strongly denounce such unwarranted actions.

My country and other sponsors have prepared an
objective and balanced text for the draft resolution.
Despite all of the available evidence pointing to the
involvement of a specific State and a specific entity in
the assassination plot, according to the documented
confessions of the accused detainee, which are
substantiated by other evidence, the draft resolution
neither condemns nor accuses a specific State or
individual. I repeat that the draft resolution neither
condemns nor accuses any party. It is limited to
stressing a series of basic principles, which I will now
summarize.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-59970 (E)

*1159970*

A/66/PV.61

First, the draft resolution condemns terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. Secondly, it condemns
attacks on diplomatic and consular missions and on
diplomats. Thirdly, it condemns the plot to assassinate
the Ambassador of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the
United States. Fourthly, it encourages all States to take
necessary steps to prevent, on their territories, the
planning, financing, sponsorship or organization or
commission of terrorist acts. Fifthly, it calls upon the
Islamic Republic of Iran to comply with all of its
obligations under international law and to cooperate in
bringing to justice all those who were accused of
participating in the plot to assassinate the Saudi
Ambassador.
Some may wonder why we mention the name of
the Islamic Republic of Iran in a call for cooperation in
bringing the participants in this conspiracy to justice.
The answer is simple. The name of the Islamic
Republic of Iran came out in the confessions of the
main suspect in the plot. Simple justice demands that
we give the Islamic Republic of Iran the full
opportunity to clear its name and prove its innocence if
it is not involved in the plot.
The truth is that there are only two possibilities.
Either Iran is certain of its innocence and can refute all
accusations against it, in which case it has only to
respond confidently and calmly to the allegations as
soon as possible, or else Iran — or one of its agencies
or citizens — was in fact involved in the plot, in which
case it is only natural for it to deny its involvement and
try to evade assuming its responsibilities in this.
Some may ask, “Is a suspect not innocent until
proven guilty?” We answer clearly, “Yes”. We
emphasize in the draft resolution that we are not
accusing any party nor do we presuppose the guilt of
any party. We simply stress basic principles and call for
cooperation. Likewise, some may protest, “Why not
wait until the accused are brought to trial and the
courts reach a verdict?” Our answer is that cooperation
with the investigation should precede a trial and that
another key suspect is still at large and cannot be tried
without the cooperation of Iran in bringing him to
justice.
Others may ask, “Why involve the General
Assembly in a matter that concerns only two States?”
Our answer is that the Charter of the United Nations is
the fundamental reference governing international
relations, especially in issues of international peace

2

and security. The United Nations has adopted a
comprehensive strategy to combat terrorism, and the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons,
including Diplomatic Agents, and other principles and
instruments of international law exist to establish
agreed and civilized norms for international relations.
Keeping silent about violations of those norms only
erodes the pillars of international diplomacy and does
damage to all principles of international relations.
My country does not seek to harm Iran or any
other country. My country considers Iran, its close
neighbour, heir to a great civilization. Our two
countries have close and longstanding bonds of
geography, history and cultural heritage. My country
opens its borders and its heart every year to tens of
thousands of Iranians who visit the holy places in
Saudi Arabia, where they are welcomed with
hospitality, respect and care. My country does not want
to be a party to any conflict with Iran or any other
country, unless it is in a matter that threatens the
security and safety of my country, the Arab Gulf region
and the Middle East. My country only seeks security
for its diplomats and its diplomatic and consular
missions. Is that too much to ask?
Mr. President, I appeal to you to put our draft
resolution — which is sponsored by more than
55 Member States — before the General Assembly for
a vote. Furthermore, I respectfully ask all Member
States to vote in favour of the draft resolution for the
sake of the security and protection of all diplomats and
all diplomatic and consular missions around the world.
I specifically call upon the Islamic Republic of Iran,
with deep respect and love, to vote in favour of the
draft resolution, because any other action on its part
will only reflect a lack of confidence in its own
position in this matter.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to introduce amendments to draft resolution
A/66/L.8, contained in documents A/66/L.11,
A/66/L.12, A/66/L.13 and A/66/L.14.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, Mr. President, allow me to reiterate the
appreciation of my delegation and myself of the
excellent way you have conducted the business of the
Assembly’s current session. I also thank you for giving
me the floor to express my view on the draft resolution

11-59970

A/66/PV.61

before us and to introduce the amendments that we
have already submitted.

resolution as it stands now, and to agree with the
amendments that we have proposed.

Before going further, I will say that I listened
carefully to the statement made by the previous
speaker, the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia. Of course we
are very confident that the Islamic Republic of Iran has
not been involved in any action like the alleged plot or
in terrorist acts in the United States or anywhere else.
We have been trying to be, and we have been, a source
of stability in the Persian Gulf in various countries.
That is our strategy in foreign policy.

As I said the other day, of course, under Article
10 of the Charter, any issue can be raised by Member
States in the General Assembly. However, it is evident
that placing allegations, as well as hypothetical and
unsubstantiated matters, on the Assembly’s agenda
would cause enormous damage to its credibility and
authority.

Mr. President, I have already sent you a letter,
copied to all my colleagues, in which I expressed the
essence of our views on this draft resolution and which
provides the rationale for its amendment. I also had the
opportunity to lay out and elaborate on our legal
arguments against it in the informal meeting held last
Wednesday — a meeting that I found very useful in the
sense that a number of colleagues had the opportunity
to explain why this draft resolution, as is, could not be
acceptable to them, either, and needed to be amended.
As I have already explained, our fundamental
difficulty with the draft resolution lies in the simple
fact that it is based on nothing but an unsubstantiated
claim by one Member State with a long history of
animosity against my country, which claim my
Government has already strongly rejected. The essence
of the claim has also met with strong doubts around the
world, including among the elite in the United States
and even many former United States officials. Under
such circumstances, it is mind-boggling how such a
pure and simple allegation could serve as the
foundation of a draft resolution brought to the floor of
the Assembly. Such an action is truly unprecedented in
the history of the General Assembly and, as such,
should be rejected, no matter which country is the
target.
As I stated at the Wednesday consultations, the
draft resolution explicitly implicates my country in the
alleged plot. In so doing, it prejudges the outcome of
the case immeasurably. It is very unreasonable,
therefore, as well as unfair, to expect Member States to
adopt a draft resolution based on an unsubstantiated
allegation, thus siding with a judgement passed in an
unwarranted manner against another Member State and
undermining the United Nations Charter. That is why
we request our colleagues not to support the draft

11-59970

If members of the General Assembly allow the
draft resolution to be adopted without amendment, the
Assembly runs the risk of setting a dangerous
precedent, and it could turn into a venue for settling
political scores and advancing narrow political
interests. Consequently, we believe that no matter who
is the target of the draft resolution, all Member States
that are attached to and hold dear the principles and
objectives of the United Nations should resolve to
counter it. That is another strong rationale for
amending the draft resolution.
The political context prevailing between my
country and the prime mover of this draft resolution —
the United States — is quite revealing of the intention
behind it and the claim made on 11 October, as well as
the media hype that followed. While the 1953 coup
d’état lies at the origin of the animosity between the
Iranian people and the United States Government, the
hostilities directed by that country against my nation in
recent decades date back, in fact, to 1979, when the
Iranian people chose to be the masters of their own
affairs. Widespread political and economic pressure by
the United States against my country over the past
many years, including unilateral sanctions and the
threat of aggression, are fully known to every
colleague in this Hall.
The allegation that now forms the basis of the
draft resolution is yet another plot, not against the
Saudi Ambassador but against my country, and another
step along the same well-known path. Against that
backdrop, it should not be acceptable to any of us for
the General Assembly, too, to be used for advancing a
political agenda against a Member State.
Unfortunately, diplomats of many countries and
United Nations international civil servants have been
the target of many terrorist acts and have, in fact,
perished in recent and past years. A number of Iranian
diplomats, too, have lost their lives after being targeted
by terrorists. Unfortunately, many of our embassies and

3

A/66/PV.61

missions, including my own Permanent Mission in
New York, were attacked and ransacked just a few
years ago. In another case, after more than 30 years, we
have yet to find any clue as to what happened to our
four diplomats abducted in Lebanon by the Zionist
regime.
Many other Member States have also been the
victim of terrorist attacks against their officials and
official premises. Nonetheless, we do not recall that
they ever tried to raise such a specific issue in the
General Assembly. The question now is why a pure
allegation would have been placed on the Assembly’s
agenda.
The ways and means of dealing with such cases
are well defined and established. Cooperation among
countries is chief among them. Targeting countries in
multilateral forums is counterproductive and amounts
to damaging the environment in which cooperation
should be upheld and promoted.
I urge those who support the draft resolution not
to help an accusatory tendency to grow in the United
Nations. It would be a very dangerous game that
undermines the credibility of this important
international body if, in future, no one can prevent
anybody from bringing such strange ploys and
accusations against another country. If we want to do
that, we will have many such cases. Many
representatives have had such experiences in the past.
The credibility of the General Assembly is on the table
today. Such a tendency, if unchecked, will have an
adverse impact on all regions, thus eroding confidence
and creating tension in international relations.
We have already expressed the position of my
Government in regard to the allegation in the three
letters that I sent to the Secretary-General. We
categorically rejected the involvement of any Iranian
official or agency in the alleged plot. Moreover, we are
fully aware of our obligations under relevant
international legal instruments, including the 1973
Convention, and we affirm our full commitment to
fulfilling such obligations.
While requesting once more that our colleagues
be extremely cautious with respect to the consequences
that this action by the Assembly could have for the
future work of the United Nations, allow me to turn to
our amendments. We have here an opportunity to bring
this draft resolution back onto the right path, in which
case our delegation would also join it as a sponsor,

4

namely, by stressing the 1973 Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against
Internationally
Protected
Persons,
including
Diplomatic Agents, which we fully support, instead of
targeting a particular country. The amendments we
hereby present to the Assembly are composed along
those lines. We thus propose to turn the draft resolution
into a text that addresses criminal acts attempted
against all internationally protected persons in general.
Therefore, in the light of the preceding, in our
first proposed amendment, contained in document
A/66/L.11, we propose that the seventh, ninth, tenth
and eleventh preambular paragraphs be deleted. The
seventh preambular paragraph refers to a totally
peaceful and restrained demonstration in front of the
Saudi Arabian consulate in Meshed, where no accident
occurred. The ninth and tenth preambular paragraphs
contain references to two accusatory letters that seek to
implicate my country in an alleged plot. In addition to
recognizing the vagueness and lack of clarity
surrounding the so-called plot, as I explained
previously, my colleagues should note that allegations
are taken here as facts. My point here applies to all
other references to the so-called plot in this draft.
Therefore, we propose that those three preambular
paragraphs be deleted.
In our second proposed amendment, contained in
document A/66/L.12, we propose the deletion of the
thirteenth preambular paragraph, which refers to an
assassination plot as if it were an established and duly
adjudicated case.
In our third proposed amendment, contained in
document A/66/L.13, we propose the deletion of
paragraph 3. Here again, the General Assembly would
be invited to concur with a claim that has yet to be
substantiated and run its logical judicial course.
In our final proposed amendment, contained in
document A/66/L.14, we propose to amend paragraph 5
to read as follows:
“5. Calls upon Member States to comply with
all their obligations under international law,
including the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of Crimes against Internationally
Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents.”
Members will note that in document A/66/L.14, the
phrase “including Diplomatic Agents” is not included

11-59970

A/66/PV.61

in the paragraph 5 to be amended. I insert it orally
here.
In amending paragraph 5, as we propose, the
General Assembly will avoid taking up an issue among
parties to the 1973 Convention relating to the
interpretation or application of the Convention, which,
based on article 13 of the Convention, is outside the
competence of the General Assembly.
Let me close by expressing our gratitude for the
Assembly’s patience and our confidence that the
Assembly will, as always, put the interest of this
Organization above any other transient consideration. I
also would like to thank, in advance, all distinguished
colleagues who supported us the other day and who
will support the amendments that I have just
introduced.
I would ask that that the Assembly take action on
our proposed amendments, A/66/L.11, A/66/L.12 and
A/66/L.13 together as a unit, and thereafter take action
on A/66/L.14 separately.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before we
consider draft resolution A/66/L.8 and the amendments
thereto contained in documents A/66/L.11, A/66/L.12,
A/66/L.13 and A/66/L.14, I would like to remind
members that the discussion of agenda item 118 will be
held at a later date to be announced.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of
procedure, the Assembly will first take action on the
amendments contained in documents A/66/L.11,
A/66/L.12 and A/66/L.13 together, and then take a
decision on A/66/L.14 separately, as proposed by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on the amendments contained in documents A/66/L.11,
A/66/L.12 and A/66/L.13. Recorded votes have been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Chad, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Nicaragua, Somalia, Syrian Arab Republic,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and

11-59970

Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Sudan, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Vanuatu, Yemen
Abstaining:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, China, Comoros, Dominica,
Fiji, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Kenya, Liechtenstein,
Mongolia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Russian Federation, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Serbia,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uruguay, Zambia
The amendments contained in A/66/L.11,
A/66/L.12 and A/66/L.13 were rejected by 96
votes against to 11 in favour, with 43 abstentions.
[Subsequently the delegations of Chad and
Somalia advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote against.]
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now take a decision on the amendment contained
in document A/66/L.14, as orally revised.
A recorded vote was taken.

5

A/66/PV.61

In favour:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Nicaragua, Somalia, Syrian Arab Republic,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro,
Morocco,
Netherlands,
New
Zealand, Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Sudan, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Vanuatu, Yemen
Abstaining:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Chile, China, Dominica, Fiji, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Liechtenstein,
Mongolia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Serbia,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uruguay, Zambia
The amendment contained in A/66/L.14, as orally
revised, was rejected by 94 votes against to 12 in
favour, with 45 abstentions.

6

[Subsequently the delegations of Chad and
Somalia advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote against.]
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to those representatives wishing to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Valero-Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela is firmly committed to the fight
against terrorist acts, wherever and by whomsoever
they are committed, regardless of their motivations or
objectives. That is why Venezuela resolutely supports
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Venezuela further condemns any act of
aggression against an internationally protected person,
which is why my country acceded to the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against
Internationally
Protected
Persons,
including
Diplomatic Agents. That is also why my country
understands the concern of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia over the possible threats and attacks against its
diplomatic officials. We therefore hope that an
expedited, impartial and fair investigation will be
carried out into the reported events and that the
responsible parties, if there truly are any, will be duly
punished.
Venezuela has been the victim of aggression
against its diplomatic and consular missions. On
23 August 2011, the diplomatic missions of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in Tripoli were
attacked. The irrational attackers were attempting, and
publicly so proclaimed, to assassinate the Venezuelan
Ambassador, Afif Tajeldine, who was accredited to that
brother country. On that occasion, an armed and violent
mob endangered the lives of the people inside and
caused substantial damage to our facilities.
On 26 August, our diplomatic mission denounced
to the Security Council and in a note that was
circulated among all countries of that forum
(S/2011/544, annex), the attack carried out against our
diplomatic facilities accredited to the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and sought a pronouncement from the
United Nations, which, unfortunately, was never
forthcoming.
Attacks against internationally protected persons
are of the utmost seriousness and should be
categorically condemned. The perpetrators must be

11-59970

A/66/PV.61

brought before the appropriate courts and tried, while
being granted all of the rights of due process provided
for in international law.
Last month, the United States authorities alleged
that they had uncovered a plot whereby men linked to
security forces in Tehran had contracted a hired killer
to assassinate the Saudi Arabian Ambassador to the
United States. Today, draft resolution A/66/L.8 has
been presented to the General Assembly. The draft
resolution seeks condemnation of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, without any reliable evidence having been
presented or even due process followed. Floating
politically motivated distortions and propaganda, the
idea is being hawked that the authorities of that
Muslim nation underwrote or were otherwise involved
in the alleged plot.
The Bolivarian Government justifiably protests
that the real intention of the draft resolution is to
condemn the Islamic Republic of Iran a priori for
supposedly having plotted against the life of an
internationally protected person. There is no evidential
proof, nor is any process under way, as provided for by
international law, to find the perpetrators in the case.
We are struck by the fact that the condemnations
come chiefly from the very same intelligence services
that baselessly alleged that Iraq was in possession of
weapons of mass destruction. They are the same
intelligence agencies, in the service of political and
military strongmen, that daily invent lies to promote
globally the political, economic and military interests
of an imperialist plutocracy. Based on just such lies
that country invaded Iraq, where it carried out the most
heinous acts of State terrorism in the history of human
civilization.
This draft resolution resorts yet again to the
expedient accusation of terrorism in an unjust attempt
to stigmatize a country. Yesterday it was Iraq. Today it
could be Iran or any other sovereign country
represented in the General Assembly. We deplore
attempts to use this organ to carry out the designs of
imperialist powers. We deplore attempts to use the
General Assembly to harass any country that dares to
disagree with imperialist Powers. By using the fight
against terrorism as an excuse to drive forward a
campaign of politico-military domination we have
jettisoned the hard-won consensus that was reached by
the Member States in agreeing on a common strategy
in the fight against terrorism.

11-59970

It is not within the jurisdiction of the General
Assembly to rule on whether or not a country abides by
international conventions in the fight against terrorism.
There are other specific conventions and instruments
that lay out the appropriate procedures for that.
We believe that adopting this draft resolution
could do great damage to this body. It would set a
dangerous precedent encouraging any country to
introduce
biased,
politically
motivated
draft
resolutions, leading to never-ending confrontations that
would degrade the dignity of the Assembly. As we have
done repeatedly in the past, we call on members of the
Assembly not to let it be turned into a tool in the
service of imperialist policies.
For those reasons we support amendments
A/66/L/11, A/66/L.12, A/66/L.13 and A/66/L.14,
proposed by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, to make the draft resolution
we adopt be one about general principles.
Allow me to conclude by stating that our
delegation rejects in the most firm, categorical terms
the draft resolution as it was first presented by the
delegations that presented it.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba’s position on terrorism is unequivocal. We clearly
and unambiguously reject and condemn it in all its
forms and manifestations. We reject all terrorist acts,
no matter against whom, and no matter where they are
committed, including those in which States are directly
or indirectly involved. Cuba also emphasizes the
importance of guaranteeing full protection for all
diplomatic missions and their personnel anywhere in
the world.
In fact, our country’s diplomatic missions have
been victim to terrorist acts, attacks and provocations,
and Cuban diplomats have been attacked and even
assassinated, including the Cuban diplomat Felix
García Rodriguez, shot in broad daylight on the streets
of New York on 11 September 1980. Cuba’s position
can clearly be seen in the security enjoyed by foreign
embassies based in Havana and their diplomatic
personnel, a fact that is recognized by all, including the
Government of the United States itself.
Cuba understands all too well the concern of
Saudi Arabia for its diplomatic personnel’s security,
and we categorically believe that those concerns and
any others on the part of any State about the security of

7

A/66/PV.61

its foreign representatives and diplomatic staff need to
be properly dealt with, so as to ensure that impunity
simply does not exist.
In the specific case brought up in draft resolution
A/66/L.8, which we are considering today, the truth is
that the General Assembly does not have the
information necessary to examine the issue seriously,
deeply or objectively, nor do we have the evidence that
would be required to lay responsibility for the deeds on
the authorities of any one country. The General
Assembly should act with maximum care and
prudence, because a pronouncement by this body on
such a sensitive subject could have significant future
consequences, both political and legal.
Adopting draft resolution A/66/L.8 could damage
the credibility of the Assembly, because it is not
consistent with the legal principle of the presumption
of innocence, recognized by international law and the
vast majority of national judicial institutions. That
would be tantamount to handing down a sentence
against a country before an impartial court rules, or
before we have to hand the results of independent
investigations, in line with relevant international
treaties. In the current circumstances, we do not
believe that a decision in that case against a certain
country would meet the minimum standards of due
process.
At this time, even in the United States’ own
courts, there has been no sentencing of those
individuals allegedly responsible for the plot.
Furthermore, the main source of information on that
incident stems from the United States Government,
whose reliability does not meet the minimum standards
of credibility. It is sufficient to recall that that same
source affirmed that there were weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq, a lie that was used to justify the
aggression that caused the death and injury of hundreds
of thousands of innocent people.
Moreover, the country accused by the United
States of involvement in the plot against the Saudi
Ambassador in Washington has categorically denied
such accusations in letters addressed to the General
Assembly and the Security Council, affirming that the
allegations were false and without any foundation.
Therefor Cuba believes that the draft resolution
under consideration today does not contribute to the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. In a spirit of cooperation among

8

States and other bodies seeking a comprehensive
response to the scourge, Cuba has always upheld and
will continue to support the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. We firmly believe in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and in the non-use or threat of
use of force. Therefore, we call for dialogue and
negotiation.
For these reasons, Cuba will vote against the
draft resolution “Terrorist attacks on internationally
protected persons”, contained in document A/66/L.8.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Nicaragua reiterates its strongest
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including State terrorism, to which
Nicaragua has repeatedly been victim, with the loss of
thousands of human lives and the destruction of our
infrastructure and economy. Those terrorist acts
compelled my country to resort to the International
Court of Justice, which ruled in favour of Nicaragua
and against such terrorist acts.
We will take action today on draft resolution
A/66/L.8. We share its basic concern over the global
fight against terrorism. Given its importance, we
believe it should have been of a universal nature, and
not have singled out any country. Furthermore, as it
contains allegations and accusations against one
Member State for which there is no credible evidence,
and particularly as no competent international judicial
body has considered and ruled on those allegations, an
attempt is being made to compel the General Assembly
to take a decision on a situation with which we are not
familiar.
That pressure leads us to several questions. Is this
draft resolution politically driven to achieve certain
results, sounding war drums, as the media in developed
countries have reported, against the Islamic Republic
of Iran? Given the importance and the standing of the
issue, resolutions on terrorism are adopted by
consensus. Now there is an attempt to end that practice
so that all States are divided and in opposition over this
important matter. We also wonder why there was not
the same pressure in cases of terrorist acts carried out
by professed terrorists, such as the terrorist Posada
Carriles and others, who move about freely in certain
developed cities and are known by all.
Nicaragua shares the concern of a great many
countries that believe we face a scenario in which the
great Powers promote military solutions instead of

11-59970

A/66/PV.61

strengthening and giving priority to the peaceful and
lasting settlements of conflicts. Prudence and the
necessary wisdom should prevail so as to bring about
political dialogue that makes it possible to establish a
climate of friendship, peace and stability in that region
and in other parts of the world.
Nicaragua, on account of its principled position,
will vote against the draft resolution, which in its form
and substance will not contribute to the global fight
against terrorism. This draft resolution will only
exacerbate tensions and hostility among peoples. Is
that the aim of the General Assembly? We reiterate our
call for good sense and a political solution.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Last month
the United States disrupted a terrorist plot to
assassinate the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia to the
United States. That plot did more than just target the
Ambassador of a single country. It struck at one of the
most sacred principles governing relations among
States — the safety and protection of diplomats. Every
single member of the international community has an
interest in forcefully condemning such heinous acts.
Given the nature of the plot, it cannot be seen as
just a simple criminal act. Attacks on internationally
protected persons have long been understood as
emblematic acts of international terrorism.
The United States therefore strongly supports and
co-sponsored Saudi Arabia’s draft resolution A/66/L.8
to deplore that plot. The resolution will send the
message that attacks on internationally protected
persons are unacceptable. While it expresses our
collective abhorrence at the known details of the plot,
it also restates and reinforces principles that are
essential to the functioning of diplomacy. It is a
measured and appropriate response.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for giving us the floor to
explain our vote on the draft resolution contained in
document A/66/L.8, entitled “Terrorist attacks on
internationally protected persons”. Kuwait, one of the
sponsors of the draft, refused to accept the amendments
thereto because to do so would have defeated the entire
primary purpose of the draft resolution.
The draft resolution is a message from the
international community reaffirming its deep concern
at the plot to assassinate a member of the diplomatic
community. The draft does not accuse any individual or
country, nor does it contain any condemnation of any
State.
The State of Kuwait, on more than one occasion,
individually or through the regional and international
organizations to which it belongs, has expressed its
condemnation of the plot to assassinate the
Ambassador of Saudi Arabia, and expressed its
solidarity with the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in
connection with the terrorist acts targeting the
Kingdom, including crimes against diplomatic
missions or internationally protected persons.
Convinced of our commitment to enhance
international cooperation to combat terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, we believe that voting in
favour of the draft resolution represents yet another
opportunity to reiterate our commitment and strong and
decisive condemnation of terrorism, wherever and by
whomsoever committed and for whatever purposes. We
must take appropriate measures as required by
international law to prevent the plotting, financing or
sponsoring of terrorist acts, and all those who commit
such acts must be brought to justice.
We therefore call on all Member States to vote in
favour of draft resolution A/66/L.8.

A fair and transparent judicial process is now
under way in the United States to prosecute one person
arrested in connection with this plot. If adopted, the
resolution will directly support that process by
promoting international cooperation to bring to justice
all those who are responsible.

Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): My
country has condemned, in a number of international
forums, terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. It
also condemned the heinous plot targeting the
Ambassador of the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

In the meantime, we cannot let that plot go
unanswered. To do so would suggest that acts such as
this are within the bounds of acceptable behaviour to
resolve international conflicts. I urge all colleagues to
vote in favour of this important draft resolution.

This morning, the Assembly unanimously
adopted a draft resolution on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. With the
establishment of the United Nations Centre for
Counter-Terrorism, we are of the view that

11-59970

9

A/66/PV.61

comprehensive international efforts should now be
focused on combating terrorism.
My delegation is a sponsor of draft resolution
A/66/L.8, entitled “Terrorist attacks on internationally
protected persons”. The draft is an important one, as it
seeks to strengthen international cooperation to combat
and prevent terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. It also reiterates that respect for the
principles and rules of international law governing
diplomatic and consular relations is an essential factor
in ensuring normal relations among States. My
delegation will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution and calls on all Member States to do the
same.
Mr. Archondo (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of Bolivia,
like Nicaragua, Venezuela and Cuba, condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
wheresoever committed. But even as we condemn
terrorism, we must also agree that the presumption of
innocence remains one of the fundamental elements of
law at both the national and international levels.
What we have before us is an accusation, an
ongoing investigation, and a set of clues. But the
investigation has not been concluded; there has been
no ruling. The draft resolution that is up for adoption in
the General Assembly today states that the Assembly is
deeply concerned at the plot to assassinate the
Ambassador of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the
United States of America. The information we have
received regarding this plot has been made public, but
we still do not have a definite ruling on this. There is
no proof. The accused party has stated publicly that it
is not involved in any conspiracy or assassination plot.
We therefore have contradictory versions, making it
extremely difficult for the General Assembly to take a
decision in this regard.
We believe that we are prejudging the situation
and rushing into a decision. Bolivia wishes to recall
that the presumption of innocence remains a key
element, and that until it has been shown that this was
an organized plot, we must believe in the innocence of
those who stand accused in this international forum.
In addition, there is a need for a neutral
investigation, supported by all necessary elements, in
order to arrive at a definitive decision. We believe also
that it would be a very bad precedent for the General
Assembly to react prematurely to facts that have as of

10

yet not been fully ascertained. It is for these reasons
that our delegation rejects this sort of practice and
hopes that this does not recur in future.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): It has long been a
core principle of the international system that for the
smooth conduct of relations between States, diplomatic
representatives must be accorded certain freedoms and
protections. Diplomats must be allowed to go about
their tasks without let or hindrance. Above all, a
diplomatic should not be subject to attack on his or her
person, freedom or dignity.
All that has been codified in many customs and
conventions, most fully in the 1973 Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against
Internationally
Protected
Persons,
including
Diplomatic Agents, which protects, among others, any
representative or official of a State. That includes just
about everyone in this Hall. The Convention protects
us as we go about our business on behalf of our
respective countries. Without that, the conduct of
diplomacy will suffer.
The allegations in respect of this incident are
extremely grave. They disclose prima facie evidence of
a conspiracy to commit an act that violates the
fundamental norms of international diplomacy, and that
requires firm international condemnation. That
evidence has already attracted statements from the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the Arab League. For those
concerned about precedent, there are past examples of
the General Assembly speaking out on specific events.
The alternative is to allow such allegations to go
unremarked. The alternative is to allow any lack of
cooperation to go uncensored. That should not be an
acceptable course to any body of diplomats, let alone
one as universal as the General Assembly.
This draft resolution does not assert that the
allegations are proven. That is a matter for another
time and another place, nor does the draft judge the
culpability of any individuals or States. It simply refers
to the allegations, and seeks only the cooperation
already required of any State party under the
Convention, thus supporting the current judicial
process. New Zealand supports the call for full
international cooperation in disclosing all the facts and
bringing the perpetrators to justice. My delegation will
therefore vote in favour of draft resolution A/66/L.8. If
we do anything else, we fail to speak out for and
protect the diplomatic tradition of which we are a part.

11-59970

A/66/PV.61

The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/66/L.8, entitled “Terrorist acts on
internationally protected persons”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of draft
resolution A/66/L.8, and in addition to those
delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have also become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Federated States
of Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Palau,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Sudan,
Spain, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
and Yemen.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/66/L.8.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chad, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Egypt,
El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,

11-59970

Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Sudan, Spain,
Sudan, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against:
Armenia, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bangladesh,
Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Chile,
China, Comoros, Gambia, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Liechtenstein, Myanmar,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru,
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Serbia, Singapore, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uruguay, Viet Nam
Draft resolution A/66/L.8 was adopted by 106
votes to 9, with 40 abstentions (resolution 66/12).
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): Egypt shares the
concerns of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which
initiated the resolution just adopted, and stresses the
importance of ensuring the full protection, security and
safety of internationally protected persons, including
diplomatic and consular missions and their
representatives, as well as representatives and officials
of international organizations. Egypt further condemns
in the strongest terms any terrorist attack wherever and
by whomever committed.

11

A/66/PV.61

My delegation voted in favour of resolution 66/12
in full conformity with the statement issued by the
League of Arab States on 13 October, and taking due
account of the statement by the Gulf Cooperation
Council on 12 October on the same issue. In the
meantime, Egypt reiterates that its support for the
resolution should be interpreted as support for the
importance of investigating all alleged violations
relating to the security and safety of any internationally
protected person and bringing the perpetrators of such
acts to justice — including in the case at hand
presented by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia — through
an impartial, open and transparent legal process and
with the full cooperation of the States concerned, in
conformity with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations and in full observance of the
supremacy of the rule of law.
Mr. Meetarbhan (Mauritius), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
In that regard, Egypt reiterates that the legal
framework governing the prevention and punishment
of crimes against internationally protected persons is
clearly identified in the 1973 Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against
Internationally
Protected
Persons,
including
Diplomatic Agents. The Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, on the other hand, is a separate political
framework for maximizing international cooperation
against terrorism. The references in the resolution to
those two different frameworks should not compromise
the integrity of each individual framework and the
different legal status of the obligations each contains,
nor should they overshadow the well-established
biennial resolution adopted by the General Assembly
entitled “Consideration of effective measures to
enhance the protection, security and safety of
diplomatic and consular missions and representatives”,
which should remain the chief means of dealing with
such issues in future.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to reiterate to the Assembly that the Government
of the Sudan condemns all forms and manifestations of
terrorism, particularly those committed against persons
enjoying international protection, including diplomats,
whatever their citizenship or country of origin. We
denounce in the strongest terms the attempt to
assassinate the Saudi ambassador to Washington, D.C.,
and we look forward to the day when the transparent
judicial investigations clear all the facts.

12

The delegation of the Sudan does not support the
incrimination of any country without sufficient and
substantiated legal evidence by specialized judicial
bodies. My delegation would like to reiterate that this
resolution should not set a precedent and should be
understood in its proper context.
In conclusion, the delegation of the Sudan
reiterates the need for cooperation among all Member
States in combating all forms and manifestations of
terrorism.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China abstained in the voting on resolution 66/12,
entitled “Terrorist attacks on internationally protected
persons”. We oppose all forms of terrorism and always
stand for compliance with international law and the
basic norms governing international relations in
handling State-to-State relations, as well as for
effective protection of the safety and security of
diplomatic personnel.
The present case is highly complicated and
sensitive, and parties still have different views of the
issue. Any conclusion or action must be based on
comprehensive, impartial, objective and transparent
investigation and on substantive evidence. Before the
facts are out, parties should adopt a prudent approach,
refrain from jumping to conclusions and avoid taking
any action that may complicate or worsen the situation.
China hopes that the countries concerned will continue
to appropriately address the issue through dialogue and
that they will make joint efforts to maintain peace and
stability in the Middle East and in the Gulf region.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil reiterates its
unwavering commitment to fighting terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. Brazil is a party to the 1973
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons,
including Diplomatic Agents. We call on all States to
fully comply with the obligations under the
Convention.
Brazil abstained in the voting on resolution 66/12
because it has doubts on whether the United Nations
should address an alleged involvement of a country in
a terrorist plot in the absence of concluding evidence
and without observing the presumption of innocence.
Based on the principle in dubio pro reo, the United
Nations should exercise the utmost caution when
appraising situations that are sub judice. Situations

11-59970

A/66/PV.61

such as the one before us could be dealt with through
judicial means on a bilateral basis.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation resolutely condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We are
firmly attached to the fight against terrorism, in
keeping with the norms and principles of international
law. We are seriously concerned with the rising
terrorist threats and the increasing frequency of
terrorist acts around the world, including against
embassies, United Nations staff and diplomatic
personnel.
With respect to the resolution just adopted, we
unquestioningly support condemnation of acts of
violence and the call on States to cooperate in the fight
against such acts. We take international cooperation in
this sphere very seriously. However, the text of the
resolution includes a number of provisions that we
consider problematic from a legal standpoint.
The tenth preambular paragraph and paragraph 5
could be easily interpreted as an accusation against
Iran that it has not complied with its international
obligations and that it has refused to cooperate with the
countries concerned. Documents have been distributed
at the United Nations in which States take different
positions on the issue. Disputes of this kind between
States can and should be settled through the established
legal mechanisms, above all those contained in the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons,
including Diplomatic Agents, of 1973. The General
Assembly should have called upon all interested
Governments to settle this dispute in the appropriate
forum.
Moreover, the examination by the court of this
alleged plot has only just begun. Therefore, during the
legal proceedings it is very important to observe the
generally accepted principle of presumption of
innocence. In this situation, given the serious doubts,
the resolution just adopted by the Assembly violates
that principle. These concerns prevented us from
supporting the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
have the honour of clarifying, on behalf of the
delegation of the Principality of Liechtenstein as well
as my own delegation, Switzerland, the decision to
abstain, after the voting process.

11-59970

First let me emphasize that Switzerland and
Liechtenstein firmly condemn terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, whoever the perpetrators are and
whatever the locations and the motivations. The 1973
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons,
including Diplomatic Agents, is a key convention in
the fight against terrorism. We are fully committed to
it. It goes without saying that all States parties to that
Convention are under an obligation to bring to justice
the presumed perpetrators of attacks against
internationally protected persons. They are likewise
obligated to contribute as best they can to the outcome
of the criminal proceedings.
Nonetheless, our delegations did not feel it
appropriate to vote in favour of the resolution.
We understand that the assassination attempt
against the ambassador of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia to the United States will soon be examined in a
court of law, as it should be. But precisely because we
value those proceedings, we do not believe that the
General Assembly should be called upon to comment
on them.
Likewise, if the resolution just adopted is
intended to address a dispute between States
concerning the application of the 1973 Convention, the
General Assembly does not appear to us to be the
appropriate forum. Article 13 of the Convention
provides that States may submit such a dispute to the
International Court of Justice. Again, it would appear
that the most appropriate institution to deal with the
subject matter of our resolution would be a court of
law, which, it should be noted, is empowered to issue
provisional measures to preserve the rights of each
party, if necessary.
It is for those reasons that Liechtenstein and
Switzerland decided to abstain in the voting on the
resolution.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): India is a State
party to the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected
Persons, including Diplomatic Agents, of 1973. We
strongly believe that crimes against diplomatic agents
and other internationally protected persons, which
jeopardize the safety of such persons, create a serious
threat to the maintenance of the normal international
relations necessary for cooperation among States. We
take our obligations under the Convention with the

13

A/66/PV.61

utmost seriousness and call upon all States parties to
comply fully with the provisions of the Convention in
letter and spirit.
India has been a victim of terrorism for decades.
We condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We have been in the forefront of global
actions on counter-terrorism. Our tireless efforts as
Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee established
under Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) have
resulted in the United Nations adopting a zerotolerance approach to terrorism. We urge all Member
States to strive for the strict implementation of this
approach.
Today, however, we have abstained in the voting
on the resolution, as its substance deals with a specific
case in which we are not in the possession of all the
facts and the matter is sub judice.
Mr. Roman-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation requested the floor to explain its
abstention in the voting on resolution 66/12, which the
Assembly has just adopted.
First, we would like to reiterate that Peru
unequivocally condemns all acts, forms and
manifestations of terrorism. No circumstances can
justify them, and their perpetrators must be prosecuted
and brought to justice, without exception. In this
undertaking, the cooperation and commitment of the
entire international community is essential, as it is only
through united efforts that we will be able to eradicate
this scourge, which has caused such damage and loss
of life.
Allow me to recall that for Peru terrorism is not
something distant. For nearly two decades we suffered
under internal, national terrorism that caused the loss
of thousands of human lives and a great setback in the
socio-economic development of my country.
As soon as the international community learned,
through the print media, of an alleged conspiracy
against the life of the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia to
the United States, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Peru issued a press release in which it expressed its
total condemnation of that act, rejected it and indicated
that it hoped that the relevant appropriate legal
measures would be taken immediately, in conformity
with international law, so that the facts could be
investigated.

14

Secondly, I wish to reiterate that Peru
energetically condemns any act that could endanger the
safety and security of missions, diplomatic agents and
consular representatives.
We believe that before the General Assembly
could pronounce itself in a specific manner on the
aforementioned circumstances, further elements of
information were needed. For that, it would have been
necessary to await the outcome of an inquiry and the
conclusions reached by the judicial authorities. That
would have enabled us to understand the scope of the
acts and identify responsibility in order to place them
into due context, given the nature and legal scope of
those acts, thus enabling us to take the suitable steps.
Peru believes that the resolution that was
submitted and adopted reflects a legitimate concern
that, as we stated previously, we share fully. We are
prepared to support these concerns unequivocally.
However, there are substantive reasons reflected in the
resolution that, we regret, caused us to abstain in the
voting.
Finally, Peru calls upon all States to lend their
effective cooperation in accordance with their
international obligations and in full accordance with
international law to ensure that the alleged acts can be
duly investigated.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
condemns all acts of terrorism under any
circumstances, and in particular all acts perpetrated
against internationally protected persons, including
diplomatic agents. Consequently, my Government
expresses its firm rejection of the assassination attempt
against the Saudi ambassador in Washington, D.C., and
calls for the full implementation of all obligations
contained within the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected
Persons, including Diplomatic Agents, and in other
relevant international instruments.
Chile abstained in the voting on resolution 66/12,
although we share the spirit and consider valid the
purpose of the resolution — to preserve the physical
integrity of protected persons, as well as the
inviolability of diplomatic and consular missions and
their representatives. That is the framework within
which the international community must undertake all
efforts to prevent terrorist acts that seek to attack
individuals and protected goods.

11-59970

A/66/PV.61

We support, and would have been an advocate of,
a general pronouncement in this sense. We believe that
in order for the international community to issue a
pronouncement on a specific situation, it would not be
advisable to pass judgement on acts without input from
judicial authorities or their decision, which is still
pending.
We conclude by reiterating our unequivocal
condemnation of all terrorism acts and call upon all
States to comply with international law and with the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Ms. Rodríguez-Pineda (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala vigorously condemns all acts of
terrorism, including those aimed at diplomatic and
consular missions and their representatives. However,
on this occasion we abstained in the voting on
resolution 66/12 because we think it is not in the
purview of the General Assembly to pronounce itself
on an alleged act when the circumstances have not
been fully established. That could be a precedent that,
to our mind, is not proper.
Mr. Saripudin (Indonesia): Indonesia is of the
view that providing security guarantees for diplomatic
personnel and agents is the obligation of every country
in working towards the objective of strengthening
friendly relations and accomplishing internationally
agreed objectives. Indonesia therefore supports efforts
to enhance international cooperation in protecting
diplomatic personnel and agents. At the same time,
Indonesia also condemns in the strongest terms all acts
of terrorism, including those directed at diplomatic
personnel.
We support the investigation of the specific issue
addressed by resolution 66/12 and call upon the parties
concerned to lend their full cooperation. However, we
believe that the fact that the text refers to a specific
case that is under investigation by singling out a
certain country as a responsible party will prejudge the
efforts being undertaken. Indonesia therefore abstained
in the voting.
Mr. Chua (Singapore): Singapore strongly
condemns all acts of terrorism. We have been
following this particular case very closely and with
great concern. The targeted assassination of a diplomat,
who enjoys protection under international law,
threatens the very foundation of international
diplomacy and thus has implications for all countries.
The implications could be particularly serious if the

11-59970

plan was indeed State-sponsored. It is therefore in the
interests of all concerned countries to cooperate fully
with the investigation to clarify the circumstances of
the plot and to ensure that those responsible are
brought to justice.
However, until investigations and the judicial
processes on the case are completed, it is premature for
the General Assembly to pronounce on the matter. For
that reason, Singapore abstained in the voting on
resolution 66/12.
Mr. Pham Vinh Quang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam
has consistently maintained that international law
governing diplomatic and consular relations and
relating to internationally protected persons must be
duly respected and implemented. We condemn
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Viet Nam suffered a terrorist attack against one of
its diplomatic missions. We therefore share the concern
of countries over attacks against diplomatic personnel.
However, we are of the view that all alleged attacks
must be duly investigated, in accordance with judicial
standards. Therefore, Viet Nam abstained in the voting
on resolution 66/12.
Ms. Williams (Grenada): Grenada fully supports
the principles of diplomatic and consular inviolability.
We support policies and actions to combat global
terrorism, and we support the Charter of the United
Nations. Further, Grenada stands in solidarity with all
persons, Governments and States that are victims of
terrorist actions. In that sense, we stand in full
solidarity with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Although we supported the principle and the
spirit of resolution 66/12, Grenada abstained in the
voting, preferring a more general and, legally speaking,
less premature resolution. Abstention on this resolution
does not diminish Grenada’s full support for the
principles outlined above. Grenada’s vote should be so
understood. We continue to support continuing efforts
for international cooperation to counter and to combat
terrorism.
Mr. Srivali (Thailand): While abstaining in the
voting on resolution 66/12, Thailand reaffirms its
utmost respect for and adherence to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as the principles and rules of international law
governing diplomatic and consular relations.

15

A/66/PV.61

Furthermore, as a State party to various
conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism,
including the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected
Persons, including Diplomatic Agents, Thailand
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
including acts of violence against diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I now give the floor to the representative of Saudi
Arabia.

16

Mr. Al Oyaidi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish to express my gratitude and appreciation to all
those States that co-sponsored and supported resolution
66/12. It will certainly contribute positively to meeting
aggression against any State Member of the United
Nations or its
representative.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
118.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

11-59970
