V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

7. Further emphasizes that the new international
development strategy should also ~ontain spec~c
measures and actions to meet the special and pressmg
problems of the land-locked, island and most seriously
affected developing countries;
8. Emphasizes that, in order to launch the 1_1ew
international development strategy on a sound footmg,
it is of fundamental importance that the current an_d
projected negotiations and conferences under_ the _aegis
of the United Nations system on the ma1or m~ernational development issues relating to the estabhshment of the new international economic order be
completed speedily and successfully;
9. Decides that the results of the conferences and
meetings relating to the establishment of the new international economic order should be given full consideration in the preparation of the new international
development strategy;
10. Also decides that, for the purpose of achieving
the objectives set out in paragraphs 1 to 9 above: t~e
new international development strategy should, w1thm
the framework of viable, consistent, specific, quantitative and qualitative goals and objectives-both over-all
and sectoral-define the role of, and where appropriate contain, agreed commitments of all countries,
expressed in quantified terms or in a time framework,
or in both, for the adoption and implementation of
policy measures to achieve the above goals and
objectives;
11. Stresses that the new international development strategy should take fully into account that
colonialism, imperialism, neo-colonialism, interference
in internal affairs, apartheid, racial discrimination and
all forms of foreign aggression and occupation constitute major obstacles to the economic emancipation
and development of the developing countries and peoples and therefore must be eliminated without delay;
12. Decides that the new international development strategy should envisage appropriate arrangements for reviewing the progress in its implementation
and its possible adaptation in the light of new needs
or developments, while fully adhering to the ultimate
achievement of the international development strategy
within the decade;

II
l. Decides to establish a Preparatory Committee
for the New International Development Strategy, which
should be provided with the necessary conference
facilities and should hold an organizational session
early in 1979 at United Nations Headquarters;
2. Also decides that the Preparatory Committee
shall be open to the participation of all States as full
members and shall be responsible to the General
Assembly and report to it through the Economic and
Social Council;
3. Requests the Preparatory Committee to establish
its programme of work and calendar of meetings in
such a manner as to be able to submit to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session, through the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1979, a preliminary draft of the new international
development strategy, with a view to finalizing it in
time for its adoption in 1980;
4. Invites all States to participate actively in the
work of the Preparatory Committee and to make an

123

effective contribution to the formulation of the new
international development strategy;
5. Stresses that, in order to establish a solid basis
for the preparations, research and planning for . development within the framework of the United Nations
system should be geared towards the above-mentioned
objectives;
6. Invites the Committee for Development Planning to take fully into account in its future work the
new international development strategy in accordance
with the objectives set forth above;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the
Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation with the responsibility for
providing over-all guidance, orientation and co-ordi_nation for the contributions of the relevant secretanats
of the United Nations system to the formulation of
the new international development strategy and submit
relevant documentation in this regard to the Preparatory Committee;
8. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization and the executive heads of
the other organs, bodies and organizations of the
United Nations system to co-operate fully with the
Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation in fulfilling his task in connexion with the formulation of the new international
development strategy;
9. Requests the executive secretaries of the regional commissions, as appropriate, to bring their
respective regional experiences to bear on the preparation of their inputs to the formulation of the new
international development strategy, taking fully into
account the different levels of development and differing development situations of their respective
regions;
10. Requests the United Nations Secretariat, in the
light particularly of its responsibilities regarding interdisciplinary research and analysis as well as technical
co-operation, the regional commissions, the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
the United Nations Environment Programme, the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities and the specialized agencies, including the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, as well as the International Atomic Energy Agency and other organizations in the United Nations system, to contribute
effectively to the preparatory work for the new international development strategy by providing inputs,
including relevant documentation, in accordance with
the objectives set forth above.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979
33/194.

Multilateral development assistance for
the exploration of natural resources

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session.

124

of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 197 4 containing the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362
(S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and
international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolutions 3175 (XXVIII) of
17 December 1973, 3336 (XXIX) of 17 December
1974, 3516 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 and
31/186 of 21 December 1976 on the permanent
sovereignty of States over their natural resources,
Emphasizing the need for specific measures to support the efforts of developing countries in the exploration and development of natural resources,
Cognizant of the importance of natural resources
exploration and development to the economies of the
developing countries,
Recognizing the need to ensure an adequate flow
of investment into the natural resources sector in the
developing countries, in particular from the developed
countries,
Noting that several developing countries desiring
to do so have been unable to undertake systematically
the exploration and survey of their natural resources,
Recalling its resolution 32/176 of 19 December
1977,
l. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on multilateral development assistance for
the exploration of natural resources;176
2. Requests the Secretary-General to organize and
undertake, in co-operation with the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme, missions
to developing countries that so request to assist in
the assessment of the needs of those countries in the
field of natural resources exploration and development,
including an estimate of the costs involved, taking
into account the proposals made in paragraph 13 of
his report, and to report to the General Assembly at
its thirty-fourth session on the progress achieved in
this undertaking;
3. Takes note of the findings of the intergovernmental Group of Experts on Mineral and Energy
Exploration in Developing Countries as transmitted
by the Secretary-General in his report;177
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in
consultation with the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme, to consider the advisability of adjusting the operating procedures of the
United Nations Revolving Fund for Natural Resources
Exploration, taking into account the views set out by
the Group of Experts in paragraphs 87 to 92 of its
report178 and the basic principles of the Fund;
5. Invites the World Bank to explore ways in
which its activities in financing natural resources can
be made increasingly responsive to the needs of developing countries, and to examine whether new approaches would be useful, taking into account the
views set out by the Group of Experts in paragraphs
176 A/33/256.
177 Ibid., sect.
178 A/33/256,

II.
annex.

80 to 86 of its report, 178 and bearing in mind the
sovereignty of States over their natural resources;
6. Decides, in the light of the importance for developing countries of the transfer of the technologies
required for natural resources exploration and exploitation, that the Committee on Natural Resources and
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development should review the recommendations concerning
the transfer of technology in the natural resources
field;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep developments in the field of exploration and development
of natural resources under review and to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a
report on the experience gained in the activities mentioned in the present resolution.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979

33/195.

Economic co-operation ainon~ drveloping countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 197 5 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolutions 3177 (XXVIII) of
17 December 1973, 3241 (XXIX) of 29 November
1974, 3442 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, 31/119 of
16 December 1976 and 32/180 of 19 December 1977
as well as resolution 92 (IV) of 30 May 1976 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,1rn
Noting the programme of economic co-operation
among developing countries adopted at the Third
Ministerial Meeting of the Group of Seventy-seven,
held at Manila from 26 January to 7 February 1976, 180
Noting also the decisions taken by the non-aligned
countries on economic co-operation among developing
countries, in particular the Action Programme for
Economic Co-operation adopted at the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19
August 1976, 181 and also the relevant decisions of the
Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries, held at Belgrade from 25 to 30
July 1978,rn2
Noting further the measures set out in the report
of the Conference on Economic Co-operation among
Developing Countries, held at Mexico City from 13
to 22 September 1976, 183
179 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.TI.D.10
and corrigendum) part one, sect. A.
LRO Ibid., annex V, annex I, resolution l.
L81 See A/3 I/ I 97, annex III.
1s2 See A/33/206.
183 See A/C.2/3117, part one.
