CONTENTS
,%,.
I Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2082)

.. . ... ... .. . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

Stakmtltlt by the Presiderlt
EXpression of thanks to the r
_,

Adoption of the agenda

..

Thc-Situation in Namibia

,

..

zz=z= _

Page

1

............................

1

..ldent ........................

1

. . . . . . . . . ..*........-.I.....

1

,. ,. .. .....,.. .... ... .. ... ..

1

Document

symbol:

s

y\1. /$oszi

copy
available

Best

The situation in Namibia

’

4. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Angola, Benin, Mali, Senegal, South Africa, Sri
Lanka and the Sudan, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion., In accordsnce with
the
usual practice I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite th& representatives to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in conformity with the
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

psKuf; The representatives
of the followirlg St:ttes:
gb, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia,
France, Gnbon,
gi>mny,Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
” h, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingof Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Statt‘s
&3, VerleZllela.
:,d’nG
‘#*
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2082)
,‘;u:
:*
a:“?’
4 ‘.
$iJoplion of the agenda
.,rr%
,-I,*
k situation in Namibia
:,,.

5. There being no objection, I invite those representatives
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the usual understanding that they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table whenever
they wish to speak.

Statement by the President

At the invitation of the Presicietzt, Mr. LIIIYMI/Uand Mr. de
Figueiredo (Angola), hlr, Boya (Benin), Mr. Kantc (Mali),
Mr. ,!$~lIu (Senegal), Mr. R. E Bo tha (South Africa),
Mr. Gooncrarrle (Sri Iankuj and Mr. Derrg (Sudan) took the
pkrces reserved for them at the side of the CoitrzciI ckunher.

FRESIDENT: I should like first, 0n behalf of the
h$d, to welcon~e the presence at the Council table
“‘? of& Escellency Mr. L,ouis de Guiringnud, Minister
” i::vi# Affairs of France, Fiis Excellency Mr. FfarIshzih ccnscller
Vice-Chancellor
and Minister for
‘%&fl Affairs of ;he Federal Republic of Germany His
~~~~n~ the Right Honourable
David Owen & P
W’~iratyof State for Foreign and Commonwealth’ Afhiii
!hl,.,
e&ZLUnited Kingdon
and His Excellency Mr. Cyrus
::“8 &Wary of State’of the United States of America.

6. The PRESIDENT: I should also like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
27 July from the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia which reads as follows:

[~!$Q(l’d alsO ].l,
1-e t 0 welcome His Excellency Brigadier
*&’ ‘* Carba Men&r of the Supreme MiIitary COUZ~C~I
pMal
Envoy
’
Plenipotentiary
of the l-lead of tht:
,l’.“fhiiliW Govrrrunent of Nigeria.

“The Security Council is now considering the question
of Namibia. I wish to convey to you the desire of the
United Nations Council for Naznibia’.to participate in this
debate, without the right to vote. Fqc this purpose, the
Council for Nmlibia will be represented by a delegation
headed by myself as President of the Council, ?and
including the three Vice-Presidents of the Council.”
7. On previous occasions, the Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other appropriate United
Nations bodies in connexion with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. It seems appropriate to me to
proceed, if there is no objection, to extend an invitation,
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, to the
President of the United Nations Cotmcil for Namibia and
the rest of the delegation of the Council.

Adoptiorl of the agenda
8. The PRESIDENT: 1 wish to inform members of the
Council that 1 have received a letter dated 27 JllIy from the
1

1

15. The SfiCRETARY-GENERAL: The ?t
’ ccurity cc&p
hasjust lakcn a historic decision..The complex qucslio;~
Namibia has been a special responsibility of the OI&
zation ever since it was founded 32 years ago **
agreementnow reached here to impfcment the t . fz
[:f
peaceful solution will enablethe people of the T erllis
.trjr;Et
Cm
exercise their inalienable right to selFdeterminatIOn.&f
independencein accordance with the purposesand
h
ciplcsof the Charter of the United Natjans.
,’“:
16. I have taken careful note of the task entrustedto iki
and I wish to assurethe membersof the CouncilthatIr;l
exert every effurt to carry 3t out in the fullest andwi
expeditiousmannerpossible.

&&we,I]le undcrsigncd members of the Securjty Council,
have the honour to rccluest that the Council should
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to h4r. Sam Nujoma, President of the South
’ west Africa People‘s Organization (SWAPO), during the
course of the Council’s consideration of the situation in
Namibia.” /s/l2 794.f
9. lf I hear no objection,
agreesto the request.

I shall take it that the Council

It MUSso dcridcd.

17. In keeping with the Council’s decision, I intrr,$pl
appoint Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, the United Nationsc’,zy
missioner for Namibia, my Special ReprescrltatircF
Namibia. Mr. Ahtisaari will lead a mission ~}~j,-~~ ,&‘i
proceed to Namibia within a week to conduct a sukti ai
the arrangementsnecessaryfor the implementation0{i
Council’s resolution. I expect that the missionwal c.:yl,
plcte its task within two to three weeks. Onthe basJlf;,q
r
findings, I shall then submit ta the Council detailed;‘ybi,,
for attaining the objectives set forth in the propou\f :I
settlement[s/12636/.

10. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council finds itself
today at a hisioric juncture in its consideration of the
question of Namibia. For more than 30 years, the United
Nations has sought to bring about the self-detcrrtzination
and independence!-of. Namibia. We arc on the threshold of
accomplishing this .laudable task It is an honour and a
pleasure for me, ~~rponally and as the rcprcsentative of
Canada, to preside over the nlceting of the Council which
will take the first of two steps envisaged to put into effect
the proposed settlement agreed upon by the principal
interested parlies. 1 should like to add that it is with deep
regret that my Secretary of Slate for External Affairs is not
ableto be with us this afternoon.

18, I am deeply mindful of the jmportancc uf ‘;::
CouJ~ci]‘sdecisiontoday. It setsinto motion an estrr._
c]~:Jl]cqing
OperatiOIl
of jmmcnsescope,Which\vjll I;:*l;,j.
tax the resourcesof the Secretariat aS well as.‘:‘,,4
organizationsof the United Nationssystem.Its WCC
require
the firm support of all Member States.Above
demandsthe full caoperation of all the partiesdim
CoJlcerned,1joi with the ~Ourld
bl W&g
t]leJn
h?$b#
their best efforts to\vurds the achicvemcntof inclqm~. I#
by Namibiaat the earliestpossibledate.

11. I should like to call attention to the two draft
resolutions in documents S/12792 and S/13793 and to the
documents listed therein.
12. I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/12791,.

19. In closing.
-. 1 should like to express my sTr:1&
appreciation to the partiesthemselvesfor the cor~strx:.
j>i
attitude they have shown. My gratitude goesto tt .:i
membersof the Council who havelabouredsolircfcssl~
~94
devotedly to achieve the agreementreachedheret&k 1
would also pay a tribute to the African leaders**-*di
invaluable efforts have contributed in such a de,i%+
manlier to the successfuloutcome of the negotialiunl. ,~
I’

In {IIVOIAI.: Bolivia, Canada, China, France, Gabon, Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Sfatcs of America, Venezuela.
&uhf:

None,

Abs\ai,ling:
Republics.

Cxchosloirakia,

F
Union of Soviet Socialist

20. I am convinced that the attainment of a pca~*flJ~?~
just solution to the Namibianproblem will havea ,,i:L;
jmpact on the remaining problemsof southernAft@ ;
will also strengthen the confidence of the internl~~+!
community in the United Nations itself,and providA?.,~
a<$
“I-“I:
hope for the future.
:p

13. The PRESIUl3VT:
1 shall now put to the vote the
draft rcsblution contained in document S/l 2793.

21. Mr. VANCE (United States of
mSpici0uS
occasion in the history 0
and in the work of the
painstaking diplomatic
milny countries and organjz3tions,
N7tions itself we are, as you have sqid, Mr. PrcbiibFr;b,%
tlie threshold’of a peaceful scttlement’gf a Prublcrr’
asold asthe United Nationsitself.

14. The I’Iil~SlL)~NT: I have been informed that the
Secretary-Generalwishes to make a statcmcnt, and I now
calloil him,
-1 SW1~5olutioti
4.71(1978).
1
2 !h rc$nluiioll432 (1978).

77

The issueof Nalnjbja was first raisedat t/g ’
%tions in 1946, rind the inability of the world @fl’
2

.

tI, eOnle to an internationally acceptable solution to this
p,jbl,,rn has over the years posed an increasingly serious
,hrc;rt to the peace and stability of southern Africa. TO&I)‘,
i. by dint of hard work
and goodwill, WT 113~ finally set in
n#rtion the process by which Namibia will achkve
indepen‘+adden,.e
peacefully and in accordance with Security Council
,tsolrrtion 385 (1976). In terms of the purposes of the
,~Unttcd Nations and the history of this problem, it is of
I prdmourlt importance that this process should take place
a Factfully and through direct participation of the United
;+tiens, I am pleased that the United States and other
Vwcstarn members of the Council have been able to play a
#& ln what has been achieved.
“#
$33, It would be incorrect to single out any one country or
+erOup of countries. Many countries have made a contriit is fair to say that each contribution was in its
vital and essential to the success which has been
In the final analysis, this diplomatic achievement
to the United Nations itself. It has provided the
for a Namibia settlement, served as the focal point
negotiations leading to the settlement agreement
now providing the mechanism for its implemen&btlun. Secretav-General
Waldheim, whose support and
g$!vice has been invaluable throughout these negotiations
l&k! who will have to see this process through to its
$inclusion, merits our particular gratitude.
To the Government of South Africa and the South
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) we must
ss our sense of appreciation for their pursuit of a
ful solution to Namibian independence and their
wss to join with the members of the Council in
1Qking
diligently towards that goal. To the front-line
I3
.“!lean States, without whose assistance this conclusion to
i,‘Gsf efforts would have been impossible we must express
t;j”?r’ gratitude and our belief that in facilitating a peaceful
!@tdzn~ent in Namibia they have made a major contribution
‘ire Peaceand stability of Africa as a whole, We also wish
1:” fJll attention to the positive role which other parties in
gr::ribia have pl ay ed in this endeavour.
“a,~

Settlement

By

opening

a

new

chapter

in

“The Genera1 Assembly will have noted that we have
omitted from our proposal the difficult question of
Walvis Bay for the reason that we see no way of settling
the question in the context of&z present negotiations.
We feel strongly, however, that the issue should not delay
the long-sought-after independence of Namibia, We consider that all aspects of the question of Walvis Bay must
be subject to discussion between the South African
Government and the elected government of Namibia. We
have, furthermore, obtained assurances that the strength
of the South African force in W&is Bay will not be
increased during the transitional period and that
Namibians in Walvis Bay will be able to participate in the
political life of the Territory during the transitional
period, including by voting in the elections”3

the

“%“‘rY Of Namibia’ we also open a new chapter in the
‘,::: Of the Unitkd Nations. The world body will now
:.+ * ” the impetus for the emergence of a newly indepen! ’
nation. By approving this p ro posal for Namibian
rrsndenc% at one and the same time we vote for an
a and we take a step to strengthen the
ef the United Nations and its ability to respond

/a*
is‘(% “’ Prublems that confront

,,, :,

28. From the beginning of our efforts to assist in the
achievement of independence by Namibia in accordance
with resolution 385 (1976) our Governments have been
conscious of the strongly held views of the Parties
concerned on the status of Walvis Buy. Since’ these opposing
views appeared to be irreconcilable, the five Governments
decided to take the position that they would not include
any provisions on this question in their proposal for a
settlement of the Namibian situation. Consequently, the
terms of the proposal which we submitted to the Security
Council on 10 April [S/12636/ contain no mention of
W&is Bay. This does not mean that we have no views
cancer ing this question. We adopted our position in
r
recognrtion of the fact that no proposal on Waivis Bay
appeared to be capable of acceptance by the parties.
Indeed, we were acutely aware that an effort to resolve the
question in the context of our proposal would make
agreement on the proposal impossible, Thus, in our
discussions with the parties we did not seek to initiate a
substantive discussion of this issue. We emphasized to all
concerned our belief that a discussion of the legal status of
Walvis Bay would not be useful and could only continue to
hamper a resolution of the 30-year controversy
over
Namibia. Instead, we stated on a number of occasions that
the question of Walvis Bay would have to be the subject of
negotiations between the parties concerned because we
recognize, and we believe all parties recognize, that Walvis
Bay is critical to the future of Namibia.
29, In this connexion, I should like to reiterate what the
Secretary of State for External Affairs of Canada said when
he spoke in the General Assembly during its ninth special
session, on 25 April. Mr. Jamieson said:

In nV Government’s view, the importance of what has
’ achieved has implications which go far beyond the
aibia Problem itself. The successful resolution of this
.:,,’ ‘“ational issue can encourage solutions for other press;>‘:; irr~blerns ofAf rica, particularly in the *case of Rhodesia.
spirit of goodwill and compromise exi t“rc i,,:dthe
b same
h
y t e parties in Namibia could create a basis for a
Ei”‘ful

27. I should nbw like to make an sdditionaI statorneln on
behalf of the Governments of C:III:I~;I, tire Federal Republic
of Cerrnany, France, the Unitctl Kin&orn and the Llnitrd
States about the resolution on Walkis Bay which has been
adopted by the Council.

30. Since that time, our Governments have given further
consideration to this difficult question. We have confirmed
our position that we do not wish to enter into disputes of a
legal characte~~concerning the various claims as to the status
of Walvis Bay: Nevertheless, we recognize that there are

the world community.

3

arg“,,,, alll~ of a gl:ograpliic. plitjcn!, social, culttm! and
a,jmj&faiiVe nature which support the union of Walvis
gay with Namibia. Our Governments have also taken due
note of Ihe fact Ihat political parties in Namibia hold the
view that Waltis Bay must be part of an independent
Namibia.
31, ,ql these considerations lead t0 the COJlC!lISiOfl
that
it
Security
Council
should
adopt
a
js appropriate that the
resolution which calls for “the initiation of steps necessary
of Walvis Bay into
to ensure the early reintegration
Namibia”. Thjs resolution does 1l0l p1’ejudice the legal
positjon of any party. It does not seek to coerce any party.
F,,~our part we should like to state our understanding of
ouJ role wit11 respect to the future of W&is Bay. The
commjtment of our five Governments, our undertaking by
votingjn favour of this resolution, is to stand ready to offer
he djplomatic support of our Covernmnts
to achieve the
objective
sf a successful negotiation. We view our undertaking as consistent wj,th the fundamental principle of the
Chafler of the United Nations that disputed questions are
to be settled peacefully. We consider that the “steps
necessary”, re.ferred to in’ paragraph 2 of the resolution, are
aegotjatjons between the ‘two partics directly concerned.
Accordingly, we shall encourage negotiations on th.iS
subject between the Government of South Africa and the
government of Namjbja that will be elected in accordance
with our proposal for a settlement of the situation, and we
are pleased to note that the Government of South Africa
has publicly indicated its readjness to enter into such
discussjons.
32. We hope that the adoption of tllis resolution wil.l make
a positive contribution. In our view the support of the
Security Council in resolving this question is entirely
appropriate in view of the rcsponsjbilitjes which the Charter
bestows upon this body. Our Governments pledge to exert
our best efforts in order to promote the achievement of an
early, peaceful and successful result to the negotiations on
Valvis Bay for the mutua1 benefit of the people of the
region.
33. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD
(F rwce) (ir~tcrprctation from
fiench/ Mr. President, I should like first of a!! to greet you
asPresident of the Security Council and as Ambassador of a
Pat country with whjch we are very friendly. AVa time
when the Council is seized oi a particularly difficult
questjon,your outstanding talent, which we al! recognjze in
YOU,will be sorely needed. I am aware of’ your personal
illlercst in the question before us today. You may be sure
of my delegation’s full support and comp!etc co-operation.
34. I also wish to express my tlici~~ki
to the representative
Of Bolivia, Mr. Marjo Rolhn Anaya, who was President of
llle Councj! for the month of June and ~110 so skilfully
hded its proceedjngs.
3% The dcbatc this week jn 11~~Sccurjty Council on the
q’lestjon of Namibia represents a historical event. In
ad9tiJQ the plan for a scttlcrncnt,
the Council has
Provjded tile Organjzatjon with the nwa~~s of applying an
infernatiollally acccplable solution to one of the most
ifitrac(ablc
prchlr’~us
it has ever 1x16 to deal with, and we
aresure Ihat it will also pave tllc way for a new era irk a!! of
southern ATrica.
!

36. The qi!t4siiOil \bf h’:tr-liihia 110sbW1 1331th? :lgcPda ‘,f
the Council for almost 30 ycilrs. On 30 January 1976 t&
Council unanimously adopted resolution 385 ( 1976).‘!t ir
;
on this basjs that the Governments of Canada, France, thc _; j
Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom and tl,c .,+” ; /
United States on 10 April last submitted a proposal fart
settlement. I believe I may say that the efforts undertaken9
by those five members of the Cormci! were within [he.
framework of resolution 385 (1976) and in Conformily
with the spirit and the objectives of many resolutiorar
adopted by the General Asscrnbly on the question d
Nanlibja. I would add that the plan was arrived at aftrr
lengthy negotiations with the parties oL)ncerned, b$ i:i:
South
Africa and SWAPO, the prjncjpal Namibjan national, ;:$i
ist movement, and in close consullatjon with the Secretar,,-~‘:;~~.~
General, the front-line States and Nigeria, Gabon and ‘x0
Mauritjus, which are members of the Council, as we!! e a),
numerous other countrjes. This proposal for a peaceful uld ‘.,
democratic transfer of powers to the elected representat;,.+%
of Namibia is therefore a collective undertaking which
required an exercise in imagination and political maturity
on the part of a!!. It is onIy natural that today the plan ‘?$$
should be submitted to the Security Council to receive at ,t,2
endorsement of the international community. I should !ihe $2;
to point dut that never has the Council been seized of sudi 1 Lz;,p
complex and detailed document, nor the United Nations ,;&
entrusted with a role fraught with such heavy rcs~~~:“$
bilities. This means-and I should like here to express h ,:,y
firm position of my Government--that the United Narjonn,
to succeed in its task, will need the support,
undcrstandi!:g ,,‘tk,
and co-operation of al!. We are convinced that all ~$1 ~~:,
sjncerely wis!l to participate in this work of peace and ‘,q,
‘1:: ’
freedom.
,, .p d
4fS
‘. “f#&
37. France voted in favour of the two resolutions jug;.
adopted. In this connexion, I wish to specify that nly ,?,
delegation enljrelg subscribes to the interpretation given V;‘E
behalf of the five members of the Council by the Secretary ,;,
of State of the United States in respect of reso!uli+%~,~.,~~
84.;,,
432 (1978).
$8;,,r;
q&*

38. In agreeing to the proposals which have 110~ bccom
the plan adopted by the Council the parties concerne
aIready proved their constructive attitude. We have
note of this and we are certain that, in keeping wjtl~
commitments, they will fully contribute to the imp
tation of the plan.
39. No one is unaware that initial]>* some d
w]let]ler the Uljjted Natjons really had the capa
accomplish the task which it is about to assume;
not believe that the Organjzation was in pJ3Cti
undertake such an endeavour. we, for our part,
believed that the United Nations would be equal I
responsibilities and we have tried to convince all 11~
concerned that this was SO. The contacts which w
maintained wjth the Secretary-General have s
persona! interest which he took in the efforts
I-IC was informed of the role which might be
UJljted
Nations and we know that he has bee
with this for a long time. The Organisation 1
more, had ~(rnc cspzrience in thjs field It
played
a role in t!~ accession to indevndellce of 1
Territories. In each USC it acted COflllXfbI~t!Y
and

>$aa;-

time is of the essence. The plan which the
constitutes a pfsctictl me;m to
385 (I976),
bUt PfOltlpt 3Ction is
of Namibia have been waiting only
d to their appeal and pay n tribute
rts of all those who have striven for
edom of their country.
j >$,,
‘,, 41, (4s lor1g wso as 1975, at this very table, I myself, as
:& iplcscntative of France, proposed that general elections
8$?h&-J be held in Namibia on the basis of “one man, one
;g rptCnand within the framework of a single electoral roll for
:‘$ \hc entire Territory. It is that provision which constitutes
::, tic basic element of the plan just adopted, and this cIenrIy
that there is continuity in our action and that it is in
cardance with the principles and purposes of the
rance will continue to do everything necess:lry to
the attainment of the common goal. France will
rate in every way possible in the task now being
aken, so that justice and peace may finally prevail in
OWEN (United Kingdom): I should first of all like
tulate you, Sic, not only on your assumption of
ency, but also on your presiding over n meeting
nlay come to rank as one of the more important held
: b rllc Security Council.

independent with the help of thr Chlited Nations, through
negotiation and c’ompronlise.
46. Above all, our action to&y has shown that even a
Problem as intrrl&lble as that of Namibia can be salved by
patience, goodwill and the process of negotiation. This’is a
victory for the concept of the‘ peaceful settlement of
disputes a~ enshrined in the Charter. We are demonstrating
today that there is an alternative to the armed struggle,
with all the bloodshed and suffcrirrg which that en tails; that
people of different views can, even while fighting each
other, still come together and negotiate for peace49. I am proud that my Government along with the
Governments of Canada, France, the Federal Republic of
Germany and the United States has been able to help Africa
resolve one of its most difficult problems. Many African
countries have contributed-many
around this table here
today. Wq have acted at times as a catalyst, but without the
wisdom and statesmanship of the leaders of the front-line
States we could never have reached this conclusion. Nor
could we have succeeded without the willingness of all
parties to work for a peaceful 3nd internationally acceptable settlement and to make conc‘essions-even on points of
important principle-to reach a compromise agreement.
50. The first resolution we have adopted today is only the
starting point of a process which will lead Namibia to
independence. It is our hope that the Secretary-General will
be able to act speedily in order to install the United Nations
transition assistance group in Namibia at the earliest
possible date, in accordance with the proposal which has
been negotiated and agreed by the parties. The task before
the Group will require great skill, good judgenent and
immense hard work, and everyone must wish the Secretary-General’s distinguished Special Representative good
luck in his task. But I am confident that the United
Nations, under the distinguished leadership of the Secretary-General, will prove able to discharge the vital role of
guaranteeing the stability and security of Namibia, at the
same time as supervising the electoral process. My Government stands ready to help in any way we can.
*

1 should say at the outset that I associate my
vcrnment with everything thrit has been said on behalf of
tee Cavernments of-the Five by my colleagues in the
,““~W\ci],
,,..,

ting in various parts of the world. The
been able to deal effectively with these
x-fire and in some cases by
g forces. But it has not always
sic problems underlying
we take the first and most
actual solution of a problem
efforts of the United Nations for

51. At the end of the transitiox period, the newly
independent Namibia will enjoy the‘ full support of the
United Nations. It will ot’ course face problems. The
question of Wdvis Bay will have to be resolved, as envisaged
in the second of the two resolutions we have just adopted.
And there will be the enormous and challenging task of the
development of the country’s substantial natural resources.
The international community will have an important role to
play in supporting the Namibian Covernrr~ent, and the
United Kingdom will play its full part in t@s vital task.

a can today look forward to
ved peacefully under leaders of
But the decision we make today has an
d the frontiers of Namibia. It is my
that a settlement of this problem will
of peace, stability and economic developide Namibia but in the whole region of

52. Mr. GENSCHER (Federal Republic of Cermany):4 It
is a great honour for me to speak in this august body for
the first time. It is a particular pleasurefor me to do SO
under the presidencyof a distinguishedCanadian.This is all
the more true asour two countriesare linked by manifold
bonds of friendship and con~moninterests. Mr. President,
your courttry has rendered outstanding services to the

t some people in South Africa will today see
atient negotiations they and their county
I community, not against it.

F

its friends. As you are aware,
European Community is at present i
Federal Republic of Germany. 1 sho
draw your attention to the declaration o
the nine foreign ministers on 25 July from which
Your permission, Mr. President, I should like to quote

i’,,iled Nafjo]ls, ~$p?~ia~~y in IlKlSt dif‘fjclllt
pcaL’e-kePpir)g
o,,eralio~ls.
)‘ou
have
greatly
contribtrted to Canada’s active
,ele in the Organization. The expericncc you have thus
pined will be of great help in solving the important
qrrestionbefore us.
$3. I should like also to pay a tribute to Ambassador
RolbnAnaYa of Boljvja, who presided OVLX the work of the
with great skill and efficiency during the month of
June.

“Having frequently expressed their support f
peaceful solution of the Namibian Situatjon
based
Security Council resolution 385 (1976) the F
Ministers of the nine countries of t
munity, meeting in Brussels, noted wi
the proposal of the five Western
members for the settlement of the Nami
been accepted by all parties concerned.
been opened to an early internati
solution of one of the major prob]erns i
Tl~s is proof that peaceful solutions to
possible. It has been done in close cothe active support of front-line States.

(o[JJJCi]

54. On behalf of the Federal Republic

of Germany,

jhQll]d

at the

]jke

to

e>;pl’eSS

my

peat

Siitishction

fact

I

that

Security
Council has, by its decision to confer a
llarrdateon the Secretary-General, created the basis for the
Ittainment of Namibia’s independence under the auspices
,f the Vnited Nations. All parties invoIved and the
sternatib&l community must be gratified to learn that the
:ondjtions for the peactful solution of a burning issue are
,ejng created, an issue *which has for a long time been a
burdenfor the people in .southern Africa--and not only for
hem. This decision taken by the Council serves effectively
e confirm the peace-kee’ping function of the United
,‘ations, to which the Federal Republic of Germany
ttaches great importance within the framework
of its
lolicy for peace and co-operation 011 a basis of partnership.
llle

‘2. /
$*yi;;
“The nine Foreign Ministers declare that, should arj ‘:,*’
internationaIIy accepted independent Namibia so rcqu~~t&:~2
the European Community and its member Slates w8’:jj,i,
prepared to render their support as far as possible t+$‘:”
“.,,,?,jfp
promote the economic well-being of the country.”
: ‘~~~~~
60. The Federal Republic of Germany
will endeavoured
assist Namibia after it has acquired its independence in ttc; .’ .;
&veloplnent of the country
on the basis of equality ~rj”‘~ ,i
partnership. We renew and reaffirm our assurance to t~&,~~~;
effect given before the thirty-second session of the Ccner&k~,~~
Assembly.

5. The fact that it was possible to achieve a peaceful
Ilution of this problem was due to the readiness for
egotiafion and compromise of all parties directlY and
idirectly involved, to their patience and their vision.
56. Even though initially the positions of the parties
directly involved were far removed from each other, thanks
1(I the good offices of the United Nations and the mediating
n,le played by a number of States, in particular also by
IImembersof the Organisation of African Unity, it was
!inally possible to reconcile their points of view to such an
extent that the way for a peaceful transition of Namibia to
independence has now been paved. In this context I should
like in particular to mention the endeavours undertaken by
the front-line States and by Nigeria.

611 As I said in Brussels on 24 July last, in my capacjtj, ~<,~;~~~~
President of the European Community, on the occasitrs~~
the solemn opening of the negotiations on the
co-operation agreerneni between the Europan Commu
and 53 developing countries from Africa, the Caribbean
the Pacific, the Community is willing to include all Afr
developing countries south of the Sahara, which h&,$
acquired their independence, in the negotiations on
extension of the Convention of Lorn& This offer
applies to an independent, internationally
recogn
Namibia.

57. The decision of the Security Council is, however, only
the first step along Namibia’s road to independenct. In the
future, too, considerable efforts will be required in order
that the people of Namibia may finally shape its future in
free self-determination and work towards the well-being of
r-ad1of its citizens. That this maY be achieved is our sincere
wish.

62. We are hopeful that the consensus and the will
co-operation as manifest in the consensus of the S~CU
Council will be kept up throughout all phases of impIcIr@“” :’
tation of the Namibia plan. We hope in particular tha
further problems and differences of opinion possibly a
among the parties involved will be settled in a spir
co-operation and not of confrontation.

58. The Federal Republic of Germany is determined
actively to support the United Nations in the impkmentatiOn of the Namibia plan in aI1 its parts. M’e shall SLJpport
!‘et~, Mr. Secretary-General, and Your Special Representative for Namibia in the fulfil~ncnt
of the mandate ass&cd
to You by the Security Council. We shall support the
United Nations in fuIfiIIing the task of ensuring gcncral and
free elections in Namibia, and we arc also dctcrmined to
make CILJ~ contribution to\vards the operational readiness
and Jllaintenance of the ~Jnitl~d Nations peace-keeping
troops.

63. As to the Security Council resolution on walvis
which has just been adopted, I fully associate mY
what has just been said by my colleague from the U
States. I should like to add that I fully associate m
with what has been said by him and by the represc
of the other States which have engaged in the initiat
me, that is to say, the lJnitcd Kingdom and Frenc
‘, ‘1
Ministers and the representative of Canada.

9. An independent Namibia \~ill, as a new member of the
international COmmunity, rcqrrire tlrc economic snpJ’or1 Of

64, We hope that Namibia will become a modd
peaceful relations and cooperation among aI1 section’
6

,>!:!,,.
‘“; (

zation process,wh[ch is now unf&lin~ in the Srcurit)
Council and through the Secretary-Cene:iJl.
n&icve a lasting settkrnrnt
of contlists not by
“;.‘k~jlow to
but only through a fair and peax~l~~
bahce
of
,;i p,m
g;klcrCstsand co-operation among all parties involved.
*,
‘E giji,The PKESIDENT: The next spt’:lkrr on my list is
T tit. Slm Nujoma, President of the South West Africa
4 fe,ple’~ OqpIlizatil~n-

hlr, NUJOI!IA: It was our understsndifrg earlier th:lt
staten~entswould precede the voting on the draft
lutions Now that the order has been revised, I should
to indicatethat someparts of our statement need to be
npd accordingly. However, the substanceof the statehasnot been affected in any way.
Once again it is my privilege and pleasure to be
or&d an opportunity to addressthe Security Council on
ucstionof Namibia.
This privilege was initially bestowed on us when I
atcdbefore this esteemedCouncil in 1971, in this very
lber, as the first freedom fighter to be so honoured.
cc then, my colleaguesand I have been making frequent
tancesto put our view acrossto the Council and to
izc the world community in support for and soli:I;$ with the stru@r of the Namibian pcoplc, under the
;:k*dcrshipof SWAPO, for national and political liberation,
ialemancipationand economic self-determination.
Indeed,I felt on that first occasionin 1971, and I feel
byevenmore intensely, that it is the inevitable historical
3“~~~%sand victories of our people in Namibia which have
BTplled
nations countries and peoples of the world to
‘(
&be and app’nciate our devotion, determination and
mitrnent,aswell asour willingnessand preparednessto
4 to sacrifice and to die in order to liberate our
“rland and to reassert our dignity and national sover‘6pty.
‘3$

Ihat the Namibian people have assumedthe direct
” ?~+Q~sibilityand duty to liberate themselvesby any and
“‘*’ ‘icnns at their disposal in particular armed struggle, is
““ ’ PJrt of contemporary &tory. This is a proved fact.
appear this time before the Security
, in our view accidental. Rather, it is a result
rs of untold su’ffcrings sacrificesand hardships
and women and childrkn--born and unborn- as
e elderly at the handsof the racist rulers of our
and their im;rialist masters,who support and abet
in the perptuation of colonial oppression, racial
tion and foreign exploitation of our country and
Without their heroism, patriotism and selfless
to pay the price for freedom, it would not have
ible for me to receive this recognition and honour.
For my own part the dynamics of the historical and
aGo insid; Namibiaand the wishesof SWAP0
ked to put on my shouldersthe respctnsibility
to represent and defend the legitimate
inalienable rights of the opplts.
’ ~Wll
_ peq-k! of
c, ant1 at ,1113tlges thr~,~lgliuur tlkc deCirll,niq
7

73. While we, in the first instanst’,bdlicve in and drtiw
coumgeand inspir,lticmfrom the g;jll:ultry amI mngnaninrity OF our own oppressedmasses
and from the patriotism
of the militants of tht: People’s Liberation Army of
Namibia, we have over the years of ~hc struggle received
m:iterial, political, diplomstic and Inkrr,ll support from the
oxrwhelming majority of the world community This has,
indeed,enhancedour integrity and s~,mdingar]dIlas further
strengthenedour own efforts to libcratc Namibia.
‘74. During the past five months, we have been extremely
pleasedto witnessand welcome, with sinsere thanks ant!
appreciation, political support and concrete, material assist
ante from the United Nations, the Organization of African
Unity, Socialist countries, from the African front-line
States and from other progressivecountries, international
organizatiofis,supportgroupsandindividuals.
75. For example,the United NationsCouncil for Namibia,
meeting in its plenary sessionsheld at Lusaka in March,
renewed its support of and co-operation with SWAP0 in
the struggle until general independence is achieved in
Namibia. Then, in April, the General Assembly met in a
specialsessionand, at the end, adopteda Declantion and n
Programmeof Action, in which the continuing specia!
responsibility of the United Notions concerning Namibia
wasunderscoredand consecrated[rtwl~rfion
S-9/2/. Thesr
documentsexpressfull support for and reaffirm unequivocal poIitica1 solidarity with and material assistanceto
SWAPO, as the sole and authentic representative of the
Namibian people. Furthermore, on 10-l 1 June 1978, the
African front-line Stales convened a summit meeting at
Luanda, also attended by my collc~guesin the Central
Committee and me. In a final comrnunicluCissuedat the
end of the summit,the African leadersstated, in part:
“The front-line States call upon the international
community to intensify their moral, political, diplomatic
and material support for the just str@e of the people of
Namibiaunder the leadershipof SWAPO.”
1c
They concluded:
“Finally, the front-line Statesreaffirm their con;&ued
support for SWAP0 and the liberation struggle of the
Namibianpeople.”
76. Only a few days ago, the fifteenth summit of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity concluded its meeting. This
was a historic gathering for a number of reasons,least of
them being the record attendance by African leaders.
RegardingNamibia, all the headsof State and Government
or headsof delegatiorlswho address4 the Assembly were
unanimousin their expressionsof appreciation to SWAP0
for having stood steadfastand unrelentingover the years in
the gallant and courageousstrugglefor the total liberation
of Namibia. Moreover, they commendedSWAP0 for its
statesmanshipand the spirit of principled flexibility it
delnonrtrated in the diplomatic dretl:i, with a view to
finding 3 neguti:\tt:;i set1km~:utfl!r NJrilij ELI \>I\ tht: bit~is of

and decisions of the Unitcld N:Jt iuns,
JCSo]lltio~~s
especp~uySecurity COUllCil
rC.SOlUtiOJl 385 (I 976). At the
end, t]le ~ssemhly unanimously adopted iwo imp~~rtant
,esolutiorlsWI Namjhia (S/12837, UJVICXJ.
The first one is a
strong,comprehensive, political resolution on al] aspects of
[he question of Namibja, in the context of the ongoing
:trug]e, and on all fronts--military,
political and diplomatic. The second one is a special reso]ution in which the
African leaders welcomed the Luanda joint communiquC
of
I2 JU]Y 1978 between SWAP0 and the reprcscntatives of
thefive Western Governments, whereby the two delegations
agreedto proceed to the Security council in order to open
the way for the initiation of the decolonization process
regardingNamibia.
&ql~,t

77. We feel it is necessary and proper ‘to put these
deve]op$ents over the last five months on record, in the
lightof what we are going to be engaged in henceforth,
.Ir
78. The Security Corrncil is now seized formally of “The
sjtuation in Namibia”. Qbviously, this meeting is most
:mportant and unpreceddnted, with regard both to the
lroblems it must address and resolve at this stage and to the
uarantees it must ensure for a genuine and satisfactory
:ttIement in Namibia.
9. Namibia is a unique and special responsibility that the
Jnited Nations has assumed in the interests Of the
olonized and oppressed people of the Terriiow. Since that
istoric decision of the Genera] Assembly in 1966-but
ven before then and certainly thereafter-the international
ommunity has taken unequivocal and fzr-reaching decisions of legal and political significance in defence of the just
rights and legitimate interests of the Namibian people.
Certain basic principles and notions have emerged over the
years during which the United Nations has been grJpp]ing
with the question of Namibja. Today, as eseJnplificd by the
references made earlier, there is over\~helming agreement
that Namibia must be free and independent, with scrupulous
adherence to the principles and notions that were
adopted and have been persistently followed by the world
community
F
80. A situation should never be allowed to occur in which
euphoria and expediency would replace political acumen
and CarCfd
administratjve planning, in order to CnSUJe 110W,
at this stage, that there will he no pitfalls, gimmicks
and
chaos late? when the process has drcady started, It will be
by late then, and the likely options are equally costly in
:erms of life and limb for the Namibian ~x’oplc :md of the
nkgJity
and the very existence of the United Nations
&elf.
.

82. During a]] the stagesof the talks, the o
r&ime employed the sn-calledtwo-track strateg
tical character assassination,
manipulation of mass
false pretensionsandpublic-relationsgimmic
presenting racist South Africa in a pos
suggestingthat it has gone a long way in
concessions.But actually, inside Namibia, t
remained intransigent and uncomprorldsing.The
and activities of the rCgimeremain contradict0
spirit of the talks and destructive of efforts t
negotiatedsettlement.
83. Suffice it to bring to the attention of the
the fO]]c)Wing
JepJCSSiVe
measures
and
acts carried out by the racist South African
Namibia dwing the period when the talks betwe
Western Security Council membersand SWAP
finding a negotiated scttlcment of the Namibian pr
were going on: first, the unilateral and illegal appoin
of the so-called AdIlliJlistntor-Gcrlcral i
secondly, on 28 February 1978, the ena
re-enactment of numerousrepressivemeasure
gency regulations-for example, AC 26 of April
under which SWAP0 leaders,membersand sympa
have been arrestedand detained;thirdly, on 4May I
wanton act of aggressionagainstthe Pea
Angola and a barbaric attack on a Nami
settlement at Kassinga,killing or woundin
Namibjans, mainly wornen,
children
and
elderly
pcrsufr,
I
fourthly, in June 1978, an illegal proclamation for
so-calledregistration of voters in preparation for spa
elections in Namibia; fifthly, the pouring of hugesums
money into the pockets of the puppetsand quislingsof
so-calledDemocratic Turnhallc Alliance in preparation
the so-called elections; sixth]y, the continued oJgaTii~r$ +
terror campaign and violence against SWAP
detentions, and intimidation of SWAP0 members
COrllJXUnity

84. Despite the fact that we agreed in good fait
proceed to the Security Council in searchof a negot
settlement, arrests and detention of SWAP0 lea&r
memberscontinue unabated.The latest in this series
re-arrest of our colleagueswho took part in the L
meeting, amon’g them, SWAP0 Secretary for F
Relations, Comrade FestusNaholo, and SWAP0 Se
for Transportation, ComradeFranz KambanguJa.
85. Even at this Iate stage,the regime is threat
withdraw from the who]e escrciscand put intO
the second track of its Strategy,
the
.x-called
sett]ement. We wish to bring tlleSe points out in o
caution that there is still much that remainsto bc
During

31. The process of exploratory talks, proximitJ* talks and
ndk.A and direct ncgotjatjons over the 1x1 1S months has
)eencumbersomeand difficu] t. II provided an opportkJJJjty
bJ SWAP0 to present, articulate and dcfcnd thy position
)f the oppressedpeople of Namibia. In this rq:lrd,
S\y,It’O
las always rind throughout sought to Jiffcrc‘nti:rlc, as a
natter of principle, between the just rights and k@tiliiate
rdrests
of olJr suffering masses,on the one hsnd, and the
lnfoundcd claims of the racist Soutli African co]onial
Swsor and usurpr, on the other.

this

debate

of

the

COIJIIC~~,

We shall

no

d

the occupati
tllreatening to withdraw or actually withdrawing
so-ca]]ed.conccssionsmade. It is misleadingto say
stage,when we are j\Jst starting the seriousbusiness
the diplomatic process,has already succeededin H
Hope is no certainty.
:b.p,
.a ,,
86. ‘1‘1,~sitm(ioJl is still prqyant \r*ith many uncerr’in!
jrnponderablesand d3ngcr%lf we are seriousab*ul
businessof so]ving the problem of Namibia in the ‘“f
the continued double-[a]k and intransigenceof the Oc’

the

\loices

of

he

spokcsm~~l

of

I

then we should not regard the problem as an
exercise or an occasion for administn tive
rimerrtation We cannot and will not entertain such an
rtaking. The lives of our people and their future and
of ouT country are at stake. We accept seriously the
nsibilitY and duty to defend and protect the safety of
$Oarrpeopteand the territorial integrity of our country.
:”
&, should this exercise end in fiasco or should it, at
jtirst, fail, the result would be tragic in either CJX for the
ipcaPtecf Namibia. Equally dangerous would be a situation
gatrr tea cover-up, in which case certain actions or intrigues
overlooked as aberrations or
i wuJd be conscientiously
;,‘dnor incidents. The result of this would be that these
!prcsumed incidents would be too numerous to be accidental and would actually become incidents of a fait
[ycempti. Here again, the victims would be Namibians.
lf it is a fiasco, the best that could be done would be
the matter to be referred back to the Council. At that
“tbc, what can and what will ihe Council do? By that time
ifis might have been lost, property damaged and untold
$r[fcring incurred. Hopes, expectations and aspirations of
j&oppressed Namibian people would, one more time, be
frustrated and destroyed The only conceivable action by
$eCotrncil would bz a resolution of condemnation.
:@. WC must think not only about present developments
I~al.dsoabout future eventualities, whether they occur by
!dedrsig
n on the part of the enemy or by default by the
%itcd Nat’rona For our part, we will not deviate from our
&red obligation of bringing Namibia to genuine indepenh?.

% 1 have chosen to go to great lengths to pet our point
:$‘fvkw en record before this esteemed Council and before
tic world assembly of conscience, And we feel strongly
.@ut these matters.
!m New I wish to comment in general terms about the
eSteraproposal contained in document S/12636. I shall
‘frairr from discussing it section by section or paragraph by
l@“graPh since the SWAP0 delegation has already indiened te its authors which sections or elements present
dffiClllties,
F’rrs.t , we u’riderstand the plan to be an effort to put
tilutien 385 (1976) into operational terms for implernenhfhl and not
an ingenious scheme to supplant that
‘$Qon.
J* Se’‘endlY, we do not regard it as a final document
“Ihich s
rncorPorates all our concerns, programmes or priri‘bks f
Or the kind of society that we are committed to
9ding in Namibia. It is a compromise plan which is, in
“lrr view, he,dv il y weighted in favour of South Africa’s
“loniat hk?rests in Namibia.
‘k

’ Third1Y, the language is deliberately so vague and
?tb’eous that it is subject to different and unavoidably
‘“fikting h t
erpretations. One area where this is partic%ly 1
gariag is with regard to the positiorr, powers,
F?uritY and ~
‘orkir:g relations betwec!ir the United
i’i”riL
spCl i rl
I<c~:~L.sc*~; t::ti~;~
atiC! ttlc ICi~il coh~riial

representative of South Africa. the so-called AdministratorGeneral. Our knowledge of thi racist rulers in Namibia and
our experiences with similar previous United Nations
undertakings lead us to believe that it is here that most,
although not all, of our concerns and apprehensions lie.
95. The success or failure of the United Nations undertaking in Namibia this time will depend on the effective
power and authority that the Special Representative must
possess
and wield regarding all stages and aspects of the
transitional administration, security measures and the conduct of the entire electoral process.
96. In this regard, we should like to restate our understanding of the role and functions of the Special Reprcsentative:
(a) He mr+st exercise effective supervision and control of
the transitional administration, all the security arrangements and the conduct of elections i,n accordance with
resolution 38.5(1976);
(b) He must have the preponderantpower and authority
to approve or disapprove any action by the colonial
Administrator-General;
(c) He must alsohave the power and authority to initiate
measurestowards the implementation of *allthe necessary
steps for transferring power to the Namibisn people in
matters such as the taking of a census,the registration of
voters, the preparation of voters’ rolls, the delineation of
electoral constituencies,the setting of the commencement
of the electoral campaigns,the date of the election and all
other aspectsof the electoral proceduresas well as the
tabulation, publication and certification of election results;
(d) He must have the final say regarding the good
conduct of the police forces and should ensure that
necessary steps will be taken to guarantee against the
possibility of their interfering in the political process.
I
‘.

97. This is the interuretation of SWAPD’sunderstanding
of the role and functions of the Special Representative
which we expressedto the representativesof the five
Western Governmentsat Luanda and it was on the basis?rf
their concurrence, amongother things, that we agreed to
proceedto the Council.
98. Fourthly, I should like to comment on the recruitment and deployment of the United Nations personnel,
especially the civilian contingent. Without in any way
seekingto interfere with this prerogativeof the SecretaryGeneral, SWAP0 wishesto state, with due respect, that it is
not enough for someoneto be an expert, without commitment to the principles and resolutions of the United
Nations and sympathy for the Namibianswho are victims
of colonialism, racism and exploitation. It is also not
enough for someoneto be well read, abstractly, about
Namibia. Book knowledge about Namibia should not
preclude the actual situation and the real conditions
prevalent in the country. There is also a problem of
attitndcs and subjective preferences.The very fact that
Namihi:l has beeri for so many years a subject of interli,l!‘>’ :I di~;~lt~: h,,.. g;;crl iri ‘r)ll:,: c{ll:I!i;r\ ttt ’ H’rtlIiL.

k /‘ttts cvcrybod>’ is JI’IOK Ls,rgcr to clccide for us tlran to
]j,len to 11s Paternalism is jusl a few drgrccs on the positive
sjde of racism or CthlJiC chauvjnisny. Both are insuliing and
despicable, and we shall without fear or favour expose and
denounce anyone who goes to Namibia with this kind of
attitude,
99. Pifthly, regarding the peace-keeping force, as the sole
arId authentic representative of the Namibian people we
expect to be consulted about its composition.
100, Sixthly, we maintain and insist that the remaining
enemy troops should be confined to one base under strict
and elaborate surveillance, to prevent them from being used
for purposes of intimidation
and repression of the
Namibian people or for aggression against neighbouring
States.
lOl.‘~This time we want to be certain that right from the
beginning everything is carefully planned and executed at
each stage with caufion and deliberation.
‘t,

102. We are willing Jo take a political risk. In the first
instance, we are confident of the political maturity of our
people in their popular desire for total liberation and
genuine independence. We also know the weaknesses and
the desperation of the enemy, which create favourable
conditions for the seizure of political power by the
Namibian people. The masses of Namibia and the militants
of the People’s Liberation Army of Namibia will, if need
be, take up arms to renew the resistance and defend the
safety of our people and the integrity of our fatherland. I
repeat: the masses of Namibia and the militants of the
People’s Liberation Army of Namibia will, if need be, take
up arms to renew the resistance and defend the safety of
our people and the integrity of our fatherland. This is our
inspiration; this is our determination.

tljerefure ~t’~.~,~::~
As t11c Scc,llity Council to mire, I\
c~unnijtljng itself lo cxl&iting the irm~l~di,,tewitI I
11rfr0,
aH;1l
of all enemy troops and administrative machinery
,
Walvis Bay, that it will be speedily and uncond*t.
1 wq
;” .i
restored to Namibia.
:
~{?,’ -1
105. In conclusion,Mr. President,I would extend to y
and to the membersof the Council our sincereappreeiati
and gratitude for this opportunity to addressthe Court
and to put our views on record. I thank you persod
Mr. President,for you understandingand goodwiII. I ho
and trust that you will steer this seriousbusinessof t
Council to a successfulconclusion that will pave the ,,,
for a lastingsettlementin Namibia.

106, We would alsoexpressour gratitude and appreciati
to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for
professional and personal commitment to assisting
efforts of the international community aimed at
realization by the Namibian peopleof their inalienable
just rights to self-determinationandgenuinejndependen~~~~~,~
:, /<
107. We congratulateMr. Martti Ahtisaari on hisappola~~~~~’
ment as the United Nations Special Representativefi+ )*-“, ,,
Namibia, wish him good luck and state our wish b “”
co-operatefully with him in the realization of the goalsani
objectivesfor which he hasbeenappointed.
108. FinaIly, I would wholeheartedly thank my Aftian
brothers the HonourableMinisters for Foreign Affairs aa.4
1
the representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and Nigeria f,,;
i
their initiative in supporting our beingheard in this debate?
“, ; :
We are confident that they wiI1 continue to back uw“’.i- 1
throughout this process, until the Security Council 1~s %”
satisfactorily completed its tasks concerning Namihb, s,,
Through them we wish also to thank the Chairmanof tie ,,l’.~.
African Group for this month and the Group asa wholeI;Y ?“’
their continued confidence in us and their gencrw
political and diplomatic support.
;, b; 1
’ +,; 1
109. Mr. GARBA (Nigeria): Mr. President, as this is &,, $,:‘I
fist time that my delegationhasspoken in the month ef asp’,;
Jdy, I should like first of all to extend to you my warn
congratulationson your accessionto the presidencyof
Security Council for this month. My delegationwelcom
Canada’spositive contribution to the searchfor a peaccfuf
settlement in Namibia and, indeed, in southern Africa ti
whole.

103. We want only to make absolutely certain, while we
can, that the independence that finally comes to our
troubled Namibia, as it inevitably must, will be the genuine
and complete independence for which our people-the past
generations and the present ones-have suffered, sacrificed
and died. The United Nations should not, cannot and must
not falter and relinquish its unique and special responsibility over Namibia until that indcpcndence is achieved. In
this respect, it is our continuing belief that the United
Nations Council for Namibia remains the only legal
authority over Narnibja until independence and must
accordingly be effectively in\loIved in the decolonization
process.In the meantime, the United Nations Council for
Namibia must continue to carry out its responsibility
towardsimplementing the nlandaic entrusted to it by the
GeneralAssembly,

110. It has been a long and difficult journey for all the
parties concerned.Now that, it is hoped, we are approach
ing the end of the journey, there is an even greaterneedfor
circumspection and sober judgement, so that Namibia’s
progresstowards independenceunder the auspices
t&$lt Nations will not be inferrupted either by
1

104. Before I conclude I wish to say something about
walvisBay. As far asthe pcoplc of Namibia and SWAP0 are
concerned,Walvis Bay is and will forever remain an integral
Part of Namibia. SWAP0 thcrcfore strongly rejects and
eerrdemnsracist South Africa’s decision to annex Walvis
Ray.WCregard that decision asilkgal, 1~~11
and void and an
act of aggressionagainstthr: Namibian people and a flagrant
violation of the territorj:il integrity of our country SWAP0

111. We should be clear in our minds as to what bs c: 1
brought about the situation in Namibiatoday and awared :&. i
the untold sufferings to which the haplesspeople
~‘1)
iJof :)‘“1
‘j,$fj
Namibia have been subjected. The manner in
Namibia washanded over to South Africa by the Leaguecf ’ i
Nations in a fit of absent-mindedness
is a lessonfor ds
mankind. The failure of the international community ovcc”I
,,
i
10

c3rs to insist upon and secure South Africa’s withom Namibia is a bl emish on everyone conccrn~d.
to rehash all the efforts and attempts by
to SCCU~C South Africa’s withir:lwal
11these efforts, no matter how genuine,
as they lacked a sense of purpose and
ination. So many lives have been lost in the fnsuing
conflict in Namibia, which could have been avoided
e international community
fully discharged its

s stage to dismiss the
stern members of the Security Council
u for a paceful settlement in Namibia. The
certainly been tough and no agreement
hed had it not been for the efforts of
mbers and the Secretary-General to
&crt pressure on the racist tigime in South Africa.
$bJarly, we wish to pay a tribute to SWAP0 for its
l&sm during these difficult negotiations. Despite very
bfut31treatment and harassment of its members, SWAPO’s
altitude to the talks has been constructive and pragmatic.

3. In light of this, we must recognize the fact that
%Po’s acceptance of the settlement proposals is an act
ljith in the United Nations and not in the South African
?Kist% It is therefore essential that SWAPO’s faith in the
cd Nations and, ipso facto, in the international
munity be not abused, It would be a tragedy for the
cd Nations if by error of commission or omission it
ould in the end prove unworthy of the faith which

More specifically, there should be no ambiguity
t the future of Walvis Bay. If necessary,clarifications
sought and obtained now about aspectsof the
s relating to Walvis Bay, It is my delegation’s
riding that Walvis Bay will be reintegrated into
asspeedilyascircumstancespermit after Namibia’s
rrsttionto independence. There should be no prevarisubterfuges on this matter. The Secretaryould be given fully authority to ensure that all
resolution 385 (1976) relating to Walvis‘Bay will
Implemented. It is only after this objective has
ecuredthat we can considerour task completed.

dangeroussituation which, if left unattended for
will certainly lead to a major world-wide
tion Men of goodwill throughout the world have a
‘Oral responsibility to ensurethat reasonwill prevail
bwe. The writing on the wall is very clear and it is
minority and unrepresentative rCgime at
to heed the warning on Zimbabwe. We therefore
Opportunity once again to call upon all the parties
ncd in Zitnbubwe to choose the path of reason and
negotiation. The alternative is a ghastly war, the

116. AS we take ;hesc initial stepstowards the decolonization of Namibia, we slw~ld not forget the series of
broken promiseswhich have characterizcd South Africa’s
behaviour.in the past. Even after having adopted today the
enabling resolution authorizing the Secretary-General to
appoint a Special Representativefor Namibia, we have a
collective responsibility to ensurethat no impediment will
be placed in the way of Namibia’sspeedy transition to
independencethrough free and fair elections.
117. We for our part will continue to give SWAP0 full
moral, political, diplomatic and material support in its
heroic and legitimate struggle for the liberation of its
country. More specifically, we standtinflinchingly with it in
its determinationto maintain Namibia’sterritorial integrity.
118. Finally, it is imperative for the United Nations, as
part of its continuing obligation towardsNamibia,to ensure
that the inqepndent electionsin Namibia will be free and
fair and that the political will of tiie people of Namibia will
prevail in the end. The SpecialRepresentativemust be given
very clear terms of reference in this regardso as to avoid
the mistakesof the past.
119. At stake, therefore, is the credibility not only of the
Security Council as mankind’s custodian of international
peaceand security but also of the Westernsponsorsof the
current initiative, who, we hope, will see the wisdom of
continuing to ensurethat both the political and moral will
of the world, as well as the aspirationsof the people of
Namibia, will not be frustrated. To do otherwise would be
to disrupt the delicately balanced arrangement.To upset
the present arrangement in the hope of making some
short-sightedpolitical gains would certainly set back the
march for peaceful transition to an independent Namibia.
120. Let us therefore resolve that, in thesecritical times,
we shall exercise fully our collective responsibility and
dischargeour obligation towards the people of Namibia.
This will requireour full commitmentynd dedication.
121. Mr. RAMPI-IUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, I should
like to congratulate you on your presidency on the
occasion of this historic meeting of the’-Council, which
marks an important point in our long deliberationson&e
Namibian question. I should alsolike to thank you for t!ie
frank and helpful manner in which you have helped to
carry us through the difficult consultationson the matter
which have been taking place this month. Your wise
guidance as the progressiverepresentativeof a Commonwealth country hasbeen much appreciated.
122. I wish also to congratulate my coIIeague,the representative of Bolivia, for the skilful and firm but courteous
mannerin which he conducted the businessof the Council
during the month of June.
123 I would also welcome to the Council my beloved
African brothers, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Africa, who all played a crucial role in achievingagreement
on the way towards a Namibian settlement. We are
honoured to have them hero and we are happy that they
can participate with ui in thrhc dcliberdtions.I bid a special
wairn welcr~rn~to nrig:!!rcr Garb:\, mclu~cr of the SLl[Jlc!lle

128. At ill? SiilllC time, it is iml~~.irtant to n,)lc tl.,
tit I;*lpp,i
<?Jli
problelns have not yet hwn %dwd.
Even as we have
decision to request the appointment of a special repr; R
tative for Namibia, there is a danger that the harr$+ ,,
people will be denied real independence and the
& (1
of free political expression. For South A
actions which, in the absence of counteractions
undermine the settlement which is now in vie
here of South Africa’s refusal to agree that Walv
integral part of Namibia, and of the campaign
dation and violence which prevents free politic
in Namibia today. The agreement reached a
weeks ago has carried us very near a settleme
problems, however, must be solved.
I .ff;“’

124.. I should also like to welcome the Foreign Ministers
:, of the Western members of the Council--the Secretary of
* State the Honourable Mr. Vance of the United States of
?TAmerica the Honourable Mr. Owen of the United King: &m, His Excellency Mr. Lob de Guiringaud of France
; and His Excellency Mr. Genscher of the Federal Republic
i: af Germany. Their tireless. efforts over these long months
;! havehelped to bring a Nanublan settlement within reach.
;i
; 125. 1 als~ salute the presence among us of my comrade
and beloved African brother, Fresident Sam Nujoma of
SWAP& to whose statement I listened with special atten: tiofl.

129. The Security Council has Gpeatedly affirmed $ ,. “’
Walvis Bay is an integral part of Namibia. Quite apart frz
historical and legal arguments, there are important re.&‘i
why it has done so. Let me remind the Council, if 1 ihq
‘4,
what they are.
a’,’
130. Walvis Bay is Namibia’s only deep-water ocean k$(‘~ ,’
Namibia would be practically a land-locked county wi:h 1
out it. There are no economically feasible alternative pfFr
The continued occupation of W&is Bay by South *h!d*
would make an independent Namibia economically
dent on South Africa. Indeed, Namibia could
economically only if South Africa were willing.
Africa would have near-complete COntJOl over Namih:e
trade. The country could be subjected to quotas v+
financial burdens. Namibia would probably be romp&d :.,.
enter into the South Africa Customs Union, about \vh&
there have already been many complaints, FurthermaR,,
South Africa would take possession of one of Namib[~$,;~,,
most important industries: the fishing industry. \Yalvis &$jl,
is the only port which can ,accommodate the large bii&z.
now used for commercial fishing. It has all fhc ? +~‘~’
processing facilities of Namibia, The continued iC
occupation of the enclave would therefore mean a subs
tial loss to Namibian national income, a 10s~ which g 11c
independent and developing country could scarcely affo
to sustain.

-'+

126. It would be prong to enter into our discussions
today without takin$ note of the importance of the
occasion. The question;pf Namibia is unique in the annals
of &e United Nations.’ As a result of decisions by the
GeneralAssembly, and d a result of the Security Council’s
own previous discussions and decisions, the Council has
assumed an important, indeed historic, responsibility-the
responsibility for taking action to end South Africa’s illeial
occupation of Namibia and for assuring the transfer of
power, by means of free and fair elections, to the people of
that Territory. In the context of the deepening crisis in
southern Africa as a whole, it is a crucial responsibility For
by our actions we can show that we can fulfil the legitimate
hopes and aspirations of the Namibian people, however
difficult that may be. Our ability to carry through with our
obligations-indeed, our determination to do so-will have
iniportant consequences for the standing of the Organization in the international community.. By bringing an end
to colonialism and ensuring a period of transition in which
there can truly be a free play of political forces, the
Security Council can reaffirm the principles of the Organization, on which the peace of the world depends. If we
should falter, it would be tragic, not only for the people of
Namibia but also for the United Nations itself-not to say
r0r the entire international community
P
127. We must therefore be glad that we have come so far
already. The commitment to a settlement, hard work,
perseverance and skilful negotiating have carried US very
near our goal. My delegation would like to express its
reco&nition and gratitude to all those involved in the
negotiations, especially SWAPO, the front-line States and
the five Western members of the Security Council; for their
efforts lo secure a settlrment. I should like also to pay a
special lrih~ite to my beloved Afro-American
brother,
Ambassador Andrew Young of the United Sates, W~OX
Personal spirit and dj*namic and sincere enthusiasm for the
service of the cause of the oppressed people of southern
Africa have certainly forced the wheels of progress to move
in the right directjon. Mr. Kurt Waldheim deserics our
dccIwst appreciation for the constant, inderatigable, quiet
)Ct nlost cffcctivc role he has played over the yearS, ever
he he assumed his almost impossible duties as Seflctary-

131. It is clear, however, that South Africa
maintain its hold on Walvis Bay for strategic rcas
has a naval base there, with the most modern
cations facilities, There are also important army
force bases. According to the most recent reports, 1
facilities are now being expanded. Several thous
are already based in Walvis Bay. Indeed, the forces
Bay are among the most modern and well equi
South
Africa has. They cjn be transported by
any point in Namibia within a few hours.
132. Thus, the possession of Walvis Bay by
creates an immediate military danger to the i
of a future Namibia A Namibian government
circumstances exist under the constant threat
vention by South Africa, whose overwh
power in the region it could hardly oppo
Nations cannot accept such a siiuation. I
Namibia to he born in such conditions. It ~a
Namibia into being and at the same time al1
so threatened.

Gemal.

12

IfS, There arc a number of other considerations wh&h
JIou!d be taken into account, but there is really IIV need
,or rurther dt’td ’ . [t is clear enough that the South African
occupat!orl of Walvis nay underrnirlcs any possibility of real
,nd~pc”denCCfor Namibia: ,;, hly delegation therefore wishes to express its concern
,ba,,t the omission of the question of Wa!vis Bay from the
.cornmuniquC issued at Luanda earlier this month. The
“guestionof \VaIvis Bay must be settled in accordance with
pious decisions- of the Genera! Assembly and of the
kgcur!ty Council. There annot be a real settlement which
does not recognize Walvis Bay as an integral part of
/,+,mibinThat is why we support the reso!ution On Wa!vis
Bayand why we regard that resolution as necessary if we
,n to begin the process of transition to majority CUlc in
INamibia, I fee! that the Council, especially its permanent
malbers, must undertake to ensure the territorial integrity
of Namibia.
r.,
,135 There is a second issue which needs to be discussed
‘here and which we must begin to resolve. That is the
‘+estion of the powers of the United Nations Special
gReprcsentntive for Namibia. I should like, if I may, to
lexp!ainwhy my delegation regards this as a critical issue.
‘136 We must remember that resolution 385 (1976),
which we are seeking to implement here, calls for the
withdrawal of South Africa’s occupation forces, the withdrawal of its administration,
the ending of repressive
$gislation, territorial integrity, the release of all political
prisoners, and free elections under United Nations supervisionand control.
137. It is understandable that in the course of long
negotiationssome concessions sllould have been necessary
Onboth sides Consequently we stand on the threshold of
,/he transition period without
having satisfied alI the
‘Conditions laid’ down in resolution 385 (1976). South
Af’ricawill gradually withdraw a!1 its troops except for a
Imallforce However, it continues to administer Namibia.
*ad it governs, in effect, through the new AdrninistratorCeacra!, a South Africln judge. Its police continue to
‘maiatain what South Africa calls law and order. Large
nafnbers of po!!ticaI prisoners are in gaol. And the
‘hdministrator-General has already begun preparations for
allelection.
138, we must examine the implications of this situation
far the achievement of the objectives of resolution
‘j(l976).
Clearly the situation is a difficult one. For
rtso’ution 385 (1976) envisages the end of South African
contro! in Namibia and the transfer of power to the
riamibianpeople It prescribes that the transfer shall take
“@ through free elections held under U’nited Nations
“Upervision and control
The drafters of resolution
38s(lg76) emphasiled &e word “control”
because they
kere aware of the need to ensure truly free elections. They
‘QC aware that elections which were controlled by South
“‘&I
e’-JUld.might be far less than free and that South Africa
b e ’ In certain circumstances, frustrate the aims of the
“Ited Nations by a guiIefuI use of power.
139
’ I do not think there can bc: any dou!>t that South
?’ ‘Odd lihc tcr ;L\g)id free electic;rls in S,~nlihia It is

we!! known that Pre;oria is strongly opposed to the ide3 of
a SWAPO-led government at Windhoek. Yet the fact
rcnuins-,and South African sources acknolvledge it-- that
SW.APO commands the loyalty of the vast m:~jority of
Namibians. Free elections would lead inevitably to a
WM’O victory, that is, to a result which is apparently
anathema to the Pretoria racist r&gimr.
140. The difficulty we confront now, the difficulty which
remains, even after long months of negotiations, is that
South Africa is still in a position to prevent truly free
elections in Namibia. And there is ample evidence that it is
seeking to use the power it has to frustrate the aims of the
Council.
141. I should like to indicate briefly why my delegation is
alarmed about the present situation in Namibia. In thz first
place, South Africa has created a political grouping in
Namibia, the so-called Democratic Tumhalle AUiance
(DTA), which has already organized an intensive electoral
campaign. The Alliance is closely tied to South African
interests. According to numerous press reports, it receives
funds not only from South Africa but also from Europe. It
is believed to be spending something in the order of
400,000 rand per month. It is well known that South
Africa is actively seeking to ensure an electoral victory for
the Alliance in order to ensure the protection of its
interests in Namibia.
142. It is worth noting that Namibia” citizens are being
more or less dragooned into the Alliance. It was recently
reported that at one missionary hospital DTA men were
distributing party cards to incoming patients, telling them
that if they did not take them they would not be treated.
Elsewhere in Namibia, people have been threatened ,with
the loss of cattle, Fnsions and jobs if they refuse to join
the Alliance
143 At the same time, South Africa has been proceeding
with the registration of voters in Namibia, including the
preparation of voting rolls. There have been reports of
forced registration and even of the registration of Angola”
citizens
7
:
144. All this is to say that South Africa clearly is alreaez
taking control of the electoral process. Yet this process IS,
according to resolution 385 (1976), supposed to be controlled by the United Nations.
145. Far more serious, South Africa has organised a
widespread campaign of violence and intimidation designed
to make it impossible for SWAP0 to participate effectively
in the electoral process. According to various reports, and
most notably that of the Anglican Church of Namibia,
there has been a significant increase in the numbers of
troops and security police in Namibia in recent months.
Two observers recently returned from Namibia indicate
that there are likely to be far more than the 50,000 troops
and police SWAP0 has spoken of in Namibia. Reverend
t{einz I-lun;lc, recently expelled from the Territory, has
shown that tortura has now been institutiona!iLeJ
in
Namibia, S#i\l’C) lcadcr> have been rounded Up anJ jailed.
llulldrc& are irltclrugatk:J arid threatencJ cvcry WW~. At
Kyf,r[llrs
L .

to\b.rlitii})

! ! \]‘iJl,‘bt.

‘k.,

pi

)I, killi~~l-lt?rS

t\dL?

tJLi!I

_i’
]46. jn s]lllrt, Chile pqsdra tiuns for so-called elections are
made,and uhile sympathisers of South Africa are favoured
andassisted, SWAP0 is being prevented from organizing an
ebctoral campaign. Its leaders in Windhoek have ejther
beelld&jlled
or have left the country. LUCY Hamutenya,
$be “,,ly S\\‘ApO leader still at Windhoek, said a few weeks
)!
it would be suicide
fs:;gg~
tllat, and I quote: “At the mo~nr~~t
$,, organizeSWAP0 meetings or to distribute openly our
$,materiai”.
;,
e,
$147, Thus, South Africa is already making a mockery of
i;t~,ecentral idea of resolution 385 (1976), that of free
; elections
under United Nations supervision and control.
~q
:,148. @$-can ignore that fact only
at the peril of losing
i’everythingfor which- the Namibian people have been
1s[riving,arid everything for which the Council has been
: slriving.The Council cz$ot countenance a situation which
wouldpreveJlt
SWAPO,.‘the sole and authentic represcn;~lativeof the Namibian people, from even competing in the
electoralprocesson equitable terms, It cannot allow South
Africa to subvert its fundamental objectives in Namibia by
forceor by fraud.
149. The question, of course, is how to deal with this
dtuation. The answer is clear and is already provided in
resolution385 (1976). We have only IO specify carefully
the powers of the Special Representative for Namibia in
orderto put an end to the abusesnow accumulating in
h’amibia.Resolution 385 (1976) calls for IJnited Nations
controlof the electoral process.We ~nust specify-,--perhaps
at a more appl-opriatetime -powers which will enable the
SpecialRepresentative to initiate actions he regards as
necessary
to ensurefree and fair elections and to prevent
actionson the part of the Administrator-General which
wouldinterfere with that aim. That is, we must specify
powers,in detail if necessary, which will truly give the
SpecialRepresentativecontrol of the situation in Namibia
whenhismissionthere begins,
ISO. My delegation would cmphasize that thesemust not
bepaperpowers.The Special Representative must[lave the
authority to use United Nations military forces to do what
he deemsnecessaryto prevent interference with free and
fair elections,to prevent intimidation and to prevent fraud.
Theremust be an agreed mechanismto ensure that he will
beableSO to act without constant recourseto the Security
COIJIIC~I,which would,

of colJrsc, be h-npossjble.

152. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (i/lfer[jrelntion. fror,
O~irwse): The Chinese delegativn haslistened attenti,+ i’
the statement mndc by Mr. Sam Nujoma, Presjdent
SWAPO, and the statements made by the hlinjstets
Foreign Affairs and the representativesof somemusttactfi
We have also studied the relaied draft resolutionsa ’
participafcd in the voting.
4

153. Now, I should like to state briefI>, the chh
delegation’spsition on the relevant questions.
154. First, the Chinese Government and peopleb.
always firm]), supported the Namibianpeople in acl,h
their national indep~lndenc~e
free from any outsideIn
ference and on the basisof territorial integrity md unllp
We sternly condemn the South African racist r&&c for in%
if&al occupation of Namibia, and we have alwaysheId
the South African racist regimemust immediately,t
and unconditionally withdraw all its military and
forces as well as its administration from Namibiaa;J
immediately terminate its illegal occupation there, sorbrl
the Namibian people may achievegenuineindcpendcnqcfi
the basisof the above-mentionedprinciples.Thisis then
correct guideline and means for the settlement of
Namibian question.
155. Szcondlg, over a long period, the heroic Nam&;$
people have carried out valiant and unremitting SI
against colonialism and racism and for national
dence and librratiun. In their just strugglethey
extensive support from the African people at larg
people of the rest of the world. In recent years, un
leadership of SW.41’0, the Namibian people have acti)::
waged and ccasclcssly stepped up the armed
winning one victory after another and dealingincrea
heavy blows at the South African colonialist a
The South African authorities have also met
finuous setbacksand failure in their political s
institute the bani ustansand a so-calledinternal
in Namibia. It should be noticed that the SOU
racist rfgime has finally been forced to commit
gradual \vithdrawal of its troops from Namibia
to its illcgnl occupation Ihere asa result of the
struggle. particularly armed struggle, carried
Namjbjan people with the support Of the entire
il.
people and tlw peoldc
tl~ou&out
the world.
” i”:I”

There must

156. Thirdl\t we hsve noted that the draft
contained in’dclcument S/I 2792 refersordy to the
Council “(:tkinp note of the proposalfor a sc?ttlCJnc

be 110doubt in anybody’s mind that it is the Special
ReprcS?tltativF
who is in control and not the So~~th African
Atlt~~illist~atur-Ceneral.

Namihi:lu

situ3 tion”

submitted

by the five WesterJI 1’

without askingthe Council to approveof the “Pr
question. Tircrcfore, the Chinesedelegation’sa
vote for th draft resolution doesnot signify our a
or total cnd~~rscmentof the “proposal”. In
“proposzll” haswrious dcfccts.

If;J. I Would hope tllat the first report of the Special
R~l~rcsentative
would provide clear recommendationsabout
I]K powers and arrangements necdcd to ensure United
Qlions cuntrul jn this Jll:ltter,
including
COJltrol
over
the
~~~~inisti-atix
s\slem which determinesthe environment in
~~hich
the elect&a] pi cass [~I.xs pl;mz. There should be no
~rlll~iguityabout tl,cse mattea. For if our aimsshould be
jAmed by force a:ld fraud, and as a result of our own
NJj;lbibyto asserttl~e p..,tcritixI po\scr and authority of the

157. ill 11x firs1 place, we have ahva)*sheld a dJtit’
positictn jn i:.rir;ciple \sitll rsspectto the dispatchof “‘I!
Natj(>Ils~~-II~c~;id hL*~xewe ha\r serjousrWr\.31iati
14

* ahc conte,~t of the “propos~11” concerning the dispatch of
t;:e sn-callc’d United Nations transition assistance group.
At
II:$ sarne time, we hold that the Security Council should
~njoi,, the South African
racist aLlthuriticS
to withdraw all
&ir military and police forces as we!1 as their adminis: lrJtion from Namibia immediately, totally and uncondi:_iionally, put an immediate end to their illegal occupation of
,ynrnibia and transfer political power to the Namibian
pzilple.
158, But the “proposal ” of the five Powers would allow
to retain in Namibia
b[be south African racist r&me
‘,~~dUri,lgthe transition period” part of its military force and
‘ai1 its police force, as well as the whole administration
baded by the Administrator-General
appointed by South
urica and so on. Furthermore,
at present the gradual
llwithdrawal of the South African racist r&gime’s military
[~o,ces frorn Namibia still remains a commitment in word
9lnd an agreement on paper, but not yet something real. As
?“[o the Nnmibian people’s armed force carrying on the just
~.;$truggle,the “proposal” of the Five has not only failed to
@e support to it, but has taken an unjust attitude in its
,approach, It must be pointed out that under these
@curnstances it is imperative to heighten one’s vigilance a
hundredfold and resolutely prevent the South African racist
authorities frorn taking advantage of the said circumstances
to manipulate the elections and carry on sabotage.

covetous eye, is ‘sparing no cl‘fort to carry out infiltration
and expansion in that regiorl. Thcrcfore, in order tu acIlicvc
genuine and cc\nlplctr indrpcndence, the Nanlibi.ln LXO~!C~
have to cnrrj- on arduuus and unremitting struggles, gl~:lrd
against and frustrate the schemes of sabotage and troubIr
making on the part of the South African racist rzgime, and
forestall the control arid intcrfcrence by the super-Powers,
particularly by that su~~cr-Po\v~r which styles itself the
“natural ally” of the Afri<:m people. However, we are
deeply convinced that the Nanlibian people and the entire
African people
will pcrscvzrc in unity and itruggle, over.
come all disturbances and obstacles and win final victory in
their just struggle for natiorlal independence and liberation.
162. Mr. CARP10 CASTILLO (Venezuela) (ij~terpre~ntiur~
from Sporrislz/: Since I know that the next name on the list
of speakers is that of the representative of the Soviet
Union, I should like to say that it is simply a coincidence
that 1 should find myself between China and the Soviet
Union. I
163. My delegation wishes to state how pleased it is, Sir,
that you are presiding over the work of the Security
Council. We are certain that your lengthy experience and
your outstanding diplomatic skill and personal charisma are
credentials which guaruntee the good conduct and success
of the tasks facinE us. Having for more than three years
represented my country as Ambassador of Venezuela to
Canada, I should like to take this opportunity to pay a just
and well-deserved tribute to your country for its positive
contribution
in all international forums, in which its
presence has been a factor of moderation for the rational
and peaceful solution of problems

159. Fourthly, we have always held that Walvis Bay is an
part of Namibian territory and that it should be
,&stored to Namibia immediately. We severely condemn the
,%uth African authorities for their illegal occupation of
H’llvis Bay. It is totally unjustifiable and absolutely
impermissible for the South African racist rCgimr to
contiriue its forcible occupation of Walvis Bay under any
Pretext.
inkEd

164, This meeting of the Security Council can be described as historic because its effects will be so far-reaching
and it represents a victory for the international community
and for the United Nations itself, which has taken upon
itself the task of saving Namibia from usurpation by the
Government of South Africa. We thus put an end, we hope,
to almost half a century of domination of a Territorydomination which, to make matters worse, has been
exercised by a racist rCgime which has no respect for the
human rights of the indigenous Afri@-ns and has a strange
concept of its historical responsibility’ to the international
“;
community.

160. We have noted that the draft resolution contained in
document S/l 2793 has confirmed Walvis Bay as an integral
Part of Namibia, that it has enjoined the South African
ncist rCgirne to reintegrate Walvis Bay into Namibia by
rndinE its illegal occupation there and that it has declared
this to be the prerequisite for assuring the territorial
inteErity and unity of Namibia. Therefore, we support this
Jr;lft resolution. But it must be pointed out that such
“ording in the draft resolution as “the initiation of steps
“cessary to ensure early reintegration of Walvis Bay into
hJn?ibia” is ambiguous, Consequently, we also have serious
‘EXrQtions in this regard In our view, the Security council
lnust never allow the Sou;h African racist rCgime to use this
‘mbiEuity for prolonging and perpetuating its forcible
occ”Pation of W&is Bay Here we wish to reaffirm our
resQolutesupport for the legltimnte demand of the Namibian
@‘pie for the immediate recovery of Walvis Bay.

165. The efforts made by the five Western Powers
members of the Council have been very important in the
drafting of the agreement for the independence of Namibia
and we consider it our duty to recognize this at this time.
But the fundamental struggle, the basic pressure which has
led to the present situation, has been the result of the
unwaveringsympathy and support that the progressivepart
of the international community has given to the popular
forces in Namibia, whose victories must be credited to
SWAP0 becauseof its heroic struggleto expel the illegal
occupiers. It has been proved once again that there is no
force greater than that of the will of a people ready and
determined to achieve its independenceand freedom even
at the cost of heavy sacrifices.

16’, Fifthiy the facts show that there will be no small
hbd fances or; the Namibian people’s road towards genuine
“ational independence and a number of twists and turns
?y yet ernerge. The iouth African racists will never shun
‘* and do good and beco me Buddhas overnight. The two
%X-P owers have been intensifying
their rivalry over
‘Outhern Africa. One super- Power is trying by every
Possible ~C\‘III~ to preserve its vested interests in southern
Africa, W!lili the other super-power, a late comt:r, canting a

166. My country has always been in favour of and
supperted the .c nat it!, .I’ anti-ccrloni:;lIibcI ation strugglers
SC

P”
;:

$,becaustthe) ;lrc. just :rnd IcgitillliitC; we ~~n~ierstaiid 1hc:m in
<[heir [rue propNfit~llS sirrzc more than 150 yeurs :1g0 in
‘blin America our fu~cbears waged a lengthy anti-colonial
war for national lihcration, which happily led IO the
indcpcndence of more than 20 territories which then
becanlesovereign republics.

174. I!1 wclcuming tllf pWScI1Ce at this JnpP[i)jg (,f
outstanding figures from African :Ind utflcr
note that their participation in the work of th
indicates the importance of the problem for the consid
eration of which we are meeting here,
175. The liberation of Namibia from co10
occupation is one of the most important inttrnationa
and brooks no further delay. The just solution o
problem will determine to a great extent the fate of
and security not only in southern Afti.ca but far beyo
confines of that continent. The hquldatlon in Nam
one of the last bastions of coIoniaIism would
important step on the way to the final elimination
SllamefuI colonial System, a system which until
recently held a signifjcant part of the globe in its &Tip

167, soon an electoral process will begin in order to give
1the Territory of Namibia the legal and political instruments
“&ed by every modern State. It is our hope that that
process wiII strengthen democracy in the newly born
country emerging to independence and freedom. As my
country sees it, democracy is the recognition of the will of
the majority, which can only be expressed and brought
about by consulting the people, without pressure or haste,
and plltting the results into effect so that the governments
\\hjch emerge from these consultations of the people may
enjoy respect and accept ante. We hope and trust that the
forthconling elections in Namibia will represent the will of
its people so that respect will be guaranteed.
‘(
168. Furthermore, my delegation considers that agreement by South Afrjca;‘raiher late in the day, to leave the
Territory of Namibia, wh$h it has occupied by force, can
and should positively encourage the solution of similar or
analogous problems in other parts of Africa and other
regions of the world where the illegal occupation of
territories represents a threat to international peace and
security.

176. Over the past quarter of a century,
witnessed enormous changes. The colonial
collapsed and there has arisen the practical pro
complete elimination of hotbeds of colonialisn
on the African continent. The liberated Afric
in spite of all the difficulties, have experienced VC
positive changes, With growing vigour, the young S
attempting to strengthen their independence, to raix
level of the social, economic and cultural development
their peoples and to defend, in opposition to Imperialism,:
and neo-colonialism, their legitimate and inalienable r&h
The role and significance of the countries of Africa on 1
international scene have grown and their contributioni
the stru&e
for dCtente, the strengthening 0
disam7ament and the reaffirmation. of the prin
equality in political and economic relations amo
are becoming increasingly substantial.

169. We beljcve that the satisfactory solution of the
problem of Namibia strengthens the credjbiljty of the
United Nations as an international organ for the achievement of cjvilized coexistence among nations and countries.
But this credibilit~~ needs to be perfected and this can only
come about when Walvis Bay is reintegrated into Namibia,
for South Africa cannot allege that it has any valid title to
continue to usurp that sovereign part of Namibia.

177. Igowever, we are also witnessing other tr
international circles which clearly do not find the IVIES\&
and social progress of the African peoples 10 thei
pursuing a poljcy of whippirlg up tensions in A
around Africa and are fomenting, for their OW
interests, fratricidal conflicts among Africans and
arrogate to themselves the right to decree the
African peoples. The activities of such circles ca
interpreted as clear attempts by any means possibl
brake on progress in Africa, to divert the cOUnlri
continent from positions of non-alignment, to
their solidarity and to divide them in the face of
exerted on them by the forces of imperialism, racl
reaction. Serious concern has been aroused t]~rougIlou
world by the efforts undertaken by some circles
to preservhg the racist order jn Namibia and in z

170. In this spirit of renewed faith in the United Nat.ions
and the possibilities it offers, Venezuela voted in favour of
the two draft resolutions which in a sense might be said to
constitute Namibia’s independence act.
171. Mr. TKOYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (i~r/crpretatim
from Russiarr): Mr. Fresident,
allow me first of all to congratulate you on your assump
lion Of the important and responsible duties of President of
the Security Council and to express the Ilope that your
clceptional diplomatic experience will contribute to the
success of the important discussions in which the Council is
JWV engaged.

178. Over the last decades, the racist r&me of I’rC
has shamelessly plundered the natural wealth of K~J
oppressed and enslaved its population and extend
ferritory the shameful policy and practice of a[.‘or
attempts by every meanspossibleto repressthe nw
of the Namibian freedom fighters and keep the
under its colonial sway. The racistsarc building IV
military potential in the illegally occupied Ter
h’amibia and are striving to maintain their troops
country, while hatchjng plots to take away vilaI]y
tant parts of the Territory. If we have not bee!] 21~
far to put an end to the criminal policy of the Jrr

l72. I should like, at the same time, to express our
satisfaction .at the \~ay the representative of Bolivia,
Alnbassador Rolbn ,\na>,a, so ably guided the work of the
‘hmil last month.
17% The Soviet delpgation welcomes the participation in
ihe work of the Council of the acknowledged leader of the
j Sarnibian people -tile President of SWAPO, Mr. Nujoma.
I
The organimtjm
11~ he:]&
has been leading for a period of
!, ll]Jny years the strug$c of the Narnibian people for the
i, affirmation of tlleir inaIi?nabIe right to freedom and
i. independence
iI
!

,

16

::

ka~~crs,

then

those

t~,o,w who encourage

do

art:
tht

t&ilnC

guilty

first
and

and
support

foremost are
its activities.

‘I CtS shO\VS that major responsibility fol
179. A myriad of 11
;,-; ,lle continu.ing occupation of Namibia by South Africa lies
s precisely with thosr: countries which, in spite of the many
3’4,
?~~~~ccisions of the United Nations, continue to lend South
,*,,, Africa political, econonlic and military support. The rea$j,’ Wns for that Sllppc~ft
;Il’t ’ a secret
to no
one.
They art’
‘6” touted, first and forcniost, in the far-reaching interests of
!?I eastern transnational nlonopolies in the continued esploi$K tation of the natural resources of Namibia, which they
@$‘earry out either by themselves directly or jointly with the
I!,, South African racists. We cannot fail to see how the
,;,,!,:tconornic relations of South Africa and the Western Powers
No doubt it is precisely the
!;+ arc closely intertwined.
6, existence in Namibia of potentially great deposits of
6, minerals which explains the stubborn efforts of those
3: powers to preserve in one way or another the colonial order
@ In that part of the African continent.
> .’
?,!, 180. The Soviet Union has favoured and continues to
;,I’: bvour the enjoqrrncnt by the Nnmibian people of their
2 inalienableright to self-de termination and independence on
$$
pr‘ I~C basis of maintenance of the unity and territorial
F Integrity of their country. The Soviet Union has favoured
the immediate and total withdrawal
of the troops and
, rdrninistration of South Africa and the transfer of power to
SWMO, which is recognir.4 by the United Nations as the
,,: SOIClegitirnate and authentic representative of the people of
; e’Namibia.
:4’
181. The Soviet Union supports positive measures which
’ arc designed to achieve a political solution of the Narnibian
‘” problem in the interests of the people of that country. As
the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the
Con’Imunist Party of the Soviet Union and Chairman of the
‘, Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Leonid I.
““Brezhnev,
said in one of his recent statements:
i

against it in ;he economic, commercial, fin:lnci:II and all
other spheres, in full application of Arti&
41 OF the
Charter.
183. These remarks explain the negative view wllich we
have expressed on rnany occasions concerning the Nanlibian
Mtlement plan as proposed by the five \L’estern States
members of the Council, especially with respect to its
Pwisiuns which refer to the presence in the Territory of
Namibia of South African troops and of a11AdministratorGeneral. All that goes against the decisions of the United
Nations and the speedy achievement of genuine independence for Namibia with strict observance of the principle of
the territurial integrity of the country.
18-l. In the light of its experience, the Soviet Union has
the gravest misgivings as to the appropriateness of the
dispatch to Namibia, in accordance with the Western plan,
of num’rous civilian personnel and United Nations troops.
We feef that SWAP0 has sufficient espericnce and the
necessary personnel, enjoys the confidence of its own
people and is prepared to assume responsibility for the
solution of any matters which might arise in connexion
with the independence and the governing of the country.

” ,I@. The Soviet Unioll continues to believe that the basis
b ‘Or a solution to the Nnrnibian problem is set forth in the
*eU-known resolutions of the Security Council and of
‘lher United Nations bodies which provide for the
jr”mediate cessqltion of the ocdupation of Namibia by the
i”Pretoria rigime‘and the immediate withdrawal of all troops
‘“band
Police forces as well as of the Pretoria administration
including Walvis Bay. A reliable

185. However, bearing in mind the position of SWAP0
and a number of African countries, we have not objected to
the adoption by the Security Council of a resolution
instructing the Secretary-General to appoint a Special
Representative for Namibia and to submit a report and
recommendations on measures to be taken in implementation of resolution 385 (1976). In this regard we feel that,
in solving the question concerning the sending to Namibia
of a limited contingent of United Nations military and
civilian personnel, it should be clearly specified that the
purpose of their presence in Namibia is to ensure the
immediate and full withdrawal of all troops and the South
African administration from Namibia and the granting to its
people of genuine independence on the basis of maintenance of the unity and territorial integrity of that country.
Further, we feel that the functions of observing and
effectively supervising the electoral process should fall not
to the South African AdrninistratoF-General but to the
Special Representative of the Se&ary-General,
who
should bc granted appropriate powers for that purpost$ It is
also necessary fur all questions concerning the establishment, composition, leadership, fun&ons and length of stay
in Namibia of civilian and military United Nations personnel to be settled directly by the Security Council and to
come under its strict and constant supervision. There
should bc exclusion from the United Nations contingents of
personrlel conling from those States that maintain C~OSC
contacts with South Africa. According to the Charter, the
activities of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative in Namibia fall strictly within the authority of the
Security Council, which is the only body empowered to
permit, supervise and direct such activities.

international isolation and
regime 011 the basis of sanctictris

186. E.upenrlitures for such operations should be borne by
thaw coiintrics that are irnpc)sirlg a plan for a Scttkll1~llt
that proviilcr for the niaint~ri.~n~:c in Namihi:l of SOlrtb
Afrlc;lrl
alid the dii().~~.i~ to Nanlihi.l of L~llittY
N;i[iclrls niilit.lry i*orl(ili&:lIL~,

“As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, it is side by
side with the national liberation movements in Africa as
Well as those in other parts of the world. We are in
solidarity with the just liberation struggle of peoples. But
I.’i this, of course, does not at all mean that the Soviet Union
is against efforts, including diplomatic efforts, which are
‘, d,.
e%ned to achieve a peaceful solution t0 pressing
;, Problems if such a soIution is in keeping with the
; legitimate interests of peoples.”

tr(Jc)p

17

~i)~iikJtJns
ihe
activities of
,t;(r\iCt
/.:lJiUJl
~fi’J7l~)’
Africa dezignrd to perpetuate the v<cupation of
\‘ahjs Bay, which is an irllegral
part of h’amibia. We feel
tllat that area also should immediately be cleared of the
troops and admini~tratiun of South Africa. We therefore
voted for the reSOhJtiOn
On Wah’is Bay adopted by the
187.

The

solJt]]

COllflCiL

188. That is our position of principle on the matters now
before the Security Council.
189. The interests of peace and the development of Africa
require an immediate end to imperialist interference in the
affairs of African countries, respect for their right to free
and independent existence, and support for the maintenance of equitable relations with all States in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter.
190,e,.The message recently sent by the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet and the Council of Ministers of the USSR
to the participants’m the fifteenth session of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity expressed confidence that the leaders of
independent Africa would, as on more than one occasion in
the past, find solutions to pressing problems in keeping
with the vital interests of the peoples of that continent. The
message further stated: “We are convinced of the final
triumph of the lofty principles of real African solidarity, of
the cause of freedom, independence and social progress in
Africa.”
191. For its part, the Soviet Union will, as in the past, do
everytJting in its power so that matters in Africa may take
just such a course
192. Mr. EL-JEAAN (Kuwait):
Mr. President, allow me
first to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. Although we did
not meet durjng the first two thirds of the month, we were
grateful for your continual concern and alertness, which
kept US rather busy with important international develop
Jll~Ilts
affecting international peace and security. We should
also like to express our gratitude to the President of the
COUJIC~~
for the month of June, the representative of
Bolivia,for hisexcellent guidance.
Ir
193. Kmvait w:elcomesthe settlement of the Namibian
problem,which has long been overdue. We appreciate in
thisregardthe initiative of the five WesternStates members
of the Council.
We \vclcome all the efforts exerted to tackle
the outstandingissuesWe urge that the efforts by the Five
and their commitment to a settlement should not stop
short of resolving all outstanding questions. My Governmentbelievesthat any settlement of the Namibia problem
shouldmrei \vjth the ;rpproval of S\VAPO and the consent
of the front-line States. \\‘e note the courage and realism
den~nnstrated
in a fle\ibIc position by SWAPO. However,
\\‘erecogntie the impori;rnce of securing the consent Of all
Partieswithout any prejudice to the future independence,
rrnity and stability of Xamibja.
1%. WC are of the opinion that the details of a negotiated
settlerncnt should conform to the terms of resolution
385(1976). adopted unanimously in January 1976. It
t

gLJa[

t!ltc‘r’S

thC

fcrrilorid

intcgrify

2nd

:rclity

of

N,

dnribiaat
a nation and declaresit ~Jll~~LJatiVC
that
,~l~~tj~,~~
und
f-2lll~
su!?rVisiC~n
and conlrol of the United Nations should
h
held for the whole of Namibia asone political entity, .$
Proposalby the WesternFive hasnot ignored the Provisirlrri ‘?
,
of that resolution. After all, it wasresolution 385(19,
‘6%ii :
that inspired the drafting of the proposal, or so we htic
beeninfomled.
I*“<
,,a,,$
, ,b@
195. We are very much concernedabout the unresolved*~
issueof Walvis Bay, which is not referred to in the Westerrt*,y
proposal. The objective of restoringWalvis Bay to hraraJbIszI%
should be upheld.WalvisBay is anintegral part ofNamtiit II?:
That has always been reaffirmed by United ~~t;c,% #-,i
resolutions.Without !vdlViS
Bay, an independent NasiQ ji
would be at the mercy of South Africa econornicall,,ti rs
strategically. It would lose both its outlet to the seaand%?.1,
economic asset of critical jmportance. MOreOVer,
soilL
L-a,
Africa shouldnot be allowed to useW’alvisBay asa mcapm~,I
of pressureor intimidation againstindependent Namjbia *&
’ $5;$1
196, In spite of all our concerns,we are still full of ho~‘,$#
We are certain that an independent Namibia will h,,*,:,,~
far-reaching effects throughout the African continent. 1t~;~
_
will mark the triumph of the rule of law over repression.
believe that it will alsobe a clear acknowledgementof t
decadenceof upartheid and the triumph of the right
self-determinatjonand independence.
‘,“’
197. We emphasizethe leading role zrd responsibility{$
the United Nations in the transition process,not mcrcly~
‘I
an expressionof legality but alsofor political expedicnri,&:
It may all dependon how effective the United h’ationsQ~$T
be. The Organization will be confronting one of its me&$“?
difficult tasks.In addition to the complexities of the is.sr$~?$~
jt wfll have to cope with a wide areahaving a thin dcr& ‘I **
of population.
198. Most important are the conditions under
United Natjons will operate. The South African
ment has taken a number of measures
to affect the
of transition. South Africa haslong been plannir
about the results it desiresin Namibia. It i
jmportance to make it clear that the authori
Unjted Nationssurpasses
that of the South Africa
tration in Namibia. NO action by South Africa
allowed to jeopardize the effective functioning
United Nationsin Namibia.
199. The involvement of the United h’ations in su
and controlling the elections shouldensurethe int
the electoral process.We believe that only jf the Pro”
of resolution 385 (1976) are adheredto by all Partie
there be a smoothtransition towardsan independcntps
and unified Namibia. The resolution declaresthat ”
shall be adequatetime. . . for the purpose of err
United Nations to establishthe necessaryrnachinev
Namjhja to superviseand control [the] elections’
the illegal administration of South Africa she
withdrawn from Namibia and the release
prisonerssecured.
200. Lastly, the delegation of Kuwait voted in ‘a@
the .two
. draft resolutionsin the realization thal this

18

$
“;,, ;;ll,,,,l that could
y+L
ym”

be achieved under esisting circum-

(Gabon) [b~f~~~‘cr~iltiofrfiorr~
I should like first of :dl to extend to
gratulntions on your assumg
the Security Council for the
+,tl, of J~[Y. My pleasure at seeing you presideover the
fG,ancilis particularly heartfelt because your beautiful
,,,.iilt,,, and my country enjoy close relations based on
tanding and mutual respect. The role
country have played and continue to
tv problem before us today, together
1ltle.sas a diplomat, your experience in
~r;trnit(ionalaffairs and your wisdom, are all guarantees
‘;gatO,,rwork will be crowned with complete success.
#*,‘<
1 shouldalso like to join in the congratulations that
en extended to your predecessor,Mr. Mario Rol6n
, the representative of Bolivia, on the manner in
lyeconducted the proceedings of the Council during
h,rs NCUEbtA-h~ki

,,@, Turning now to the two draft resolutionswhich we
npjust adopted, I should like first and foremost to recall
‘or, to my delegation, Namibia is an entity and that its
t~.!lreterritory should accede to international sovereignty
t*FIindt‘pendence,
including Walvis Bay
~?4 hty delegation welcomed the Luanda agreementof
on the proposals of the five Western membersof
ncil becauseit signalledthe setting in motion of the
leadingto a just and final settlement respectingthe
,tfilinrJte interests of the Narnibian people and the hops
, + ~*JOC
of all the people of that part of Africa.
I”
iy,“m$1~ delegation would of course have wished the
@blCmof Walvis Bay to be linked to the Western plan.
“YtQuch as it has not been, we hope that the Security
+‘Kil
will remain faithful to its commitment and that no
,
uiJ?C
will be left unturned to ensure that Walvis Bay, an
‘[’ &‘rJlpart of Namibia, will never be allowed to escapeits
‘i”rTu(and that SWAP0 will never have occasionto regret
“!’ ‘rlJjorconcessionswhich it made when it agreednot to
:1”1 that part of its territory before independence.
L as
u As far as my delegation is concerned, the acceptance
” LhzWestern plan by all parties puts an end to the
t’,v’k which until today had made it impossiblefor the
p4’i14hations to play
its
p t-0p er rol? in the settlement of
“* %dmibian
problem We hope that in the context of this
” andon the basisbf resolution 3185(1976), the Special
il’E’eXntJtive of thk Secretary-General and his transition
“‘t43r’se group will establish a genuine interim adminis
“’ fully meeting the aspirations of the Namibian
‘?!* Suchan administration in which Namibiansshould
E”.,8”i’nan effective part is & only way of guaranteeing
“’ ,*‘ti’itical future of ihe country by giving practical
hp”*41:lce
in running the affairs of state to nationalsof the
” v’ilry in this interin, period.

19

presidencyof the Security Council for the month of july. I
am pleasedto notk in this connesion that the Socialist
Republic of Czechoslovakiaand Cnr~d.~h:~velong enjoyed
friendly working relations and that the future development
of these relations is a highly promisirl~ prospect, p:irticUlarlY after the recent meetingin May bct\vetln the Prime
Minister of Canada, Mr. Trudeau, and the Minister for
ForeignAffairs of Czechoslovakia.
208. I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
f.he representative of Bolivia, Ambassador Mario Rolbn
Anaya, for having skilfully and com~tcntly conducted the
work of the Council last month.
209. The Socialist Republic of Czechoslovakiahas always
consistently favoured the speedyenjoyment by the people
of Namibia of its right to self-determinationand independence. Czechoslovakiahas always been a proponent of
decisive measureswhich would put an end to the illegal
occupatio of Namibia by racist South Africa--measures
which wo1 Id guarantee the full transfer of authority in
Namibia to the patriotic forces of the country headed by
SWAPO, which has beenrecognizedby the United Nations
as the sole and authentic representativeof the Namibian
people. My country’s position on the Namibian question
has always been that there should be a just settlement in
Namibia on the basisof complete and unswerving respect
for the fundamental principles formulated in the decisions
taken to date by the General Assembly and the Security
Council,particularly the latter’s resolution 38.5(1976).
210. More than 10 years have elapsedsince the United
Nations declared the occupation of Namibia by South
Africa illegal. Today, just asat that time, a just settlement
of the Namibian problem on the basisof strict implementation of the relevant decisionsof the Security Council and
the General Assembly is possibleonly if an end is put to
South Africa’s illegaloccupationby meansof an immediate
and unconditional withdrawal from the Territory of
Namibia of all South African troops, police and administration without exception and the dismantling of all
existing military and paramilitary South African installations. Today, just as at that time, p just settlement must
guarantee the unity and territorial integrity of Namibia
including, of course,the port and city:of Walvis Bay, which
is an inalienable componentpart of Namibia and which is
closely linked to it through geographic,historical, cvJtura1,
economic and ethnic ties. Today, just as 10 years ago, a
paramount condition for a genuine settlement of the
problem is the speedy and guaranteedtransfer of all power
h the country to the patriotic forcesof Namibia, under the
leadershipof SWAPO.
211. Only if those major conditions are completely met
will the Narnibian people be able to achieve its victory,
independenceand freedom, It is in that context that the
United Nations must live up to its particular responsibility
for the full emancipationof Namibia.
212. Naturally, we are very cautious in respect of all
proposals that do not fully conform to the relevant
decisionsof the GeneralAssemblyand the Security CounciI
and that etl&avow to bypassthosedecisions.We are not at
all surprised that the provisiurls of many of these pro-

.!?O. The itclcgatitin of licllivia is ::inierc]y I+alcd (rrt
able to participate in the vote during
ihe Security Council. We believe that a positive
real hiStOriC
meaning has been taken. Th
Namibia has been before the United Na
creation and is one of its major responsibi
internatjonal community. Apart fro
principle-that is, the elimiriation of one
obstaclesto decolonisation-we were
only by the aim of contributing to the best of our
the authentic andgenuinefreedom of the
Hal

213. Quite honestly, the delegation of Czechoslovakia

r,,ust voice its doubts with respect to the proposal for a
%tt]ement of the Namibian situation referred to in draft
resolutionS/12792. The Namibian people’s right to frcedamand independencemust not be subject to any kind of
experimentation.The Organization must fully abide by the
importantresponsibility it assumedover IO years ago, and
,,,ustseeto it that the processof the decolonisation of the
Territory wiI1be carried out without the slightestdetriment
to the destiny of the Namibian people. However, becauseof
theposition taken on this question at this time by SWAP0
andthe African countries, we abstainedfrom voting on the
draft resolution.,
2Ii.‘. In this connesion J should like to note, already at
this stage, that C$echoslovakia does not intend to participatein the finantiing of the United Nations operations in
Namibia. That po$iGon held by my country wiIl be
explainedin due time,. asappropriate.
215. The Czechoslovak delegation voted in favour of the
draft resolution on Walvis Bay, contained in document
S/12793. Jn this connexion, we should like to expressour
conviction that in the very near future the Security Council
wiIl do everything necessary to guarantee the territorial
integrity of Namibia.
216. Mr. FUENTES IBAREZ (Bolivia) (interpretation
I should like to begin my statement by
welcoming the presence here of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Africa and Western countries members of the
Security Council. This confirms the importance that the
international community attaches to the problem of
Namibia and to the efforts of the United Nations to
producea suitable andjust solution to that problem.

from Spanish):

217. I should like also to welcome the President of
SVt’APO,Mr. Sam Nujoma, and the Presidentof the United
NationsCouncil for Namibja, AmbassadorKonie. Without
their very valuable participation, it would not have been
possibleto achieve results that are so pronjjsing for the
causeof the h’arnibian people.
‘18. It is also my honour to greet you, Mr. Prcsidcnt, on
behalfof my delegation and more particularly on behalf of
Ambassadorhlario Rol6n Anaya In his name 1 thank YOU
for the kind words you said about him in his capacit)) as
Presidentof the Council for the month of June. \‘our
wisdomand esywrience are reflected jn the successthat has
bwn achieved this aftCTJKmi, successto w11ichyou hive
sontributcd b>’ the serenity and spirit of justice sh:lracleristicof Your great country.
219. 1 wish to thank also the delegationsof France and
(]E Federal Republic of Germany, as well as the rcprcsentatives ‘of ?lauritius, the Union of Soviet Soci:tlist Re]lliblics, Ku\vait, G:lb<m and Czechoslo\skia fur their kind
\~~~rds
:jhou( the bead of my delegation, ,\mbaseld~\rIPolijn
AllaYa, Who could nut he here today.

22 1. The Government of Bolivia viewed
interest the efforts of the Westerncountriesmembe
Security Council to find a formula
settlement that would enable the Namibian
accedeto freedom peacefully. After patient eff
which the partics displayed a large m
nation and faith, we are now on the th.re
of the new State of Namibia, whit
independent life after a long period ‘o
devotion to the true missionof freedom.
222. The doiuments that havebeenadopted today
be regardedas final; rather, they are the exprcssi
firm will towards decision. MY delegation sharcb,1,
reservationsexpressedby the representativesof the $,:Bua
Unjon and Czechoslovakiato the two resolutions,ylui $ *j
felt that, becauseof the seriousnessand urgency&[‘p, ‘1
problem and becausethe situation cannot be aIIou<f rJ !
continue any longer, we should accept the resolut;~~&’
above aI{ jn view of the fact that both of ~~CIII hadby
accepted by SWAP0 and the front-line count&$
accordancewith the decisiontaken at Luanda At any
this doesnot representa delay but, rather, means tlra
future procedure will he in conformity with the rc
mendationsof the Secretar)f-General,Whose
nl(~rdl
rc?p?+
sibj]jty and ex:ecutive talenls give US every re3SOJI lo t’t$- .f
*..I,1&R
the best.
.i
;:\#A#&
223. Once we have before us the plan of action
incorporate in new reso]utionsall those safeguards
guaranteethe achievementof the proposedaims.A
delegation, we should like to add to the requiren. .,>
forth by other delegationsthat specificmeasures
sh@u!$
taken for the total integration of Walvis Bay into hlam
since we believe-indeed we know this from OU!,
experience--that any negotiation, if jt is lo be ~ffectti
not becomeboggeddown in rhetorical formulasor dc
tactics with regardto jurisdiction and cornpeter% 1~11
,,
down definite deadlines, uqder the control of I! ,n;,
is,“):
) *“r.’
Nationsaulhorities.
S,”,.‘
3,A’)
,s,
*
224. WCdid not wish to interfere in a decision
by the parties and supportedby membersof the
Council and the countries committed to the grca
for the complete liberation of Africa We believe p! @‘@
victory is at hand, the dawn of a better world. I])* @
causewhich Bolivia regardsasits own
22s. hir. IIAIDAR (India): Mr. Pre
have spoken hcfore me in congra
assumption of the prcsidcncy of
especiallyat this momentoustime.

20 .

c,y rcspccted diplomatic skills have been well matched
needs of the hour. I should also like to express our
appreciation to your
predecessor for his successful

hly delegation

the general feeling of satisfJcwe have just adopted on Namibia.
,,epe that they point towards a new era which the
the international community have
shares

olonial and racial suppression in
one. It has provoked world-wide
,,ation and has forged determination
among the
ibian people to resist. Today’s events represent a
r,,l stage in the world community’s efforts to establish
“Iae majority rule in Namibia. The negotiated settlethat is now on the verge of being achieved, which
from the extended and arduous struggle waged by
ian freedom fighters under the leadership of SWAPO,
ibute to the statesmanship of the SWAP0 leadership
CspcciaIIy its President, Mr. Sam Nujoma. It is also a
~~~UICto the endu& c efforts of the five Western countries
lbers of the Security Council. It represents the culmia of repeated efTorts in the United Nations for the
em and genuine independence of Namibia, especially
mbodiedin resolution 385 (1976).
“2:X. India has consistently
offered its full support to
in its just struggle for untrammelled freedom and
t,;
.?
indepndencr
We believe that this can be achieved
‘it
the
mechanism
of free elections unhampered by
,“:
rcnce from outside It will now be for the United
to ensure that the Namibian people will be able to
their choice freely. We firmly believe that all South
iall troops should he completely withdrawn
from

6 1 should also like to affirm my Government’s
o*qllivocal position that Walvis Bay is an essential and
QW~I
part
of Namibia whose independence will he
mPlete without it This position is widely shared. It has
affirmed on numerous occasions in the United Nations
ia high-level meetings of the Organization of African
Y and the non-aligned countries.
while welcoming the current outcome, we are aware
the United NntiL>ns faces an important and ,dnunting
lical task. The L!nited Nations operation in Namibia is
nd fu]l of danger and difficulty. In
peace-keeping operation, the United
is to undertake an extensive plan for esercising
rvision and control over the elections. Its presence
’ reassllre a population that has been subject to
‘d terror and suppression that it is indeed free and
choose the leadership it wishes. To assure this
tern of apartheid
in Namibia will
completely. The local situation is not
to us, and practical demands made on the United
will become evident only when the Special Rep
ive of the Secretary-General is able to complete his
“%’ inspection and report back. The forthcoming
On Namibia by the United Nations deserves active

231. With the opening of this new ‘chapter, my country
IOO~S forward to the rapid emergence bf Namibia as a fully
independent State. Strengthened as it is by years of gallant
and successful resistance, with gifted human
resources and
liberal natural endowmrnts, we have no doubt that Namibia
will shortly take its due place among the nations of the
world, and we look forward to that day.
232. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia, Ambassador
Konie, on whom I now call,
233. Miss KONIE (President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia): Mr. President, I wish first of all to
express the sincere gratitude of the delegation of the LJnited
Nations Council for’ Namibia for this opportunity
to
address the Security Council in its deliberations concerning
Namibia at this crucial and decisive stage of the efforts of
the United Nations to bring about the withdrawal of the
illegal South African administration from the Territory so
that the NLimibian people may fulfil their Iegitirnate
aspirations for self-determination and independence in a
united Namibia. Under your wise and experienced guidance, the Security Council has now taken the step which we
all hope will lead to the speedy solution of the question of
Namibia.
234. The struggle of the Narnibian people under the
leadership of SWAP0 and with the support of friend]y
countries in the international community has brought
about, after a decade of arduous efforts and much
suffering, the prospects for the final withdrawal of the
illegal South African administration from Namibia. However, the complexity of the situation does not allow for
complacency The labyrinth of political and administrative
options could result equa]ly in the creation of a state and
government sensitive to the legitimate aspirations of a
long-suffering people, or in the fabrication of a monstrous
mystification of the principle of self-determination under a
rCgime which will continue to Serve the most retrograde
tribal interests’and the most questionable privileges of the
colonialist and racist aggressor. It is the responsibility of the
United Nations to ensure an outconje consistent with the
goals and principles continuously reaffirmed by the kolutions of the General Assembly and the-security Council.
These goals have recognized above all tik inalienable right
of the Namibian people to self-determination and national
independence in a free and united Namibia. Furtherri70&,
the fulfilment of these goals is directly related to the
prospects of establishing conditions for international peace
and security in southern Africa.
235. The progress achieved with respect to the future of
Namibia owes much to the unfailing support which the
Namibian people have received from the people and
Governments of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, the
United Republic of Tanzania, and Zambia. These countries
facing the immense difficulties of national development in
an unfavourable international context gave generous and
continuous assistance to the Namibian people and their
liberation movement, SWAPO. The front-tine States SW
tained and consolidated their solidarity with the Namihian
people in Spite of many sacrifices imposed on their
economy and their people They furtherrnorc were exposed

*

236 The NanJibi:in people under their authentjc liberation
movement, SWAPO, have waged a SUCCESSFUL and protract.ed
struggle
against the illegal South African occupation of
their country.. Many Namibian patriots have sacrificed their
Iives for the cause of Namibian self-determination
and
independence. Many others have been harassed, imprisoned
and tortured for aspiring to live with dignity in a free and
i,ldependent State of Namibia. The early attempts of
I\Tamibiansto obtain the recognition of their rights had no
result other than intensified repression. Today, the people
of Namibia have come closer than ever before to achieving
tllek goals. In this context, we take note of the efforts and
initiatives which have led to the recent developments of our
deliberations.
$7: A peaceful transition to independence in Namibia is
certainly in the i’nterest of all members of the international
community. At ihe same time, proposals for a peaceful
transition must not jeopardize the national integrity and
Iegitimate aspiration! of the people of Namibia for selfdetermination and genuine independence.
238. The United Nations Council for Namibia is fully
aware of the important role which the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, has played in maintaining contact with
all interested parties. The Council for Namibia had the
opportunity to benefit from his careful and informed
assessments during the early stages of the efforts to arrive at
an XernationaIIy
acceptable settlement. The SecretaryGeneral will need all the support of the international
community in the difficult months ahead as the implementation of the international settlement proceeds to create
conditions for the establishment of an independent State of
Namibia
239. The Council for Namibia is fully aware of the
complexities related to an internationally acceptable settlement. In this context, SWAP0 has shown great statesmanship and wisdom in making concessions in order to increase
tJ]e prospects of a peaceful settlement. While aware of
developments, the Council is none the less concerned that
certain issues may hinder meaningful progress. P
240. In interpreting the crucial issues of a transition to
independence in Namibia, the Security Council should be
guided by the Declaration on Namibia and the Programme
of Action in Support of Self-Determination
and National
Jndependence for Namibia, recently adopted by the
General Assembly at its ninth special session, on the
Vieslion of Namibia.
741. The question of \I’aIvis day deserves special emphasis
in evaluating the success of any agreement on the question
of Namibia. The position of the United Nations expressed
by the Council for Namibia and reaffirmed by the General
Assembly on several occasions is that Walvis Bay is an
integral part of Namibia. Its geographical position as the
nlain port and vital economic n\cnue of Namibia gives it a
decisive role in the future welfare, economic independence

,:111 ~~?li~.~i~~I
w,lrrity
elf $:!:jsil!ia, Il,i I’ ‘* 11y,,,.
“l’.4ibisa
c(!;:tiri!!‘i!ly rcit::rdfcd fhal the t~:irit~~Jl:r! ;.:tc,,ri,
Nailtibia IINJS~
11utbe conlproniised 111any intcrn.zti,Ti:“
acceptablescftlement of the question of Namibia,“;jf
concern of Member States regarding the future of U’alP
Bay wasfurthermore explicitly indicated in a resoIutic,n:i
the Organization of African Unity at its fifteenth sumrr#
meeting recently held at Khartoum fsee S/12837, a,uta;
‘,82

The importance of Walvis Bay for the future of
Territory cannot be considered a question of poli
tactics, since its location and economic role play
decisiveposition for the future of an independent~~~
Certainly, to compare the issueof W&is Bay
historical enclavesdoes not do justice to the full
canceof WalvisBay in the future of Namibia. Wa]
not a problem of territorial claims but one of e
imposed and enforced partition of the Tenjl
Namibia. An independent Namibia without Wa
would be at the mercy of South Africa and of the
whims of the authorities at Pretoria. Therefore, it
recognized that Walvis Bay is an integral part of
with which it is inextricably linked by geographic
economic,cultural and ethnic bonds.
+a,
’ s’:
243. The concept of a transition to independencewit&$
the framework of all United Nations resolutions,inc
Security Council resolution 38.5(1976), requirestic
aration of the people of the Territory for the expres
the popular wiJ.I in free elections organized und
supervisionand control of the United Nations. This ccjor;$
placesspecialresponsibility on the Special Representa:+
of the Secretary-General.He must have full authorit)
administrationof the measuresto implement the tran
to independence,including the supervision and con1
.;
I,_(
elections.
,/
242.

244. The immensepower which
the hands of the South African
constitutes a pervasivefactor in inhib
sion of the political views of the Nam
an electoral process.The United Nations must ensure
the practicesand symbolsof political
ing the presenceof South African t
stitute a distorting factor which will fal
which the United Nations is commjtte
his duties, the SpecialRepresentative
United Nations resolutjons on the
including Security Council resolutio
245. Mr. Ahtisaari is thus confro
onerous and daunting responsibili
co-operation and unstinting suppo
national community if he is to sue
We, the members of the United
Namibia, have come to recognizeM
qualities.Thesehave in no smallmea
smooth relations between his office as Commissioner
aiJ
the Council. It is the conviction of the Council rl
Mr. Ahtisaari will apply himself with the samed?gencr
the execution of his estcndcd duties. We not 0& j
congratulate him but wish him succcssin his elldeJvMl;a
We wish him to know that the Council will alwaysbe rca”r

order to ensure the achicvcnierit
by tht! Karnibisn people.

of

of the presence and locatiun of South
Namibia n\ust receive constant and
the Special Representative
of the
SFC,etaQ~-~eneral. It is not enough that all parties cond agree on the specifics. Nevertheless, it is not Jifljcult
opriate arrangements to ensure the
of South African troops during the
Se troops were in effect
r&r that a peaceful
pmkwce,

great

ntten-

insisted on the complete withdrawal
of South
I troops from the Territory
in order that free
11smight take place in Namibia in accordance with
~~VKIUS
resolutions on this matter. Whatever the final
UICOITIC,the presence of South African troops must not
inderthe fulfilment of United Nations objectives in the
The current efforts to arrive at an internationally
ptablesettlement of the question of Namibia are to be
~$j~MmmerideJ. However,
it must not be forgotten that,
;,Juringthe very processof discussions,the Government of
$&th Africa has continued to engage in illegal acts and
rcssive measureswhich have intensified the suffering of
Narnibianpeople, raising serious doubts about South
h’s true intentions. Since August 1977, the South
&di?ican Covernrncnt has adopted measures which are
~~~:Qntrary
to the spirit of a negotiated settlement and hasput
,‘.,,htoeffect numerousrzPrcssiveemergency regulations. The
ipctices of repression and intimidation of the African
;pPalationcontinue. Efforts to prop up the tribal supts~@rtcrs
of South African interests have intensified. It is
$$Qcfore difficult to conceive that South African claims to
Ei”“%t the eventual independence of Namibia are to be
f$dkcaat facevalue. The United Nations therefore must act
‘“‘$sively to ensure that any agreemen;on the q;estion of
bm$ia will be implemented fully in accordance with the
Feral objective of ensuring self-determination, freedom
i’ldePendence
in a united Namibia.
.$
2,
>drbK1
‘14’*The United NaticHISCouncil for Namibia, since 1967,
iA” endeavourcdto fulfil the mandate given to it by the
t;L
“~1 ~Isserublyto admirlister the Territory until indePndence.
South African intransigence has, during the last
,%deI Prevented the fulfilment of this mandate. At the
I” timel the Council has contributed to a systematic and
“‘tinuous international political mobilizatiorr in support
from the Territory. As a

comrrlunit) to the’aspirlltionsuf a people too long Jcprived
of its most fundsrrrent:il right to self-dctcrrnirl.rtion and
natiomd irNkp?ndenc?.The esperitir\cc :~ilclir\sigl\t which
the Council has accurnulattldthroughout the pxrs are an
hnPortant resourcewhich must remain :~vail:Ible to all
Namibian patriots until genuineindq~~r~~~~c~ is achieved.
The CounJ for Namibia, therefore, is certain that it is in a
Position to make a constructive contribution in the
complex transitional phasewhich is the concern of the
Security Councilin the fOrthcoming months.
249. The United Nations assumed
a ~ICZIIIII conllnitnler~t
to assistthe Namibianpeople to achieveself-determination
and national indepndence. It must endeavour to ensure
that thissolemncommitmentwill be fully nlct.
250. The PRJ!XDENT: The next speakeris the hlinister
for Foreign Affairs of South Africa. I welcome h.irn and
invite him to take a placeat the Council table and to make
his statemqt.
25 1. Mr. BOTHA (South Africa): Mr. President,i congratulate you on your assumptionof the presidency of the
Council.
252. I hope that this will be the last tirtie that I speakin
this forum on the principlesunderlying the attainment by
South West Africa of its independence.Very soon South
West Africa will be independent. The people of the
Territory demand it; it is their will and their inalienable
right.
253. For over 30 years South,West Africa has been the
subject of lengthy and acrimoniousdebate in the United
Nations. All efforts in the past to resolvethe issuefailed in
spite of the fact that South Africa went out of its way to
find an internationally acceptablesolution. AS far as the
questionsof principle are concerned,we are, it is hoped,
closer than we have ever been to a peacefulsettlement. We
sincerely trust that the present initiative will not be
frustrated by those like the Nujoma faction of SWAP0
who, in the nameof liberation, attempt to gain by violence
that which they fear they cannot gain by peaceful IIWII~S.
To hem I say: if, asyou claim,you have the support of the
majority in South West Africa, then prvve your claim by
participating in elections;abandonthe bullet and accept the
verdict of the ballot.
3%’
254. All along,South Africa hasadministeredSouth West
Africa in the interestsof the inhabitantsand in the spirit of
the Mandate entrusted to it by the Leagueof Nations. We
have repeatedly stated that we recognize the separate
international statusof the Territory and that it is our goal
to b&g it to full independence.To this end, we have
systematically developedit politically and economically. I
have on previous occasionsoutlined to the Council our
positive contributions in this connexion. They are a matter
of record. The resultsare there for all to sec.
25.5. But it hasalwaysbeen and still remainsour declared
policy that it is for the peopleof the Territory themselves
to decide their own political and constitutional future.
Their wishesin thiq regardare the paramour1
t consideration.
As we stated a~far back ss 1967:

-‘hl.
rwitlu:It

‘IdI?
i? II(~ 1.;rl.ti,i!.i(,m in 11~ j?,t
Siwlh
2f~icm
fclrce s)!arl)d

base. Paragraph 8 b cxplizitly pro\
S0ut.h African force would be base
Oshivello or both -leaving the option t
propI)ctic words indeed:
ultl~ttately decide”.

“The

peoples themselves will

55. fksuant
to the South African Government’s far” si$[ed vision and sound approach, the process of political
development can now come to fruition. The leaders in the
Territory told US nearly two years ago that they were ready
for jndepcndence and wanted it by the end of 1978. It is
scmctlring we cannot deny them; it is something which
cannot be delayed any longer; we have no right to thwart
the will of the people.
,
257. *We therefore welcomed and co-operated in the
, initiative set in motipn by the five Western mcrnbers of the
Security Council in 4pril last year. Through0ut the months
of negotiations whi’& fclllowed, South Africa played a
3 positive and constructive role. With the knowledge of the
five Powers, we last year appointed an AdministratorGeneral whose task it is to create conditions for the free
expression of the will of the people and to govern the
Territory in the interim period leading to independence.
258. In the execution of his task, the AdministratorCcneral has, irzler ah: assumed authority over 27 governnlent departments; abolished restrictions an freedom of
movement; gone a long way towards abolishing discriminatory measures based on race or colour-he has, for
csample, instituted equal pay for equal work in the public
sector; taken the necessary steps to ensure that during this
interim period law and Order will be maintained and to
prc\ent any disruption or obstruction of peaceful and
orderly political and constitutional
development; XC~Icrated socio-economic projects in education, housing, agriculture, trade and water supplies.
259. The negotiations on the Western proposals have
stretched over 15 rm~nths. South Africa lent its full
m-operation to those effr~rts. The .same cannot be said of
j\\‘AI’O who, backed by their neo-imperialist a)lies from
rthcr continents, have done all they can to obstruct the
tttainment of a peaceful solution. Their intransigence was
mended to delay the date of independence for the
fcrritory. These delaying tactics and statements raise strong
lotrbts that they are really willing to participate in genuine
‘ret elcc’lions. Indeed, if reports arc correct, it is even at
his lntc stage not clear whether SWAP0 has in fact
~cceplcd the proposal adopted by the Council. Nowhere in
1;sstatement today did hlr. Nujoma express acceptance. He
reates the impression [flat hc is considering accepting a
Ir(ll~osal substantially diffcrcnt fram the one submitted by
11~ five Western Po\vers and today approved by the
‘OUncil.
60. I shall refer t0 3 few cs:~nlplcs to illustrate the point.

262. Similarly, it is not for Mr. h’
directive to the Special Representati
General. Furthermore, some parts
doubt on his willingness to abandon
of the proposal demands cessation of vi
crucial t0 the implementation of the prop
tions in regard to Walvis Bay are entirely dev
or factual basis. His demands in this res
arrogant. We do not intend to withdraw
Walvis Bay. Indeed, the proposal does no
provision and Mr. Nujoma knows it. I sl
more detail with the issue of Walvjs Bay.
263. South Africa, for its part, accept
final and definitive form as far back as 25
is to say, within two weeks of its circulat
Council document. The proposal doe
the leaders in the Territory or, for that
African Government. We do not like
that proposal. Nevertheless, after con
groups seeking a peaceful settlement, m
announcing the South African Government’s
informed the South African House of Assem
South African Government’s reply to the Five.
the importance of this decision, I shall q
“You will recall”-and this was our reply to the PI&
“that our main preoccupation with your proposals
settlement of the South West African situation centre
paragraph 8 b of your proposals, in particular the p
si0n that the remaining South African Forces woul
withdrawn one week after the certification of the elc
0f the Constituent Assembly. In the light 0
c)arification,
conveyed to the Minister
of Forci
on Monday, 24 April 1978, we are now giving the
of South West Africa the assurance that we will be ga
by the wishes of the Constituent Aszmbly in
this very imPortant matter. Bearing in mind
discussions last week in Pretoria, we are now sati
the role of the Administrator-General,
as
envi.qged, remains unimpaired, for example, t
head the admmjstrative structure of the Terri
thermore, that the Special Representative Of
taIy-~eJ)cra),
in carrying out his responsibilitic
togetllcr with the Administrator-Gcrieml
t0 ens1
orderly transition to indcpcndence. h!y GOV
,-ol~~jngto its decjsion, has also been influenced de&
by the provision that there should be a cc
cessation of hostilities, including, infer uk mine
abductions etc., before any reduction
!iillillgS,
St~tlth African Forces takes place, that prinurr)’
sil~ility for maintaining 1~ and order dur
tiolla)
that

period
sha)] rest with
the issue
of Walvis

the existing

PO)

Bay is not incl
proposals. Having now been advised by
trator-General that he has CCIIIS~I)~~~ the va
partics ;lrlli church or~nizations in 11~ Tcrr
he is satisfied that the pro]XJsals are acce

,,ajority, he has recommended acceptance by the South
ent. Bearing this in mind, and also the
,jJrifan
GCJVerIlm
~~~iA1~mce
by th c Five Western Pokvers on the Security
tbu,,sil that their proposals are now in a final and
,&*&t”i+i”e form and that the Five are giving them their
backing, the South African Government
$$II+#grvcd
:$ racpt~
these proposals. In accepting them we are not
F:l~~i,lgthe main tcnance of law and order and the security’
af [hc people of South West Africa in jeopardy. You,
-that
is the F:ive-“emphasised
that the
~~~urSL’Ive%”
.>,‘;“,lrlnsjtional period should be stable and peaceful. The
.yp voPlc of South West Africa are anxiously and impa‘, li.‘l~tly awaiting their independence which has been
yro,nised them not later than the end of this year. We
wa,,,l,e we can rely on the co-operation of the five
‘! \v&rn Powers, as well as others, to move rapidly in
‘:, o&r to realize this goal.”
“‘A,,y
rime Minister’s announcement of the
11th African Government to accept the

:,“$M, Our acceptance on 25 April 1978 was based on the
rnption that the proposal would be implemented in
d faith by 31 December 1978-and not ‘Lat the earliest
,: ‘*‘~rrible date”, if this phrase were to signify a later date. We
,+%pi;iwt
ernphasize that the clarifications given during the
%.rti3tinns and the spirit in which they were conducted
*..a.6 be vital to the successful implementation of the

There are several aspects of the proposal to which
ialattention will have to be paid:
.E first, 3s the legislative and administrative authority in the
i:..~Q~itury, the I-2drninistrator-Gerleral will continue to
-$jWn during the transition period.

Fifthly, the functions of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-Generalin respectof the electoral processare
spelt out in the proposal in that, as a condition to the
conduct of the electoral Process,the &ctiOris
themselves
and the certification of their results,the Special Rzpresentative will have to satisfy himself at each stage as to the
fairnessand appropriatrnessof all such measures.In the
COUISI:
of the negotiations,we were rrpzatedly assuredthat
the Special Representativewould be guided by the proceduresand precedentseshblishedby the United Nations
in other appropriatecaseswhere the United Nations had
played a role in the determination of the wishes of the
people.
Siuthly, South Africa accepted the proposal in its final
and definitive form.
Seventhly, Walvis Bay, over which South Africa has
undisputed sovereignty, is not included in the proposal
acceptedby my Government.
266. I come now to resolution 432 (1978), dealingwith
the question of Walvis Bay, adopted earlier today by the
Council. Unfortunately, the whole settlement is now
threatened by the introduction of this new element despite
the fact that the proposalwassubmitted in March 1978 in a
final anddefinitive form.
267. I want to makeit absolutely clear that Walvis Bay is
South African territory. It isnot part of South West Africa,
and nothing the Councilcan do or decide can make it part
of South West Africa. Its position legally and historically is
indisputable.It hasbeenpart of the Capeof Good Hope for
almost 100 years. As suchit becamepart of the Union of
South Africa and consequentlyof the Republic of South
Africa. It never formed part of the GermanProtectorate or
of the former Mandated Territory of South West Africa.
This position wasrecognisedby the Leagueof Nations, the
International Court of Justiceand the United Nations.

*:‘y%<o”dly,
pri*lsry respansibility for maintaining law and
”1
“$drr b South West Africa during the transition Period
~‘i’lllrQt with the existing police forces.
t:;,,
“‘s“Tkirdly
the Administrator-General and the Special
,:‘i?‘ezn&tive of the Secretary-General are required to
; “uik together and to consult each other with a view to full
“;#ation
betwcctl them, to ensure an orderly and
;;*i;cful trahsition to indePendence. The proposal has
,-,‘:[~~~~telybeen left somewhatvague in this regard but it
“~‘?De appreciated that unlessthe relationship between
,’ ““”
‘3
* . is characterired iy a spirit of mutual trust and
*,k”‘lkration it will bc difficult if not impossible,for them
‘” ’ i’rrplemel;ttheir respective ta&s successfully.It is in this
; +h Ihat my c overnment views this relationship. The size,
‘“” “‘i’@ition functions and deployment of the United
“‘Bf’ans Traisition As5ist*lnceGroup are precisely the Sort
il,“ilrlatters
;”
on which clbse‘consultation is required.
I-

268. Throughout the negotiationsleading to my Government’s acceptance of the Western proposal, the Five
acknowledgedthat Walvis Bay was not part and parcel of
South West Africa. They alluded mrrely to the possibility
that a controversy might arise abdut the issue at some
future stage. They acknowledged that they ytr! not
arguing at all about the political and legal situation in
respectof WalvisBay. They were not addressingthe merits
of the case.On various occasionsmy Prime Minister also
informed the representativesof the Five that the introduction of the Walvis Bay issue into the proposal would
lead to the immediatetermination of the negotiations. The
Five more than oncegaveassurances
that that wasnot their
intention. That position wasreaffirmed by their abstention
on General Assembly resolution 32/9 D of 4 November
1977, declaringWalvis‘Bay to be an integral part of South
WestAfrica.

!“‘ilrthly the reduction of South African troops in South
“t “frici will commence only after the comprehensive
“;ltion of alI hostile acts and the establishment of a
3’“k;&
peace.The South African Government regardsits
zynsibility for the security of the people of the Territory
“‘4 sericltlilight.

269. During the talks in NewYork in February this year it
was proposedto disposeof the question of Walvis Bay in a
paragraphstating that acceptanceof the proposalwould in
no way prejudicethe territorial claim of any party At my
insistenceit wasagreedto deleteeven this implied reference
to the questionof %‘alvisI3a).

. .

c

‘i 0.

(qc

f;:c’

~\.:5terjl

f ::I\% r n.tl!

ills

.ry..iil

ca’ ,fcd

In ~~!ncllll;i~rrl,
:‘llilc
*,I1 25 ,jfIl,]
]!I7
21‘1
Cptt’d tile plU]~L~~~ll 011 St ~Illtl \‘l’eSt ZfriF:i in its fin,i
definitive form, we catcgnr-icallyr-eject the resol,,tir&i”
Walvis Bay. That resolution, in draft form, canreto (
attention for the first time only a few days
after our acceptanceof the proposal. It cl
prejudge the whole issue. It never forme
negotiations leading to South Africa’s acceptanceof I
proposal. We reject it. We object to it. We will r,ct
prepared to negotiate with anybody-not even wju, rb~il’
duly electedgovernmentof South West Africa-on theh ,iz*
of that resolution. As indicated in the course of
negotiations with the Five, any discussionof this I,!,r, 1
wiII be on the basisof a voluntary act on our l,a;;wTT!
decision taken by us in the exerciseof our
to do so. That we remainwilling to do.

tlxjr

274.

in the Gcncr;rl .!.~~~r~;hly in ,4p111 19 78 and
lo ,,c, a~ f,-Jl,qvs: “All nsp?cts of the question o1 \\‘:11visBay
musl be SlJbpct to discussionbetween the South African
Government and the elected government of Namibia.”
There is no room for any doubt. The languageis clear. In
any event, the fina] proposal contained no reference at all
to \valvis Bay; that we all know. Nor, I may add, did
resolution 385 (1976) which has throughout formed the
basisof our negotiations and the final proposal.
p.,

;;;‘,[l.

”

t?,

271. The boundaries of South West Africa and of the
Republic have been fixed since colonial times. No country
and no organization can arrogate to itself the right to alter
them unilaterally. In this connexion, I may also quote
briefly from a letter I addressedto the Secretary-Generalon
2 May 1978. I stated:
‘&Basedon treaties which also define the borders of
orher countries in the region, the Territory’s boundaries
‘have been internationally recognized for almost a hundred years. F’yrthermore, most Afro-Asian and Latin
American countries have accepted that colonial boundaries must, under.internationaI law, continue to be the
boundaries after ‘independence. Moreover, paragraph 11
of the hlanifesto on Southern Africa approved by the
Conference of East and Central African Statesat Lusaka,
Zambia, on 16 April 1969, and adopted by the Assembly
of Headsof State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its sixth ordinary session,held at Addis
Ababa from 6 to 9 September 1969, statesin part:

275. I want to be very frank with the Council. \\te ,&$
shockedby reports that the five WesternPowerswereg,,:.,
to support a draft resolution of the nature now before:)%
Council. We were shockedand dismayed.My Govcmniz~~t
concluded that support for such a resolution wouldrakg~,+
grave doubts as to the spirit and manner in which the F ‘.I
would stand behind their own proposal. We fearedtllrf r?,
would so destroy confidence as to make it impessibl,.
f
co-operate in the implementation of the
South African Government had at the time cometu
conclusionthat, were the Five to vote unreservedlyfor I
a resolution, South Africa could no longer co-operateIa
implementationof the proposal.

The Manifesto was welcomed by the General Assembly
itself in resolution 2505 (XXIV) of 20 November 1969.”
[S/12678, annex.]

276. Since my arrival in New York, I have
with the representativesof the Five regardin
and the implications of the resolution. I have
the explanation of vote madeon behalf of the
shall convey the statement to my Governm
have to study the full import of this st.atement.I slur
furnish my Government with the additio
provided by the five Foreign Ministers. It will then1s
the South African Government to make its final dccisi

272. It is thus clear beyond any shadowof a doubt that
W&is Bay is asmuch part of the Republic of South Africa
asAlaska is part of the United States of America. I wish to
repeat that at no time did it feature in the proposal
acceptedby South Africa.

277. I cannot conclude without referring
invective directed against my Government
today by somerepresentatives.I do feel th
come to point out that there is apparently 110limit 10
duplicity practisedwithin the Organization.

c
273. We fully agree that the territorinl integrity of South
hSt Africa must be assured.We agreewith that. In exactly
the sameway mlJSt that of the Republic of South Africa.
l’erhapsthere is a desire to modify the situations which
today exist throughout the world in regard to enclavesor
isl:rndsin the immediate vicinity of the mainland in such a
way as to require them to form part of the contiguous or
mainland territory concerned. If any attempt is made to
modify such cases,then all such casesmust be reviewed
simult:rneouslyon a global basis. If that is the intention,
and if the responsiblePowersare willing to submit to a new
international arrangement such er;m~ples as Gibraltar,
Cabinda,Hong Kong, Northern Ireland, Berlin, Bclizc, the
f’arralila Canal, Guant;inamo Bay and hlacao, to mention
only some, then, and then only, would South Africa, for its
Part, be prepared to have the caseof\\‘alvis Bay csamined
011t!lC Same basis.

278. We all know what is goingon in the
al] bow about the struggleto upset tl
And we know that the Soviet Union 1
domination. The Soviet Union’s COnCeITl
welfare of the African peopleishypocriti
I want to ask the representativeof the S
hasyour country done to improve the qu
,AJgcm continent? The Soviet Union i
Governments of Africa; it is disturbi
without peace Africa cannot develop.
Governmentsof Africa. It is introducing into Africa b
and guns to kill pcoI&. It is not assis
their agriculture, their road construct
not helping
t]leIn in any meanjngfulS

“ ‘As far aswe are concerned the present houndariesof
the States of southern Africa are the boundariesof what
will be free and independent African States.’

26 .

285. TJb2victory df the peoplesof the former Portuguese
WL'T
the colonial r&ime hasaltered the balance0f
power in southzrn Africa and the entire: world. Thus, new
Prospectsfor freedomhave been createdfor the peoplesof
Namibi:l, Zimbabweandeven South Africa.
cchi~s

,;I $$rsk. Uplift your people. Give them frcedorn. Gist
b;..
Give them freedom of
,; ..rx, fre~dorn of esprcssion.
si,iij,bln,
of r~~~Vt:Ill~ltt.
Give them frcedorn of th press and
c:GJw t1,er,l to elect their own government according to
,1’%>JbfitYv” t t‘ ’ which the Soviet Union tells us it supports in
7”,tfect of alI other countrit5 of the world.
/,;$fl, l,,st~ad of usin,~1every inappropriate opportunity to
e in unsubstantiated attacks art my Covernrncnt, I
11,~United Nations and, in particular, thr Security
cil to devote attention f0 the plight of the mihions Of
a beings who must live a life without any hupe 0f
in8 proPer training and education, of enjoying a
9 ~g~~ml diet, of living under conditions of personal
and snfcty--in short, of exercising in any meaninga choice between alternatives for the improvement
ives. Using South Africa as a scapegoat will simply
ate the plight of the suffering millions. It Wilt JlOt
eir desire to enjoy a better life, We stand ready to
c with all our fellow Africans in all spheres of life.
ver, the deadly struggle between the simper-Powers
to ovcrwl~elm the many efforts of the African nations
‘&itrds development and stability. This struggle will bring
‘.&!lt the disintegration of Africa economically and politi“%!y. The African nations have so much to offer the world.
,%I it seems as if this continent is doomed to be the
&tiag-ground of the big Powers pursuing their own selfish
itsrrsts.
1 appeal to my fellow Africans to rid themselves of
lenlptation of requesting outside assistance, which
ts in increased tension on our continent. Let us make
“a Earnest attrmpt
to remove the clonds of misunder‘@pi%separatingus and move closer towards one another
1\ebrightlight of our African sun. Let us work together.
usact allow others to drive a wedgebetween us, All of
in Africa will have to pay the price of outside
rfcrl:nce in the affairs of our continent. Allowing
‘3!sriio[, front outside will make the intruders the victors
“‘ea the p+oplesof Africa, the vanquished.
‘8,

286. The 10*1g
armedstr~ggk Fornational liberation of the
Nanlihian people conducted by its vanguard, SWAPO,
encountered favourable conditions for rapid development.
111the face 0f the growing armed struggle and of political
and diplomatic action, the South African mcist’reginte was
obliged to abandon its plans for the bantustanization of
Namibia. Vorster then resortedto acts of aggressionagainst
the front-line countries, to repressionand to massacring
PoPulations, as was the caseat Kassinga,in the People’s
Republic of Angola, where more than 600 Namibianswere
massacred.Al1 the manoeuvresof the upurrheid V0njter
regime aimed at weakeningSWAPO, at the destabilization
of the fro t-line countries and at the so-called internal
sett1ement%II met with failure.
287. In spite of these manoeuvresof intimidation and
aggressiort
perpetratedagainstthe front-line countries, these
countries stood firm in complying with the resolutions of
the Organizationof African Unity and the United Nations
relating to assistance
to the national liberation movements.
288. The Security Council must once again condemn the
use 0f the international Territory of Namibia as a basefor
acts of aggressionand destabilization againstneighbouring
countries.
289. The Luandaagreement,the resolution of the summit
meeting of African headsof State and government held at
Khartoum and, indeed,the resuIt of the debate of this body
ah represent an important victory for the people Of
Namibia and its vanguard,SWAPO. This victory is also that
of the Organization of African Unity, of the front-line
countries and 0f aI1progressiveforces throughout the world
which, becauseof their firm determination t0 rid African
s0i1of dying coloni&m, are providing important assistance
to SWAPO.
‘.
290. The recognition by the internati@tal community of
SWAJQ asthe soleauthentic and legitimate representative
of the people of Namibia is another factor that, &has
acceleratedthe processof the decolonization of Namibia. I
should like alsoto stressthe important role Played by the
United NationsCouncilfor Namibia.

(iriterpr~tution from
is the first time that I am
f the front-line countries,
nption of the presidency
ccurity Council for the month of July and on the
which you have been conducting the debate.
pie’s Republic of Angola
On behalf of the front-line countries--Botswana,
iq”e, the United Republic of Tan/.ania, Zambia and
at this meeting of the Council devoted to the
ation of Namibia. I take this opportunity to thank
“‘aI front-line countries for this e,xpressionof
its people and its PrGd~:nt,

29 1. Nanlibia is an international Territory which falls
within the competenceof the United Nations. Hence, the
United Nations must ensurethe effective application and
strict supervisionof the agreementsleading to that country’s accessionto complete and total independence; in
this regard the Special Representativeof the Secretary
General wi11have a role to play. The United Nations must
aIs0 ensure the safeguardingof the unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia, including W&is Bay, which geographically, politically and econonrica1lyis an integral part
0f Namibia. The Organization must appeal t0 Member
States and the international community in general to
contribute t0 the nations1reconstruction of the ec0nomy
of tlli+.Svtr that isnh~,lutto be born.

will
continue
to lend their
292, The front-line
COtUltries
mara],po]itic,a], diplomatic and material support to SWAP0
unti] the people of Namibia fully regain the freedom and
independence for which they have been struggling for ma.lly
years and for wh/ch they have made untold sacrifices.

293, On behalf of my colleagues of the front-line counties, I wish to express the hope that the debate in this
augtlstbody will be fruitful.
294, The

struggle

goes

on;

victory

is Certain.

295, The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
of State in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Sudan and
special representative of His Excellency President Gaafar
Mohamed Nimciri, the current President of the Organizatien of African Unity. I welcome him and invite him to
t&e, a,p]ace at the Council table and to make his statement.
296. Mr. DENG (Sydan): I wonder whether those speakillg after the represehtative of South Africa have had their
task rendered easiei’.or more difficult. In any case, on
behalf of the current...Prcsident of the Organization of
African Unity, President Gaafar hlohamed Nimciri, and of
tile Democratic Republic of the Sudan, I should like to
express my gratitude and appreciation for the permission to
address the Security Council on this matter of vital interest
and concern to our continent, namely, the decolonization
of Namibia.
297. Mr. President, under your wise, able and experienced
leadership, the Council has adopted a historic decision
which we hope will open a new page not only in the history
of Namibia but also in that of southern Africa as a whole.
We congratulate you and the Council on what promises to
LXthe beginning of a breakthrough. However, we still have
to take stock of the history of developments in that region
if we are to continue the relentless march towards the goals
of independence and human dignity.
298. I have just come from Khartoum, where our country
was honoured to act as host for the thirty-first ordinary
session of the Council of hlinisters and the fifteenth
ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African U ‘ty. Both
SetSof meetings were pervaded by a number “Bf themes
which I regard as relevant to the subject matter of this
meeting: the unanimous realizatjon of the need to consolidate African unity and solidarity in the face of the
mounting challenges of liberation; a genera] agreement that
the freedom, the independence and Ihe integrity of any
African country are vital to the integrity and the security of
the continent as a whole; a significant acceptance of the
Principle of negotiated settlement as preferable wherever
Possible-otherwise, armed struL@e must be rclcntlcss until
theobjective is fully achieved; a reCcJgllition
of the vital role
’ fllat must continue to be played by the international
community in decolonizing the continent and freeing the
,’ Africans from the dehurnanizing affliction of racism.
,‘,
f 299. Perhaps one of the most prcoccup)~ing themes at the
meetings was t113f of liberation from colonialism
L” Khoum
I) and rackIll, which remains as vit:r] for the African today as
-‘.
4 it was at the dawn of the indcpcndence movcmcnt. Africans
“’
I
i

freedom and integrity of our continent are indjvisiblc and ’
that any vestiges of foreign dependency or domination”,: ):
threaten the entire fabric of continental security. ,,,,ilh ’
Rhodesia in the hands of white rebels and Namibia il]egd]Y _:
occupied by white racists, who can really say that aill .;;
front-line Statesaresecure?And if our front-line States4rc 4a,,
’
not secure,how can we speakof genuinesecurity for IhE >,,>
rest of Africa?
ii I” ”
..dP<
1_
,‘”
300. Africa hasresolvedthat while ways and meansr,.~~.!q‘
be diverse, and sometimesdivergent, the objective is LLe.:‘J’,
same and should be clarified beyond doubt. FOr q”,‘ ’
blurring oi distortion of our overriding goalsis a gainfar ,
the enemiebof African dignity. The goalis and mustremah2;:
the freedomand independenceof the whole continenta!td *,*“’
its territoriei, without any exception. The struggleha sadly:.,
crystallized into one of victor){ and dignified sumiva]of ,:~~
defeat and tit best a subhumansurvival. It is a simk 4&t
equation,in which armedstrugglebeginswherediscusslod*i$g:
end. And, asthe Security Councilhasjust witnessed,Q]s& y;&
not becausethe African is more inclined to fight thant&$:&
No, quite the contrary: negotiation, mediation and con&43
iatjon are domirtant themesin African socialthought andg&j
jurisprudence,sharply contrastingwith the adversarycllu. q$i,(
acter of Westernlegal thought. The African resorted@$;;
armedstrugglebecausethe adversaryhad refusedto talk $@&
to listen to reason.It is a choice not of preferencebu! &:;&
necessity.It is a sacrificewhosealternative is a surrender
(g ‘:$‘.
human indignity and denialof natural riyhts and whicll“b -; ’
i”ijJ
therefore, utterly rejected.
3~
‘:u
&J
301. To correct the history of grossviolation of
integrity and dignity callsfor much on the part
who are in a position to do SO. This is why the \\
initiatives on both ZimbabweandNamibiahave a COT
significancebeyond their beingindependcntly construc(i,
They indicate a new and more promising pageof multi
respectandco-operationbetweenAfrica and the West. ,
302. Seenfrom another vantagepoint, the positiverc
tion not only of Africa but particularly of the legitim
representativesof Zimbabwe, the Patriotic Front, a
Namibia, SWAPO, is not to be lightly appraised.We
however, alsobe realistic. Despitethe historic achicvc
of today, we should alsoexpect that there might a1s.0
certain amount of caution, if not suspicion.And wh)
Indeed, how could it be otherwise? Africans have, .
enough of the conning game in which the dcblht
wisdom is generously offered from outside in
shrewdly to perpetuate tht: bondagesof colonial dc~*‘%~$
4$#
dency and the indignity of racism.
$$
” ##I
303. The espcrjcnceof a Zimbabwedid not do mtldl fo ‘@
remove Africa’s apprehcnsiunsof inner contradictim( :,I.“’
Through the Anglo-American initiative, the Unilrd x
dom and the United Statesintervened to mediatebeiw
the racist Ian Smith and the Patriotic Front. The fro
Statesendeavouredto give this peacefulinitiative 8 ch
All that cameand went. ,Lore groundwork hadto bc
Afier inicr~sivccfforls, the Patriotic Front responde
the Dar cs Salaammeetingmaterializedsnd, to the Afri+P
wasa considerablesuccess.

y$

‘I! ,+,, t-jut to Africa’s sllrprisc, this enccour:@ngpicture w:\s
the w~vid as though there hsd been furlPatriotiz f:r0nt was
e now hear of IIIOV~Sto
sanctions3g;linst the
h, a development which
State and govcrnmcnt
pt a strongfy nurdcd
y breachof snnctians
nt members of the
until, as constituting a particular affront to thr‘
of the African peoples /sre
we
all knew very well that this was
1x1
Smith in his manoeuvresfor
w are we supposedto react wlicri
ream might come true?
SinceWI:are here discussingNamibia, let mesay once
that the role of the five Western countries hasbeen
‘*,~]f nceived not only by Africa but, as YOU have just
$ dtnc& today, by the sole and authentic representativeof
,$,& Narnibianpeople, SWAPO. The Assembly of Headsof
gc$131~
andGovernment meeting at Khartoum having been
“of an accord reachedin Luandaon
,k;bformcd,and I quote,
‘?’
cl;,I*. loly 1978 between SWAP0 and the representativesof
$ & five Westernmembers of tfie Security Council on tfle
rnlposafto effect a negotiated settlement of the Namibian
ion011 tfx basis of resolution 38.5 (1976)“, WCIW~IILYI
grcernentin a special resolution on Namibia[S/IXJ7,
c.r/. Will these efforts fully matcriulite in seffruination and genuine national independence for
ibis? \c’ho knows? Mnrty will certainly continue t0
‘&,gbt.But Africa wants to give peaceful methodsa chance.
4ilerall, as1 have indicated, that is the African way if and
” dkn given:1C~XIS~.
,.’
h,
:i~ae Whilealways welcoming any initiatives for peace,the
+“.mffl hopeof the Afrfcun lies in the institutions of the
I! i”nitedNations,and cspeciafly the Security Council. fn the
,%x resolutionI referred to above, the Assemblyof f-leaifs
k ’ Shte andGovernnlerlt, mindful of the specialresponsiY of the United Nations over Namibia, requested“the
“CtY Council and the Secretary-General of the United
ensto proceed expeJitiouslv towards giving effect to
n 38.5 (1976)
as a fhllow-up to the Luanda
mcnt” in order that t,,tal and full inilt2pt‘ndencemight
utcd to Nallifbia. The Assembly also declared“that
ted Nations must have effective powersand author.
La,exercise supervision and control regarding the
“‘onal administration the security measuresand tfie
the e;pctior] ;Iroc~~s’*. It also reaffirmctf its
of the United Nations Council for Narnihia as the
f authority for the Territory until its inrfcp~ndcrlcc.
onnexion the Assembly requested the Secretaryto maintain consultations with and keep tf\e United
ncil for Namfhia duly informed OII the various
he process to give effect to resolution 385
The Assembly further requested the OAU Presintain contact with the Secretary-Generalin a.n
SUrethat all necessarymeasureswill be taficn in
ievc the independenceof Namibia. Finally, tfle
reitertited its urlerfuivocal slipport for SWAP0 in
for the total lihelation of Naniihiz.
$3
”

..--

307%The role of the United Nations,independently of the
IWdi~~tiOIlOf \C’estrrncountries, ~3s aIs0 the subject of a
different andeshaustiveresolutionon xamibi:l bj. the OAll
COuncifof hfinistersin its Khartounl session[jhit[.j. The
Council called on the Security Council to act decisively
winst any manoeuvresof thr illegaloccupation rigirne to
frustrate the legitimateaspirationsof the Namibian peuple
to self-determination,freedom and national indepr:ndznce
in a united Namibia.
308. The ball is now in the Security Counciland, so far, it
hasbeen well played. But it is now a question of whether
the Council,operatingthrough the United Nations institutions of which the Council for Nsmibi~ is a specislized
body, will continue to effect a decisivesolution which will
fead to free elections, genuine self-determination, and
respectfor the territorial integrity of Namibia.
309. Speakingof territorial integrity and recalling what I
said earlier about the indivisibility of continental integrity
and security, the issueof Walvis Bay continues to engage
the concern of Africa. In the resolution of the‘ OAU
Council of Ministers referred to above, the Council reaffirmed in the mostsolemnmannerthat WalvisBay wasan
integral part of Namibia, and reiterated its unequivocal
condemnationof South Africa’s attempts at annexation of
Walvis Bay, which would constitute a flagrant violation of
Namibia’sunity andterritorial integrity.
310. It is abundantly clear in the referencesI have made
above that Africa, representedat’ all levels, maintains a
strong faith in the United Nations in general and the
Security Councilin particular on this issueof the independence of a unjted Namibia. We were confident that the
Esu!ts of your deliberationswould not ordy prove wurthy
of this faith but alsoof the nameof this great Council and
this great Organization.The result so far has been gratifying, but the real test still liesahead.Let ushope for the best
and continue to do the best towardsthe ultimate objective
ofseff-determinationand independencefor Namibia.
3 11. The PRESIDENT: The nest speakeris the represcntative of Angola, who wishesto spdak in his capacity as
Chairmanof the African Group for the month of July. I
invite him to take a placeat the Councfl table and to make
his statement.
*,*’
312. Mr. DE FIGUEIREDO (Angola): fn my capazity as
Chairmanof the African Group for the month OF July,
allow me, Sir, to extend to you our very best wishesfor
your presidencyof tfle Security Council.
313. The issueat presentunder debateis one that holdsa
specialplacein the heartsand mindsof all Africans. In fact,
if there is one African issueon which all Africans are
completely united, it is that of Namibia. There are 110
conflicting positions;there areno sides;there are, for once,
no camps. ,411of Africa supports the struggle of the
Namibianpwple for self-determinationand indepertdcnce,
led by their national liberation movement, SWAPO. Tile
unanimity of African support is furtiler evid2rlt from the
xsofutfon on Namibia recently adopted by the headsof
State and govcmlncnt meetingat Khartoum. Our views 011
the matter of N3nlibiarl slrvcreignt>and inifcpcndcncu 3rl’

<)\~t
,,,
this
JTlO~t
Il”iCIIt
rL%d~~tilJrb
OfI
t],iS ;!lhJWt,
o,,r ~f~jc:~l~brothers and cotnradcs arc gathercll here nut to
&al]enge, not 10 confront, but to complement each other’s
efforts in the search for a just solution to the N;rmibian
problem.

Iiil) IV354ni] is air iJ~l(:,t,il i,;#rtOf?:.3-;3;h,:,
“I’- .], _
” 81‘;I
3li~lllgCiJl~Ilt
\Votlld affect the full exerciseaC
sovereignty by Namibia. Fishing is also centred in l,alpix 1
Bay, an imporlant sourceof revenue and food for +
,,
future State.
Ii
M’iiIViS

s,,L\ljed

ZUly

314. Namibia is in the unique
position of having been
colonized and re-colonizcd. Since the arrival of the South
Afrjcan armies under the racist Generals Louis Botha and
JU Smuts, which easily overcame the small garrison
maintained there by Kaiser Wilhelm in 1915, the land and
nation of Namibia has been progressively transformed into
a fifth province of South Africa, ruled by Ihe racist
minority at Pretoria, bringing the people of Namibia under
tile same hateful rules and system of apartheid
as our
majority brethren in South Africa itself. All this took place
despitethe League of Nations Mandate that enjoined
Pretoriato “promote to the utmost” the socialprogressof
the*Territory’s native inhabitants. Conditions grew proBeSsivelyworse in the Territory, and Pretoria made every
attempt to strip $e Namibian people of dignity and of
socialandeconomiLprogress.
315. It was not lj’;liil African liberation movements in
southern Africa had”made tremendous sacrifices, after
SWAP0had wageda bitter strugglefor over a decade,after
the sparkof revolution and the thirst for independencehad
spreadlike wildfire over our continent, that international
action began to be co-ordinated with regard to Namibia.
This took the form of the establishmentof the United
NationsCouncil for Namibia and other United Nationsrelatedprogrammes,such as the United Nations Institute
for Namibiabasedat Lusaka. However, the ultimate credit
for the liberation of Namibia goesto its national liberation
movement,SWAPO, which hasreceivedactive support from
progressive
Statesand anti-imperialist forces.
316. For centuries,the history and destiny of Africa have
heen guided, exploited and ruled by the parliaments of
Europe.WesternimperialistsconqueredAfrica and created
a vast empirewhich fueled its economic needs,This empire
hasslowly, sometimesviolently, been eroded, but imperialismhas managedto rear its head in different ways. We
find it difficult to b&eve that South Africa could have
maintained its stranglehold over Namibia without the
active,passiveor tacit support of Westernimperialism.
P
317. We hope that we are at the threshold of Namibian
independence--genuine
independence,and not a ITIOC~CQ’
of it. If political sovereignty is conceded but economic
sovereigntyremains in the hands of racist Pretoria, then
independencewill be a myth-a sham-and social justice
andfreedom will continue to be a mirage.It is nbt for this
that the Namibjan people have shedtheir blood. They have
not undergone torture, loss of rights, iiicarceration and
deathonly to inherit a semblanceof democracy. Africans
are prepared to G&t further to gain what is rightfully
theirs:freedom,choice, indepcndcnce--afree Aftica.

)’

318. Thus the economic independenceof Namibia is vital
1~ ils politica] WCIJ-~N$~and exercise of sosereignty. And
h’nmibia’sps$tical indcp~ndcnc.eand economic progress
hc;t!l depend(11W:;jl\rjsn;ly, tjlc Tcrrjtov’s only &cp-waler
port, which \vas illcgall>~anncsedlast year by Seth Afi-ica.
3‘0

OtIlCf

319. ]t is inconceivable that South Africa shouldk’ ,,‘)
allowed fo man the Rooikop air, seaand militav banela j b-4
Walvis Bay, where South Africa maintains a battalion ti ~~,,.:
j
ground forces backed by armoured and tank squadront,t”;*
The air basehasthe long low-altitude runway necessary
rq /:’
coastalreconnaissance
flights and bomber and intercept& :,
aircraft. It alsocarriesa transmitterin the relay of strategic j
defencesystemsto the South African naval basenearCad.
Town. In fact, someNATO countries have alreadyused;$a,*
Walvis Bay facilities, Thus, other than the fact that \yallk ,i’
Bay handles90 per cent of Namibia’s trade, and al] i!x. _/
mineral exports, the control of WalvisBay by agovernmint
other thin that of an independentNamibia would consti,
tute not only a flagrant violation of the territorial i.ntcg+
of Namibia,but would alsoposea constant threat not ‘“dy .to the peaceandsecurity of Namibia,but to aIl of so\nhcn ir
,*
Africa.
320. Let there be no doubt in the minds of the intrrng ,;
tional community that Namibianindependenceis in si&t 2ri :
the outcome of the heroic strugglewaged by the g;illEia
people of Namibia. Side by side with the political and ‘,+
armed liberation struggle, SWAP0 cadres insideNm&\a I:
have long been carrying out intensive political work al &C ‘J,
grassroots level to blunt the counter-revolutiona~ ait&/
tjes by the South African-sponsoredpuppets. It is th _,
unceasingand revolutionary struggleby the genuinefrcce ,,I
dam fighlers of Namibia that has brought mattersto (1~. ?
1 ma,,
presentstage.
:.;<:
G>
321. A free and secureNamibiais vital to the securil)
$gI”“~,,
southernAfrica, and a free and securesouthern Afri;z ‘“r
vital to the security of all of Africa. History doesnot give1
secondchance.Therefore all of US shoulddo our utnlosltu
seize the present opportunity to help resolve this bittea 1:
conflict and rectify one of the most extreme injurticcs0s _
this century.
322. A free and secureNamibiacm result only fromtb ’
assurancethat the Namibianpeople will not be bclra>cdt:J‘
even as genuine independenceseemsnear. One W
ensuringthjs is by the closeguidanceand strongprese
the United Nations, which is Only fitting, sine
international community acceptsthat the United ~1
Counci] for Namibiais the solelegitimate authority for
Territory till the Namibianpeoplecan exercisethei
to self-dcterrllinationand independence.I cando nobctcrf
than quote from the resolutionjust adopted at the fiflcc
ordinary sessionof the Assemblyof Heads of State
Government of the Organization Of African Qlity
Khartoum, which declaresthat
“the United Nations must have effective poiv@ 8:‘”
authority to exercise supervisionmd control regarL~i”sfl
the transitional administration,the security mcasure~a”,
I,
the conduct of the election process”.
323. \Silhout strong guaranteesfrom the United satb“:friends of Namibia \sill he justified in eJltcrtaini%
afl ”

jy

* -:

* ;,,,,s
about the intentions and honesty of the repme
‘_
:.,d: a,1prcscnt controls Namibia. There is no doubt that in
q f I,t” ,$I Such apprehensions WE fully justified.
.
r$4. A ,nore recent example further compounds our fears:
&&,tie,
where no true transfer of power has taken
)
er
where
the racist Smith regime still rules with a few
p;% *
;,mctic changes to foster the illusion that a minority
d,,me has been transformed into a majority one. We are
+:crfnioed not to allow that to happen to our Namibian
fJitflds. Hence we re-emphasize the full involvement of the
f+jlCd Nations
and the effective power of the United
?;;rlionsmachinery inside Namibian territory. The internae31 community qwes this rt~t~ch to the people of Namibia
$;J 10 the principles for which the United Nations stands.

)$,,I

$25, AlI of us hope that we shall soon gather here again in
fg %curity Council formally to admit an independent
ibis into the United Nations. Until that time, we shall
t to continue our vigilance over and our support for the
&mihian people.
$Jb. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the represengtivr! of Benin. I invite him to take a place at the Council
?lc and to make his statement.
flf, hlr. BOYA (Benin) (inteqvetafion from French):
‘& delegationof the People’s Republic of Benin would
‘;*
I..il to thank you, Mr. President, and the other membersof
$4 Councilfor having permitted it to participate in this
,&Lte, the importance of which is clear to all. My
legationwishesto take this opportunity to congratulate
9%an your assumptionof the presidency of the Council
as%
thepresentmonth. The delegationof Benin isgratified,
$ Iheexcellent relations that unite our two countriesand
“-%:r that the co-operation between Canada and the
$C’SRepublic of Benin will grow in strength on the
isof the commoninterestsof our two peoples.Thusit is
ttcll pleasurefor me to seeyou directing the work of the
~J~~~ncil
at a time when it is considering the question of
%ibia. \v e are convinced that under your presidencythe
f4fvuncil
will conclude the present debate in the interest of
!A Kamibianpeople in particular and the African peoples
Wpneral,
88, The question of the complete and genuineindepen‘@ of Namibia and the liberation of that international
grrri(orYfrom racist oppression economic exploitation
c” QJlturalobscurantismis a cruiial one for my country.
k&cd, the people of Benin whi ch since 1972 have been
?+Jed in a stubborn and’ determined struggle against
zti@ domination know very well that the preservationof
“‘it completeindlpcndence, their fundamental freedoms
“’ their territorial integrity depends upon the total
““‘ation
of that bastion of oppression of southern
kfiQ*

,egTheindependenceof Namibia is one essentialstepin
$I&?ration of Africa in other words, the consolidation

unrcscrvedlythe content of the statctrlertt
just madein the
Council by the Presidentof SWAPO,S:l~nN-ujama,concerning the enormoussacrificesmadewillin;l~ by the sonsof
Namibia for the liberation of their country from the
colonial yoke andoppression.
330. That said, I would expressbriefly the point of view
of my Governmenton this important question.
331. The Security Council has just taken an important
decision for the liberation of Namibia within the framework of its resolution385 (1976). The People’sRepublic of
Benin, which was then a memberof the Council, participated in the preparation and adoption of resolution
385 (1976). My country will therefore support any action
aimedat implementingboth the letter and the spirit of’ that
resolution.That is why the delegationof Benin would like
to emphasizethe followingpoints.
332. Wdvisd Bay is an integral part of Namibia. The
Securiiy Councilmustfirmly opposethe manoeuvresof the
racistPretoria rigime for the purposeof severingWalvisBay
from Namibia. The decisionto annex that enclave, proclaimed by South Africa on 31 August 1977, is null and
void. Walvis Bay is part and parcel of the sordid plans of
imperialism;it is meant to serve as a permanent basefor
aggressionagainstan independentNamibia.The people of
Benin categorically reject the nominal independenceand
neo-colonialalienationof Namibia.
333. The stationingof 1,500 South African troops at the
border betweenAngolaandNamibiaisa seriousobstacleto
the process leading to the genuine independence of
Namibia. The Security Council must therefore call for the
completedisbandingof thoseSouth African troops. That is
a sinequa nolt of a peacefulprocesstowardsindependence.
334. The electoral processmust be assured
by democratic
guarantees.
335. Finally, the Security Councilmusttake the necessary
stepsto dischargeits responsibilitiesfully and ensurethe
achievementof true independencefor Nar&bia.
;
336. The representative of those who ‘organized the
Sharpevillemassacres,
of thosewho organizedthe SowetQt
massacres,
the representativeof the executionersof Steve
Biko and so many other South African patriots, hasjust
madea very clear statement.He is apparentlyconvinced of
what he hassaid,andthat is why my delegationis forced to
believe that the resolutionswhich the Security Council has
just adopted constitute a veritable trap. But the people of
Namibia,under the firm leadershipof SWAPO,will succeed
in thwarting all the sordidmanoeuvresof the racistPretoria
r&me and the imperialist Powers designedto make the
independenceof Namibiameaningless.
337. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative of Mali. I invite him to take a placeat the Council
table and to makehisstatement.

q tie independenceoi African countries. The absolute
‘vrt of the People’sRepublic of Benin for the African
B”ona1
liberation movements clearly enunciated in the
338. Mr, KANTE (Mali) (intupr~tutiw frum Frr?ndz):
$I’$mnlWspeechof 30 Noveinber 1972 is basedessen- First, my dclegatiorl. would like to thartk you,
bb
o11this analysis.That is why my deligation supports Mr. President, and throlrgh you all the mcmbcrs of the
31

*

Spillrjty C!nincil, for granting 11s this opportunity
to
partjcjpate
in this
r3cbatewhich is $0 important for all of
Africa. The delegation of hlali cannot but be pleasedat
seeingyou preside over this debate, in view of the good
relationsthat unite our two Governments and peoples.
339. The Security Council is meeting againto considerthe
Namibian tragedy. In the view of my delegation, this
meetingis of paramount significance. For is this not the
first time, in the more than 30 years in which the United
Nationshasbeen involved in this tragedy, that we have seen
a generalagreementreached, one that would free Namibia
from the White racist yoke of Pretoria?
340. Hope residesabove all in the fact that there seemsto
exist within the Security Council and SWAP0 the political
wiI1 to embark upon a,processwhich should lead to a just
andpeaceful settlement of the Namibian question. Moreover,‘it is this will which made it possibleto reach the
agreementconcluded at Luanda between the five Western
membersof the Cbuncil and SWAPO, which has always
beenrecognisedby ?-AU and the United Nations asthe sole
and authentic representative of the Namibian people. For
the sakeof clarity, n$delegation would like to emphasize
that the Luanda agreementhinges upon three indissoluble
elements:first, the Western plan; secondly, the reaffirmationof the fact that Walvis Bay belongsto the Narnibian
entity; thirdly, the fact that the processof decolonization
in Namibiashouldbe car-ricdout, supervisedand controlled
by the SpecialRepresentativeof the Secretary-General.
341. Despite this climate of optimism which seemsto
exist, the moment is grave and the time has certainly not
cometo sheathe our swords. Indeed, we are aware of the
fact that the Namibian problem is without doubt one of
thosequestionsthat have put the authority and credibility
of the United Nations to its greatesttest.
342. In this connexion, my delegation must recall that
GeneralAssemblyresolution 2145 (XXI), which put an end
to South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia, has never been
able to be implemented, as was the casewith numerous
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly and with the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971.6 And the South
African racist regime’s only responseto those:important
decisionswas to establish in Namibia the most inhuman
systemof oppressionin the world, introducing the abhorrent policy of apurtl~cid. In its arrogance, Pretoria has
always cynically opposed and flouted all United Nations
decisions.And yet, a singleyear wassufficient for the five
Western members of the Council to compel the South
African raciststo accept the principle of Namibian independence.Today it hasbeen proved that it wasbecauseof the
absence
of political will on the part of thosePowersthat we
had to lament on so many occasionsthe uscIcssprolongation of the Namibian crisis and the suffering of our
brothersin Namibia.
343. The drama is no longer being played between
SWAPO,the solelegitimate rcprescntative of the Namibian

32

l’cople! and the racist Government of
been disqualified by the Organisation s
1966. The drama is now being played b
the Council seated around this fable, bet
of the Namibian people is their responsi
sions that the mcmbcrs of the Council will draw from
work must be clear and the important decisions that
will take at the conclusion of the debate must be abs
unequivocal and unambiguous with respect to t
tion to the Namibian people of their full national
the safeguarding of the territorial integrity
including Walvis Bay. The residual forces of
Pretoria Government must be localized and netrtraIize
the maximum extent possible by the peace forces o
United Nations.
344. SWAP0 and Africa today demonstrated to the em
world their attachment to peace when they agreed to
down at the negotiating table, just as in th
demonstrated their ardour in the liberation str
again it is up to the Western Powers not to di
in the implementation of the important decis
Council will be taking. They must make a
commitment to begin the process which will lead ta
decolonization of Namibia within its national frontiers,
345. At this final stage, there can
bypassing the issue of Walvis Bay, whid
sociologically, geographically and legally an inte
Namibia. Is it not precisely Such a shirking
at the moment of decolonisation that lies a
grave tensions which continue to rend the
the acute crises that continuously end
South-East Asia and other regions? The me
Council cannot sanction the unjustified cl
and thus deliberately help to implant a the
an independent Namibia, creating a SO
could at my moment unhdl
One Of
warsof history.
346. The decolonization of Namibia must bc full
complete, and the colonial South African administr;l
with its police and residualtroops, must leave theTern
as soon as the Special Representativeof the
Generalso orders,in pursuanceof hismandate.
347. ln the interview which the Secretary of St
Foreign and CommonwealthAffairs of the Unilc
dom, hlr. David Owen, granted on 24 June to the n
Le nc~uvelobsen~oreur,he acknowledgedthat “the W
world generally doesnot support nationalist IWNI
congratulatehim 011 his candour. This thought WcuId
to indicate desirefor a changein attitude in tlrc
stanceof the WesternPowers.

t $7:

348. That would be a signof the times. hiay thedecWimn
taken at this seriesof meetingsof the Security C
their implementation in the field provide CO1lfi
that. The processthat has been begun today
crowning achicvcment in the national liberatic
that the heroic people of Namibia have been
many years under the flag of their vanguardandsP@’
party, SWAPO. The people and Government o
through me once again to assurethem

5

‘\

\vc welcome President Sam Nujoma, who is
&d
&gflL hL’rL’1 that ar&nt patriot, that true, irrcfut;rb[c
I ,Ir, cf the Namibian people under whose dynamic and
,~ltnd&ip SWAP0 has ww this very decisive victory.

‘3.5

6 ‘c That is the message His Excellency President hIouss:r
Srhvf, h& of State of Mali, especially asked mc to
Council on behalf of the people and
II the IlOpC tll3t the great decisions
,,ncil was to take on Namibia’s future would help us
the many frustrations and the abusive vetoes of the
Powers which, alas, for many years have marked
evolution of the Nnmibian tragedy in. the United

. ‘IlIe PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the repretivc of Sri Lanka. I invite him to take a place at the
cji table and to make his statement.
r. COONEKATNE
(Sri Lanka): Mr. President, let
convey to you our warm congratulations on your
ion of the presidency of the Council for this
I should like to thank you and the other members
cil for giving me an Opportunity to participate
g as it discusses the situation in Namibia. I
th as representative of Sri Lanka and as
of the current Chairman of the Group of
Non-Aligned Countries have always in
expressed their unswerving solidarity
ause and the Namibian people, and it is
I wish to place before the members of
t of a telegram sent to the Secretaryg*“:rJl
I and the President of the Security Council by the
1, !sters for Foreign Affairs of non-aligned countries at
at meeting at Belgrade, Yugoslavia. The message reads
lows:

‘9, Ihe decisions adopted today mark a certain advance
bards the goals of the freedom national independence
“lerritorial integrity of Namibih. However, as we have
there remain areas to be
ached. It is a period calling
t of all countries and, on
e Group of Non-Aligned
assure the people of Namibia of the
g solidarity of the non-aligned
t’ The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the reprei”~Gvc of sc negal. I invite him to take a place at the
‘:xil table and t o make his statcrrrent.
’ iha SYLLA (s eneya!) [iiltrrprctcrtion from French);
“c P’esiderlt of the Republic of Senegal deemed it fitting
b SPeciallYrepresented at this meeting of the Security
“@l to testify to his faith in this international OrganizaY in these historic circumstances. Throughout
events that led to today’s meeting, President
Sedar Ser~gh~,r has bclicvcd that the Unitccl
” Pr~vikJ the orrl) valid frJrr!rw\lrk within wtiicli 111
33

conctudcd. When he \v:rs told of the Luanc!~ agrccntcnt, he
was pleased that the nzgntiations leading to a settlement of
the Namibian prohlcnr were being conducted again within
the ideal framework of the United Nations.
356. Mr. President, I should like to say that I am
particularly pleased to see you presiding over this important
meeting, which the Security Council is devoting to the
thorny problem of Namibia. My pleasure is particularly
understandable because your country Canada, and mine,
Senegal, are bound by close ties of co-operation based on
mutual respect.
357. On this occasion I should like to thank the members
of the Council for granting my delegation’s request to speak
in this debate.
358. We are sheeting here in circumstances that can only
be called exceptional. The Luanda agreement is indeed the
culmination of long efforts to put an end to a situation so
often condemned by the entire international community.
One need only recall that ever since 1966, when the
General Assembly decided to withdraw the administration
of Namibia from South Africa, many Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions have been adopted but not
implemented. Today, the five Western members of the
contact group of the Security Council, notwithstanding the
suspicion caused by their initiative, have succeeded, with
SWAPO, in finding a platform that provides us with a
glimmer of hope on an otherwise rather gloomy horizon in
southern Africa. We think it important to consider this
initiative as a highly political action aimed at producing a
~1 solution, one that is internationally acceptable, to the
problem before us.
359. We realize that the Luanda document could not be
perfect and we regret that. However, what seems to us the
most important consideration is that it constitutes a basis
for action. In this sense, it is highly positive. The conflicting
positions which it seeks to reconcile could not, in our view,
be reconciled in a better manner. In this sense, we must
keep our realism, as we must recognize that the resolutions
thus far adopted by our Organization have‘not all been
implemented. Whether we wish to admit it or not, there has-. ~
been, against the will of the Organization, a situation which
the most stubborn efforts have not succeeded in changing.
360. Now that the Unitrd Nations has taken the initiative,
we would say that the problem of the credibility of the
Organization will depend on the follow-up to the decisions
adopted a few moments ago by the Security Council, and
particularly on the unresolved question of Walvis Boy, for
the Organization cannot accept that a country should come
into existence in a Balkanized and mutilated state. Thus,
thanks to this welcome initiative, with which we are very
pleased, as President Senghor said when on 5 January 1976
he opened the Dakar Intzrnntional Conference on Namibia
and Human Rights, “the time has perhaps come for the
international community to assume its responsibilities”

.

36 I. SWAP0 has also just dernonstr-atcd great pcliilitXJ
acunlen. As a liberation movem~~nt, it has ctrnJlr..ted 311
to S;lfarm21 str~lggl~: to g;lin for its pe ~plt’ t!le riglli
li

in~I~~j~cI1~1~lIZC:I1111 It.ri;c:~lill
suv~~r;ignty
,j~~~,~~lliil!~lli~~Il,
within the fr;inlcwork
of territorial inlrgrity. ~ICIWLW~,
today jt has assumed historic responsibilities by taking a
pIace at the table with Five countries, whose responsibility
for the Territory which
it Seeks to liberate is undeniable, in
order to negotiate a document of such far-reaching significance. It has thus agreed to take risks, incalculable risks,
which are in keeping with its determination to restore all
the fundamental rights Of its people.
362. I should like here to pay a tribute to Mr. Sam
who, if there was any need, has now confirmed his
stature as a leader and statesman.

Nujoma,

370. The PRESIDENT: As there are no further narnct<lT
the list of speakers,I shall now make a statementIn ;;
capacity asthe representativeof CANADA.

363. I would also take this opportunity to pay a tribute to
the courage of the freedom fighters-those
who are still
alive and those who have fallen on the battIefieId-who
have made possible the dialogue taking place today in the
Secqity Council.

371. It is with great satisfactionand full confidencecla
the future will bear out the momentousdecisionwe r.hyZc
reached that Canada supported resolution 431(lsllt;
today. The mandate which has thus been given to tia,
Secretary-Generalwill enablehim to fake the preIimIn8q;
stepsthat will put into effect the proposalfor a settIcrrr,, :
which has been agreedupon by the principal irJtcrrtr,t
parties--the Governmentof South Africa and SWAPQ %,,$
will ultimately lead Namibia to independence,wI]ic~J:) i
goal of which the international community and 4
Namibianshavelong beenstriving.
$~,
“li

364. Senegal believes that the basis for an acceptable
settlement has j&t been created. It is now for the
intemationa1 comm$ity
to provide guarantees for a just
and genuine solution.’
‘1
365. The United Nations must demonstrate that it can
discharge important and complex functions in helping
Namibia to organize elections and accede to independence.
However, free elections cannot take place where there is
repression or under conditions of insecurity and intimidation. The international community must insist that all
necessary steps should be taken to ensure respect for law
and order and guarantee general security throughout the
Territory.

372. We rejoice today not only because the Ilr,it;,Y
Nations has once more demonstratedits vitality hut a,V.ec
especiallybecausethe Namibianpeople will at hg !xd l,+
given the opportunity to determinetheir own futurc.‘I&,
struggle for liberty, human rights and economicin
dencehas been long and arduous,but we believetl
end of this struggIeis now in sight.
I”

366. We are thus looking forward to positive proposals by
the Secretary-General with regard to the role ofhis Special
Representative and the gUa~i~JltC!CS
necessary for the proper
implementation of the agreement that has been reached. We
would also hope that the United Nations Council for
Namibia will continue to play a role in keeping with its
mandate. We are convinced that that Council has an
important role to play in the complex transitional period in
Namibia. My delegation hopes that the selfishness of some
will not prevail over the self-respect ‘of others.

373. (‘anadais proud to havebeencloSely 3SSOCi3kd
‘?+ii
the difficult processOf negotiation w’hich hasresult:: @J
today's
decjsjon.The numerouscountries and OJgXk&#
which have contributed to this success-and I Wc& I
mention in particular the front-line States, South A
and SwAP()-mt& be congratulated on their Spiri
co-operation and accommodation. Had they not be
willing t0 forgo the rigidities Of the past and prepared
entertain new concepts, the international comm
,vou]d still be facing the SameimpaSSethat hasWiStedf&i
y a&
the past30 years.
*(y$$#
:“i”,l
374. But, more importantly, we must now look 10
future. Much remainsto be donebefore we canw
this chamberthe new governmentof indepcndcntNarrG
More than ever before, the co-operation of all h!
the United Nations and of all Namibianswill be
More than ever before, we shall have to reI
Secretary-Generalandhis staff to implement the agree
that has been reached.We know wc can coun
devotion and experience,and they in turn can CO
support. Our interest in Namibia wiII not cease
adoption of resolutionshere. Welook forward to
establishmentof the best of relations with in
Namibia.

367. The results achieved at this afternoon’s n!eeting SIIOW
once again that, if we ah remain attentive to the voices
expressing the profound aspirations of the peoples of the
world, we can spare the international community needless
tension and suffering and thereby contribute to the advent
of a truly humanitarian civilization, And, in conclusion, I
wish to express the hope that this meeting proves to be the
culmination of the collective efforts of the international
community to restore to Namibia its proper boundaries, its
inalienable right to justice and pcacc and its authentic
personality.
368. Mr. TROYANOVSKY

(Union of Soviet Socialist
J’?~III~?rrssin~~):
At today’s meetins the representativeof the South African r&me madea
statement. That statement cannot hc vicwcd as anything
but a strong
challcngc to the Llnitcd Nations and the
Security COunciI. It once :Ig;lin c011frr11s
that the racist
Republics)

r5dlue d~bcsrrrlt irlt& to abide by the dccisiollr
United Naticlns. In addition, the Pretoria r~J,rer~I’~.;‘~
intcrpretcd the five-Powerplan in such a way asto jr;; :j”
the caution advocatedby us aswell asby other d 1 1.’ b
e esatiiy,,
369. As for the slanderousremarksmade by the rcra,
sentative of the SouthAfrican regimeaimedat ou
and its people,I Shall not answer them. 1 merely
Wishr %t~~;,
t
that the fact that the Soviet polcy in suppo
struggle of the peoplesof Africa againstcoloni
racism has arousedthe concern of the represcn
Pretoria provesits efficacy andaffords us great Sa

{irrtcrpwtatim

375. Many of those who have spoken during this dc’~~~
have stressedthe historic importance Of our cwrl”‘~ ,
.,

‘,
34

-

we certainly share this sentiment and are above ajl
,a:lti,lla that what the world is being shown today is that
t”3.Cf,ll solutions for the most difficult and ;lj~j~Lrr~ntly
v ‘I
e.z,tric;rbjc
problems remain possible if there exist the
patience and tolerance. J+‘e hope
our action concerning Namibia
as to how other political problems

&W.

i

Federal Republic 6f Germany, the United Kingdom and the
United States, and in particular with the statcmznt made by
SWrCt:lry Of State Van<? on the question of IYajvis Eay.
377. I should like to thank the members of the Council,
the Secretary-General and all others who have been closejy
involved in the process which has led to the successful
conclusion of this meeting for the full co-operation they
have extended to me, as well as for their kind sentiments.

t‘VP
~ ~q& Finally, I should like to associate myself with the
Znlarks mde by the Foreign Ministers of France, the

Tile mectitlg

d

35

rose at S.45 p.m.
