S/2006/778

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 September 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 28 September 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I wish to refer to my letter of 1 August 2005 (S/2005/528) informing the
President of the Security Council of the progress made by the Cameroon-Nigeria
Mixed Commission, and his reply of 12 August 2005 (S/2005/529), which took note
of my intention to continue the activities of the United Nations support team to the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission with funding from the regular budget. In the
same spirit, by the present letter, I would like to inform you of the latest
achievements and activities undertaken by the Mixed Commission. Through my
good offices, and with the support of the United Nations Secretariat, I have been
facilitating the implementation of the ruling of the International Court of Justice of
10 October 2002 on the land and maritime boundary between Cameroon and
Nigeria.
With the final appropriation of $5.6 million from the United Nations regular
budget for the biennium 2004-2005, and the initial appropriation of $7.5 million for
2006, the Mixed Commission has been able to move the process smoothly and
peacefully and to keep an open dialogue and communication between the two
countries. The following are some of the activities for which the United Nations
team of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission has provided substantive,
technical and logistical support.
As I informed you (S/2006/419), on 12 June 2006, I invited the President of
the Cameroon, Paul Biya, and the President of Nigeria, Olusegun Obasanjo, to
Greentree, New York, where they signed the Greentree Agreement between the
Republic of Cameroon and the Federal Republic of Nigeria concerning the
modalities of withdrawal and transfer of authority in the Bakassi Peninsula. It was
also signed by four witness States (Germany, the United States of America, France
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland). The Agreement
established a Follow-up Committee to monitor the implementation of the
Agreement. The Follow-up Committee, which is supported by the CameroonNigeria Mixed Commission, already met twice, on 10 July and on 31 August 2006,
and is expected to meet on a monthly basis as needed thereon.
The United Nations team of civilian observers of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed
Commission is working with the Follow-up Committee as well. It is expected that
following the withdrawal and transfer of authority in the Bakassi Peninsula (August
2006), the Mixed Commission will recruit observers up to full authorized strength,

06-54567 (E) 041006

*0654567*

S/2006/778

and will deploy them in the Peninsula to consolidate this achievement, as was the
case earlier in the Lake Chad area and along the land boundary.
The United Nations observer team, which has also been tasked to accompany
the demarcation exercise, and which operates accompanied by representatives of
Cameroon and Nigeria, has reported that the situation remains calm along the
boundary. In view of the rights and well-being of the affected populations, the
Mixed Commission has also continued discussion with Cameroon, Nigeria and
development partners on projects to promote cross-border cooperation, which would
benefit the local population on both sides.
The activities related to the demarcation exercise have progressed steadily,
although with some delays. So far, about 462 km have been demarcated. The
demarcation exercise will be followed by the emplacement of pillars, a final survey
and final mapping to be financed by voluntary contributions. In this regard, the
financial resources needed to publish the demarcation contracts on the procurement
website in order to invite bids are most likely to be met shortly. The Mixed
Commission has signed an agreement with the European Commission for a
voluntary contribution of €4 million, which, once received, will help meet the initial
estimated cost of $12 million for the whole demarcation exercise. Previous
contributions received are from Cameroon and Nigeria, $3 million each, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, £1 million, the European
Commission, €320,000, and Canada, Can$ 273,508.
Concerning the maritime boundary, it is expected that the delineation of the
maritime boundary will be finalized in 2006. This will allow the Mixed Commission
to address as necessary the tri-point between Cameroon, Nigeria and Equatorial
Guinea.
Further to the completion of the withdrawal and transfer of authority in the
Lake Chad area (December 2003), along the land boundary (July 2004), and in the
Bakassi Peninsula (August 2006), in 2007 the Mixed Commission will be able to
focus further on the demarcation exercise, on the promotion of cross-border
cooperation and on the rights of the affected populations. Taking into account the
progress so far in the demarcation exercise and the calendar of the activities related
to the Greentree Agreement, it is already expected that the Mixed Commission will
not be able to fully complete its mandate by the end of 2007.
I would like to underscore that up to 2003, the Mixed Commission was funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. During the period 2004-2006, the activities of
the Mixed Commission were funded through the United Nations regular budget. The
Governments of Austria, Canada, Italy, Norway, Pakistan, Sweden and Uruguay
have provided in kind support for the work of substantive and technical support of
the Mixed Commission (military and legal experts), in addition to the logistical
support provided by the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria.
Given the cost-effectiveness of this mission and the important tasks remaining
at this juncture in the work of the Mixed Commission, and taking into account that
the Presidents of Cameroon and Nigeria recently renewed once again their
commitment to pursue the peaceful implementation of the ruling of the International
Court of Justice and to work together to move the process forward until its
completion, it is my intention to ask for additional resources from the regular budget

2

06-54567

S/2006/778

for the Mixed Commission for 2007 to help advance the peaceful implementation of
the ruling of the International Court of Justice.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-54567

3
