S/PV.8477

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8477th meeting

Thursday, 28 February 2019, 4.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndong Mba. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Ms.Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Myanmar

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-05868 (E)
*1905868*

S/PV.8477

The situation in Myanmar

The meeting was called to order at 4.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Myanmar
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bangladesh
and Myanmar to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Shahidul Haque, Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Christine
Sсhranеr Burgener, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on Myanmar, to participate in this meeting.
The Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Ms. Sсhranеr Burgener.
Ms. Sсhranеr Burgener: Since I began my
assignment, nine months ago, I have visited Myanmar
five times and Bangladesh three times and have taken
other tours in the region and beyond. Eighteen months
have now passed since the recent violence in Rakhine
state forced hundreds of thousands of Rohingya and
others to flee their homes, including across the border
into Bangladesh. In the broader context of Myanmar’s
democratic transition, military and civilian tensions
persist ahead of general elections next year and the
peace process remains fragile, while the country
struggles with the legacy of decades of rule by the army
and, subsequently, fundamental issues relating to the
protection of human rights.
With regard to Rakhine, in addition to
accountability, I have underlined in my engagements
the following steps needed: ending the violence in
Rakhine, providing unfettered access to affected people,
addressing the root causes and spurring inclusive and
equitable development. I have witnessed at first-hand
in my two visits to Cox’s Bazar refugees living in
extremely challenging temporary conditions with little
sign of hope. While Bangladesh and host communities
have been very generous, we cannot expect that to
continue indefinitely. The recently launched United
Nations joint response plan for 2019 to benefit both
refugees and host communities needs urgent funding.
2/22

28/02/2019

Meanwhile, I am concerned that the heavy fighting with
the Arakan Army will further impact efforts toward the
dignified, voluntary and safe return of refugees.
I have appealed to all sides to ensure the protection
of civilians and to uphold their responsibilities under
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. For refugees in Bangladesh, knowing that
the United Nations and its partners are present at their
places of origin will be a positive incentive for them
to return. In developing durable solutions for those
displaced within Myanmar, it is vital that the current
positive efforts by Myanmar to draft a national strategy
on the closure of camps for internally displaced persons
address the underlying issues in Rakhine, including the
question of citizenship and that of restoring freedom
of movement.
Even prior to the fighting with the Arakan Army,
the level of access was a problem. Access in the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
between Myanmar and the United Nations Development
Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to support the creation of
conditions for the return of refugees from Bangladesh
was insufficient. That must improve in order to address
the fragility of all communities in Rakhine. Any
complementarity, especially at the regional level by the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, in support of
the bilateral efforts between Myanmar and Bangladesh
will be crucial.
At the request of both Governments, I will
continue my shuttle diplomacy and to engage all other
regional stakeholders. I will also continue to encourage
Myanmar’s greater international cooperation towards
the effective and holistic implementation of all the
recommendations of the Annan Advisory Commission
on Rakhine state. With respect to related key issues, I
am in close contact at the highest levels on the steps that
authorities are taking with a view to transparent and
credible procedures. In my recent visits to Myanmar, I
advocated a zero tolerance for discrimination campaign
from top down. In addition, I will aim to coordinate and
foster greater intercommunal dialogue in Rakhine state
through my office in Naypyidaw.
Accountability is essential for combating impunity
and fostering genuine reconciliation. Myanmar’s
independent commission of inquiry has responded
positively to my recommendation that it should engage
with United Nations human rights entities, such as the
19-05868

28/02/2019

The situation in Myanmar

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the fact-finding mission. There
needs to be complementarity, including with the most
recent Human Rights Council-mandated independent
investigative mechanism. But national responsibility
and ownership of accountability are also important,
not least from the perspective of the victims in Cox’s
Bazar and throughout Myanmar. In line with the Basic
Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy
and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of
International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law, accountability
should not be seen solely in terms of criminal liability.
I therefore encourage various initiatives that give
victims different kinds of voices and support projects
that foster dialogue, as mentioned.
With regard to the peace process, we are witnessing
in other areas beyond Rakhine, including Kachin and
Shan states, setbacks in the complex peace process.
In those areas too, many affected civilians require
assistance and access there too has been restricted.
Despite some positive steps towards an inclusive and
peaceful solution, such as the 21 December unilateral
ceasefire declaration by the Tatmadaw, tensions have
escalated, including between the Government side and
the signatory groups of the October 2015 nationwide
ceasefire agreement. It is the responsibility of all
parties to exercise restraint and avoid actions that can
reverse the important gains of the peace process. I stand
ready to help support that process. Some refugees from
the camps in Thailand recently returned to Myanmar.
It will be important to seize on such important
confidence-building measures and to build momentum.
General activities related to the 2020 elections
could add to the domestic complexities. In such an
environment, State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi is evidently moving ahead carefully on democratic
reform, as highlighted by recent efforts on the
constitutional amendment. It will be paramount that
reform issues address institutionalized discrimination.
I am grateful that the Government of Myanmar agreed
to and facilitated the installation of my small four-staff
Naypyidaw Office in January, helping to reinforce the
constructive cooperation that has been extended to
me so far, as reflected in the access I have been able
to enjoy.
We must collectively continue to build trust and
work in partnership with the Government of Myanmar.
I will continue to speak truth and help build bridges and

S/PV. 8477

greater mutual understanding, including in support of
the United Nations role in upholding international norms
and standards. This requires confidence-building and
regular communication with all leaders. While I share
concern that progress has been slow, my first five visits
to Myanmar have highlighted the enormous challenges
that will require tremendous international support.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Schraner Burgener for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar. It is
very good to know that her office in Myanmar is up
and running.
At the start, I apologize if I may have to slip away
before the meeting is over. I am hosting an event for
Brian Urquhart, who turned 100 today. Colleagues
will know that Brian Urquhart was one of the original
officials of the United Nations, working closely with
very many Secretaries-General, and indeed was
instrumental in setting up peacekeeping and also
the International Atomic Energy Agency. I therefore
ask members to forgive me if I need to step away for
that event.
The Council has focused great attention on the
events in Myanmar and particularly the Rohingya, and
I think it is fair to say that it remains one of the most
pressing issues before us. The forced displacement
of several hundreds of thousands of people across
an international border is bound to be something the
Council needs to keep before it, and the alleged crimes
against humanity committed against the Rohingya also
deserve the most serious attention of the Council. I am
also very grateful to the Special Envoy for setting out
the situation across the country, which I think we also
need to have regard to in the Council.
I want to start, if I may, on political developments.
The United Kingdom is a long-standing supporter of the
Burmese people’s efforts to emerge from many decades
of military rule and to transition to democratic civilian
Government. As did the Special Envoy, we recognize
that Burmese democracy is still young and fragile, but
the upcoming elections next year will be an important
moment and efforts to consolidate the democratic
transition are ongoing. This is why it was very good to
hear about the constitutional amendments.

19-058683/22

S/PV.8477

The situation in Myanmar

As I said, we recognize that conflict continues
across Myanmar, and the loss of life and displaced
people that we have seen are also of great concern. I
think that it is beyond doubt that a nationwide peace
settlement that guarantees rights and security for all the
peoples of Myanmar is also a very high priority. I think
we should be clear about two particular things. It is the
Burmese military that is the root cause of these longstanding problems. In our pronouncements, I think that
it is very important that the Council make very clear
that we, united, are on the side of all those in Myanmar
who want peace and democratic change and that we
will help them in that.
But I should like to concentrate on the Rohingya for
the reasons I have outlined. We are very disappointed
that more has not been possible and that there has not
been more progress on getting the refugees back. That
obviously includes creating the conditions in which the
refugees feel able to go back, which is why the proposal
concerning the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State
became so important. I want to be clear that the United
Kingdom is not ideological about the refugees returning
home. They need to return home, but they can do so
only on the basis of the principles, established by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), that returns are safe, voluntary,
dignified and secure. We really want those principles
to be upheld.

28/02/2019

To our mind, the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State remain the best
blueprint for Rakhine. We will be very interested to
see the Myanmar Government take three initial steps.
We would like the United Nations coordinator’s offer
to develop a transparent joint implementation plan to
be accepted. We would like UNHCR and the United
Nations Development Programme to have unconditional
and widespread access in Rakhine. They have had some,
but it is not enough to make the proper assessments of
conditions on the ground that could encourage refugee
return. We would also like to see freedom of movement
granted to those Rohingya who remain in Rakhine.
That would be a good start and enable the international
community to have a platform to offer support, and
there is a clear will within the international community
to do that, as I have said.
The Special Envoy touched also on accountability.
I think this really goes to the heart of everything. First,
it is essential for the refugees to have confidence that
they can go home and that they will be secure. It is also
essential because it is important to uphold the norms
of international justice. I know that this is a difficult
concept for some on the Council, but the scale of
what has been done to the Rohingya Muslims and the
allegations of crimes against humanity really mark this
out as one of the most terrible events of this century so
far. I think we need to keep that in mind.

We know that the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) has taken a very strong interest in
returns, and that is welcome. Possibly the Indonesian
Ambassador will be able to say more. We know that
the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian
Assistance has been involved. We know that the
Chinese Envoy has been making strenuous efforts. I
repeat that we do not mind; from our perspective, we
are not dogmatic about who helps the refugees to get
back, but we do want to see the UNHCR principles
adhered to because they are there for a reason. They are
to ensure the safety of ordinary people.

I am very grateful to the Special Envoy for all
her efforts to encourage complementarity between
the different United Nations instruments and the
Independent Commission Of Inquiry. I think that the
more the Commission and Rosario Manalo can work
with the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the better outcomes we will see there. I would like
to conclude by saying that we remain committed to
finding the way forward as the United Kingdom, and
we remain committed to working with our partners on
the Council, as well as with Myanmar, Bangladesh and
the Special Envoy.

I also want to pay tribute in the presence of His
Excellency the Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh and
to the generous support that Bangladesh has given and
continues to give to the Rohingya in Cox’s Bazar and
on its territory. Bangladesh has made enormous efforts
to help the Rohingya people, and we believe that the
international community should continue to support
Bangladesh in this.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Myanmar, Ms. Christine Sсhranеr
Burgener, for her briefing to the Security Council. We
appreciate her tireless efforts and those of her team
with regard to the crisis in Myanmar, especially the
Rohingya refugee crisis. We also welcome Mr. Shahidul
Haque, Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh.

4/22

19-05868

28/02/2019

The situation in Myanmar

The Rohingya refugee crisis enters its eighteenth
month as we meet today. Those refugees ran for
their lives after having been eye witnesses to crimes
committed against their relatives and neighbours. We
grow increasingly concerned as the crisis persists,
particularly because multiple minorities continue to
seek refuge from Rakhine state in Bangladesh, given
the deteriorating security situation in different parts of
Myanmar. That represents a serious threat and might
deteriorate further and thus place a greater burden on
neighbouring countries, especially Bangladesh, which
has generously welcomed more than 1 million refugees
in the city of Cox’s Bazar.
We are monitoring the developments of this issue
and are fully committed to supporting Myanmar and
Bangladesh to overcome the crisis. Our diplomacy
is based on humanitarian action. That is why we
constructively contributed to organizing and carrying
out a mission for the Council to Bangladesh and
Myanmar, jointly headed by Peru and the United
Kingdom at the end of April 2018.
As a member of the Council and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, my country seeks to ensure
that Myanmar implements the requirements set forth
by the international community. We have noted that the
Government of Myanmar has taken a number of steps
to solve this humanitarian crisis since the end of the
Council’s mission, including holding meetings between
officials from Bangladesh and Myanmar, signing
memorandums of understanding and establishing an
investigative mechanism regarding violations of human
rights. Those are good, positive steps, but they have yet
to be implemented.
The requirements and steps set forth by the Security
Council in its presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22,
as well as the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, are clear and specific.
They aim to address the root causes of the crisis, end
the suffering of refugees and ensure their voluntary,
safe and dignified return to their homes in Myanmar.
The recommendations include closing all internally
displaced persons camps; allowing all those in Rakhine
state to move freely, safely and unhindered; allowing
United Nations agencies and partners unconditional
access to all parts of Rakhine state; taking the
necessary measures to combat incitement to violence
and hatred, while ensuring peace and harmony among
all communities under the rule of law; conducting
independent and transparent investigations into

S/PV. 8477

crimes and violations committed against the Rohingya
minority in Rakhine state; eliminating the root causes
of the Rohingya minority crisis without discrimination
and regardless of race or religion, while granting
them their inherent right to citizenship, as stressed in
General Assembly resolution 72/248, which calls for
granting full citizenship to the Rohingya minority; and,
lastly, starting comprehensive socioeconomic reforms,
while making efforts to address the root causes of the
Rohingya refugee crisis.
Kuwait stresses the need for the Council to closely
monitor this crisis in order to urge and encourage the
Government of Myanmar to engage constructively
towards reaching a comprehensive, just and definitive
solution that would grant the Rohingya minority
their right to citizenship, while ensuring their safety
and respect for all their human rights. We welcome
the efforts made by neighbouring countries in their
dialogue with Myanmar. We thank them for those
efforts, which complement other efforts by the
international community.
As we are moving to informal consultations after
this meeting, I will stop at this point and add further
comments and enquiries during consultations in the
closed meeting. However, before concluding, I sincerely
thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over the Council
this month. Your presidency has been exceptional. We
also wish all the best to France and the French delegation
in presiding over the Council during March.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Ms. Sсhranеr Burgener, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Myanmar, for her briefing. We
commend her efforts. China will continue to support
her in working constructively with Myanmar and
Bangladesh to achieve progress in the settlement of the
issue of Rakhine state.
Thanks to the joint efforts of the countries
concerned, countries of the region and the United
Nations, we have seen progress recently in the settlement
of the Rakhine issue. Myanmar and Bangladesh were
visited this year by Special Envoy Schraner Burgener
and held in-depth consultations on the issue. The two
countries have actively verified voluntary returnees
and have made arrangements for the fourth joint
working group meeting. The Government of Myanmar
has committed to gradually shutting down the Rakhine
internally displaced persons camp and issuing legal
identity documents to those repatriated.

19-058685/22

S/PV.8477

The situation in Myanmar

28/02/2019

As prompted by Special Envoy Sсhranеr Burgener,
Myanmar has undertaken to simplify the application
process for legal documents. The Myanmar Government
has continued to implementing the tripartite
memorandum of understanding, signed with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Development Programme, and
approved the quick-impact development projects the
two agencies are to carry out in Rakhine state.

A total of 1,100 housing units have been delivered
to Myanmar in order to improve local conditions for
settling returnees. In addition, China has provided
Bangladesh with ¥20 million in food aid. We will
continue to do our part to contribute to the settlement
of the issue of Rakhine state. The issue of Rakhine
state is essentially one that concerns Myanmar and
Bangladesh; as such, it is up to those two countries to
work out a solution.

Turning to the alleged human rights violations,
the independent commission of inquiry on Rakhine
state held a sixth meeting at the end of January. The
commission decided to officially collect information
from the public regarding human rights violations.
The Bangladeshi Refugee Relief and Repatriation
Commission, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Cox’s Bazar
local Government have registered a total of more than
60,000 people currently seeking refuge and waiting
to be repatriated, and they are communicating with
Myanmar on their repatriation.

Countries of the region, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the United Nations can
provide positive and constructive assistance. Late last
year, the AEAN Secretary-General, Mr. Lim Jock Hoi,
conducted an inspection tour of northern Rakhine.
The ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian
Assistance on Disaster Management recently sent a
needs-assessment team to Myanmar to support the
repatriation work by the Government. China commends
ASEAN for its important role and active efforts in
search of a solution to the issue of Rakhine state.

The issue of Rakhine state is a legacy issue. Its
resolution lies in tackling both its symptoms and
its root causes. The top priority is to enable an early
return of those currently stranded in Bangladesh, which
is the only realistic and viable way to alleviate the
Rakhine state crisis. To that end, China has proposed
an approach with three phases, namely, the cessation
of violations, repatriation and development. We have
twice facilitated informal tripartite meetings between
China, Myanmar and Bangladesh, during which three
important points of consensus emerged on the issue
of repatriation, pushing the two countries to address
the matter through dialogue and negotiation. That
has been widely acknowledged and supported by the
international community, including countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Ambassador Sun Guoxiang, Special Envoy for
Asian Affairs of the Chinese Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, has visited Myanmar and will visit Bangladesh
in early March. He will have in-depth exchanges with
the two countries on the issue of Rakhine state with
a view to fostering mutual trust between the two
countries so that concrete measures can be taken as
soon as possible.
China is very concerned about the humanitarian
situation of the people in Rakhine state and has actively
provided humanitarian assistance to both countries.
6/22

The international community should encourage
Myanmar and Bangladesh to strengthen dialogue and
achieve early repatriation of the first batch of displaced
persons so that all those currently seeking refuge can
return to their homes as soon as possible. Issues of
interest to the international community in the process of
repatriation, such as freedom of movement, citizenship
and accountability, need to be addressed gradually
and properly. Insisting on setting preconditions for
repatriation will only render such solutions out of reach.
Development is the fundamental way to resolve the
issue of Rakhine state, which has abundant resources
yet its development lags behind. The international
community should increase support for investment
in Rakhine state to help local communities eliminate
poverty and promote development to achieve stability.
China supports the United Nations playing a greater
role in that regard.
Council members should remain united and
avoid applying undue pressure, therefore playing a
constructive role in promoting a bilateral settlement of
the issue by Myanmar and Bangladesh. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations Development Programme should step
up their coordination with the Myanmar Government
and steadily implement the tripartite agreement.
The international community should continue
to be patient and create an environment conducive to
19-05868

28/02/2019

The situation in Myanmar

S/PV. 8477

the implementation by the two countries of bilateral
repatriation agreements and advance the settlement
of practical issues with a view to achieving long-term
peace, stability and development in Rakhine state.

and enabling environment, including the provision
of security guarantees, freedom of movement and
access to basic services for the people so that there is
confidence to return. Those are all important factors.

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): It would be remiss of me
if I did not express my delegation’s appreciation to
you, Mr. President, and your team for your excellent
leadership of the presidency this month. I must say that
I am jealous that you had only 28 days in your position,
while I am going to have 31 days later in the year. I
would also like to extend a welcome to the French
delegation for the forthcoming presidency and to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.

It is also imperative to create inclusive and
sustainable economic development in Rakhine state
in order to ensure the sustainability of the solution.
Investment and other assistance would certainly
help as well. In that context, we urge the effective
implementation of the framework for cooperation as
agreed by Myanmar, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Development Programme.

Allow me to thank Her Excellency Ms. Christine
Schraner Burgener, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on Myanmar, for her briefing today. We know
that she has conducted a lot of shuttle diplomacy, as she
mentioned, and exerted untiring efforts to try to reach
an amicable solution to this very difficult situation. Her
briefing today is critical for members of the Security
Council to better understand the current situation on
the ground. It also serves to update us on the progress of
the good offices of the Secretary-General in addressing
the situation concerning Myanmar.

Secondly, we wish to highlight the importance
of constructive engagement. Indonesia is fully aware
that these undertakings require close engagement with
all stakeholders. For that reason, Indonesia’s Foreign
Minister, Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi, has
conducted a series of meetings with key interlocutors in
the region. Just a few weeks ago, as part of that process,
the Foreign Minister travelled to Bangladesh to meet
with her counterpart, where they agreed that the focus
will be on repatriation. A meeting was also held with
senior officials from Myanmar, which focused on
the important role to be played by the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in the repatriation
process. The Foreign Minister also communicated with
the Special Envoy following her series of meetings
with Bangladesh and Myanmar. In short, all those
endeavours are intended to build trust and confidence
between all parties and to find durable solution to the
problem. Trust is the missing link.

As Indonesia has always maintained, it is crucial
that the international community extend its full support
for a sustainable and comprehensive solution in the
country, as outlined in the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, formerly led
by Kofi Annan. Against that backdrop, allow me to
share three key points regarding our efforts to seek a
lasting solution to this critical issue.
First, and most important, we wish to highlight
the humanitarian crisis. I wish to take a moment to
commend Bangladesh for its efforts and generosity in
providing humanitarian assistance for the refugees.
Nonetheless, it is really of grave concern that we are
yet to see significant improvement on this matter. One
and a half years since the crisis escalated, hundreds of
thousands of refugees are still in the camp awaiting
our assistance.
We must therefore make sure that the pressing
humanitarian crisis faced by the refugees in Cox’s Bazar
and in internally displaced persons camps remains our
guiding compass and top priority. We should prioritize
and step up our efforts to ensure the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of the refugees. That will require the
commitment and support of all to create a conducive

Thirdly, we wish to highlight the role of ASEAN.
Indonesia strongly believes that ASEAN’s involvement
is important for achieving a sustainable solution in
Rakhine state. Pursuant to the decision of the ASEAN
leaders at their most recent summit, a number of visits
by the ASEAN secretariat was conducted to Myanmar,
in preparation for the involvement of ASEAN and its
Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance
on Disaster Management. We hope that ASEAN’s
involvement will enable us to develop a clear picture of
the humanitarian needs in Rakhine state so as to assist
Myanmar in its efforts to solve the difficult situation on
the ground, and that it will also help nurture confidence
among all stakeholders. That certainly deserves the
support of the international community. I have heard
the call of many in the Council for ASEAN to play a
key role. We appreciate that.

19-058687/22

S/PV.8477

The situation in Myanmar

We are hopeful that progress is being made. One
thing for sure, however, is that a durable solution to
this issue requires a gradual and continuing process.
We should prioritize the humanitarian aspect. No
one, including ASEAN, will be able to succeed on its
own in realizing that goal. It needs the support of all
stakeholders, including those in the Council, the relevant
United Nations agencies and the broader international
community. As we have always stated, what is at stake
is the well-being of the people concerned — and that
should be our top priority.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener,
for her enlightening briefing to the Security Council,
as well as for her commitment and untiring work to
find a lasting solution to the crisis in Rakhine state. I
would also like to welcome the presence among us of
the Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh.
France remains very concerned about the situation
of the Rohingya, whether they are still in Rakhine
state or living as refugees in camps in Bangladesh.
Despite some announcements, which are first steps,
the actions of the Myanmar authorities on the ground
remain insufficient. France hopes for more progress,
particularly in three priority areas.
The first priority is humanitarian support for the
Rohingyas and the internally displaced persons still in
Arakan and for refugees in camps in Bangladesh. The
Burmese authorities must immediately establish safe,
full and unhindered humanitarian access to Rakhine
state for the United Nations and all humanitarian
actors. While the renewed tensions observed in early
January following the attacks by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army certainly illustrates the complexity
of the situation, it remains essential to work on ways
to establish permanent humanitarian access in order
to assist the people still in Rakhine state. Rohingya
internally displaced persons must be allowed total
freedom of movement and full access, without
discrimination, to basic services. Those essential
conditions for the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return of the Rohingya refugees have thus far
not been met. We commend the exceptional generosity
of the authorities and the people of Bangladesh, as
well as the outstanding work done by United Nations
agencies and humanitarian organizations.
8/22

28/02/2019

The second priority continues to be the fight
against impunity. We still have no guarantee that the
commission of inquiry set up last summer is truly
able to carry out independent, credible and impartial
investigations. That is what we are seeking. The
conclusions of the fact-finding mission, presented to the
Council in October (see S/PV.8381) are unambiguous.
We must act accordingly by cooperating fully with
the International Criminal Court and the investigation
mechanism created by the Human Rights Council.
Serious violations against civilians, including women
and children, cannot go unpunished. In that regard, we
hope that the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila
Patten, will soon be able to report back to the Security
Council on her recent visit to Burma. It is also essential
that the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict be able to adopt conclusions on Burma and
the other situations on the Security Council’s agenda,
and that the Council’s recommendations be followed up
with concrete action to benefit children and the fight
against impunity.
Finally, the third priority concerns the
recommendations of the Annan Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, in particular those on citizenship and
equal rights. Despite the establishment of a committee
to implement those recommendations, there has thus
far been no tangible improvement in the situation of the
most vulnerable communities. The Burmese authorities
must demonstrate, through concrete measures, their
willingness to restore trust between communities and
provide a lasting solution to the crisis. Those measures
should include effective access to public, health-care
and education services for all persons belonging to the
Rohingya community and freedom of movement for
all communities.
For all those reasons, and echoing the remarks of
previous speakers, particularly my British colleague
and friend, France believes that the Security Council
must remain fully mobilized to ensure close monitoring
of the implementation of its presidential statement
of November 2017 (S/PRST/2017/22). The dialogue
established between the United Nations and the Burmese
authorities, particularly since the arrival of Special
Envoy eight months ago, must now be translated into
a concrete improvement in the situation of the affected
populations. In that regard, France reiterates its full
support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
in the pursuit of her mandate.
19-05868

28/02/2019

The situation in Myanmar

S/PV. 8477

In conclusion, I would like to express to you,
Mr. President, and your team, our most heartfelt thanks
and congratulations on your excellent presidency
throughout the month of February.

further atrocities, protect vulnerable populations and
ensure that perpetrators are held accountable for their
actions. However, collective responsibility begins with
individual responsibility.

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): Since this is the last public meeting
of your country’s presidency of the Security Council,
Sir, my delegation wishes to thank your delegation. It
was an honour to have your Foreign Minister participate
throughout the month. The debates that you organized
had a great impact. I truly congratulate you. It was
the second Council presidency in 2019 that was led
in Spanish. As a result, many ambassadors have now
learned the language.

It is also time for the Government of Myanmar
to assume its responsibility to protect its citizens on
its territory. We urgently call upon the Government
to implement the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, which include,
among other issues, the implementation of strategies
for
socioeconomic
development,
citizenship,
freedom of movement, community participation and
representation, intercommunal cohesion and the
security of all communities.

We would first like to thank Ms. Christine Sсhranеr
Burgener for her detailed briefing on the situation in
Myanmar and the latest developments on the ground.

It is also essential to fully comply with the
memorandum of understanding, which will allow
Rohingya communities a dignified and sustainable
return that adheres to human rights standards and will
ensure unrestricted access of humanitarian assistance
to all displaced people. That will enable us to effectively
mitigate the impact of this regrettable human and
humanitarian crisis. The responsibility to ensure the
dignified return of refugees lies with the Government of
Myanmar, which must create the necessary conditions
for the return of refugees with the cooperation of
the international community, particularly United
Nations agencies. We must remember that a solution is
possible and that we must prevent a repetition of the
failures of the past. Human rights and humanitarian
principles cannot be applied selectively, watered down
or disregarded.

The Rohingya crisis continues to affect nearly
1 million refugees in Bangladesh and the remaining
Muslim Rohingyas in Rakhine state, who suffer from
segregation and limited access to essential services.
Ethnic conflicts are on the rise, the peace process is
on the verge of collapse and insecurity has intensified,
creating opportunities for armed groups to engage
in illicit drug production and human trafficking.
This human catastrophe on both sides of the border
represents a threat to international peace and security
and has generated numerous situations that require the
immediate attention of the international community.
In that regard, the Dominican Republic reiterates
its strong condemnation of the serious human rights
violations and horrendous crimes that have affected
the Rohingya community in Myanmar and recognizes
the Council’s responsibility to address the crisis and
respond appropriately to it. The Council to date has
addressed this issue on several occasions and in different
formats. However, there are no clear indications of a
sustainable and lasting solution that would allow the
Rohingyas a dignified, secure and voluntary return to
their territories.
According to published data, the current displaced
and refugee population totals nearly 1 million people.
The displacement has been generated by what is
described as ethnic cleansing, genocide and atrocity
crimes. Such strong and regrettable descriptions
require action commensurate with their severity. The
Security Council seems paralysed and inert, but the
time has come for us to mobilize and act to prevent

I would now like to refer to another aspect of
this crisis — the attribution of responsibilities for
perpetrators of atrocities committed against the
Rohingya population. There has been no type of
investigation to date or access allowed for fact-finding.
Access for the Special Rapporteur has been rescinded
and journalists have been arrested for investigating and
verifying crimes committed. In short, there has been no
process of accountability.
Above all, we are concerned about the victims of
gender-based violence, the degrading and cruel acts of
sexual assault that have been committed against women
and girls. Those levels of brutality and violence indicate
a clear trend of using those crimes as a strategy to
intimidate and punish the civil population. We urgently
call for the launching of relevant investigations to
identify those responsible for those horrendous acts,

19-058689/22

S/PV.8477

The situation in Myanmar

so that they are brought to justice and we can avoid
a situation of impunity with regard to these atrocity
crimes, which constitute a serious violation of human
rights and international law. It is imperative that
significant actions be taken for these purposes.
According to the report of the United Nations
fact-finding mission on Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64), the
judicial system in Myanmar cannot conduct a just and
independent investigation —a process that undoubtedly
will have to be led by the international community. All
options should be considered, including a referral to
the International Criminal Court. It is imperative that
a clear signal be sent to other Governments that might
be tempted to follow that path of military brutality and
violation of rights.
The Council must assume its responsibility and
agree to a constructive and coordinated process
and use all the tools at its disposal in the interest of
achieving tangible progress and a lasting settlement of
this crisis, a process that links with the Government
of Myanmar and with continued support for a process
of accountability. That link is essential. The isolation
of the Government does not produce positive effects in
the eradication of the root causes of this crisis. On the
contrary, it could exacerbate the underlying factors of
the crisis.
Last but not least, the Dominican Republic would
like to acknowledge the efforts undertaken by the
Government of Bangladesh. We call on the international
community, especially Council members, to continue
to support Bangladesh in that task.
Myanmar is a cruel reality that represents an
affront to the international community, which, because
of a lack of consensus, to date has not taken action.
The Rohingyas, the entire population of Myanmar and
the whole world is watching us. The time for action
has arrived.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Envoy, Ms. Schraner Burgener, for the information she
provided and assure her of our full support for her work.
I would like to convey three messages: first, the
urgency of full humanitarian access; secondly, the
crucial importance of justice for lasting peace; and,
thirdly, the need to tackle the root causes of the conflict.
First, we urge the Myanmar authorities to grant
full humanitarian access to the relevant United Nations
10/22

28/02/2019

agencies. Almost a year has passed since the signing
of the memorandum of understanding with the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the progress unfortunately remains too slow. We
call on the United Nations and other humanitarian
partners to pay particular attention to the specific
needs of women and girls in all assessments and in
the planning and delivery of humanitarian assistance
and to make specialized medical and psychosocial
services available to victims of sexual violence. We
commend the region for the initiatives undertaken.
Belgium congratulates the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) in particular for establishing
the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian
Assistance. That comprehensive mechanism builds
upon multilateral efforts, in particular those of the
Council and the specialized United Nations agencies. I
would also like to express my gratitude for the solidarity
shown by Bangladesh to the Rohingya refugees.
Secondly, with regard to the fight against impunity,
just a few months ago, the Chairperson of the independent
international fact-finding mission on Myanmar mission
in this Chamber described the situation in Rakhine
state as ongoing “genocide” (see S/PV.8381). The
disproportionate actions of the Tatmadaw in August
2017 could constitute the most serious crimes under
international law. Those crimes cannot go unpunished.
These events took place in a climate of extreme
discrimination against the Rohingya and should be
credibly investigated and prosecuted without delay by
the competent authorities of Myanmar. I wish to recall
the fact that the Council has the authority to refer these
events to the International Criminal Court. If justice
is not delivered, then sooner or later the matter will be
on our table. How can we expect refugees to return to
a region where criminals hold on to their positions and
enjoy total impunity?
Thirdly, Belgium stresses the need to tackle the
deep roots of the conflict so that refugees can return
in a safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable manner.
The recommendations of Kofi Annan’s report provide
clear guidance in that regard. We call for their urgent
implementation. A peaceful and fair situation is
one in which human rights are protected, without
discrimination, including the freedom of movement.
It is also a situation where access to basic services
is guaranteed.
19-05868

28/02/2019

The situation in Myanmar

S/PV. 8477

Finally, it is also a situation where equal access to
full citizenship is upheld. We welcome the signing of
the joint communiqué on the prevention of conflictrelated sexual violence and call on the Government
to implement the commitments it has undertaken. I
would also like to stress the importance of the freedom
of expression and call for the release of the two
Reuters journalists.

persons to Rakhine state. We hope that the Government
will proceed with easing restrictions on freedom
of movement in order to facilitate access for all
communities to livelihood opportunities, education,
health care and other services. We have not forgotten
the responsibility of the Myanmar military to ensure the
protection of all civilians without discrimination and to
fully observe its international human rights obligations.

Belgium will continue to closely monitor
developments on the ground. We encourage the
Myanmar authorities to take the actions expected of
them to facilitate peaceful coexistence in Myanmar.

There are legitimate concerns that the Myanmar
authorities are backtracking on their commitments to
addressing the Rohingya refugee crisis. Just a couple of
days ago, we were able to learn through media reports
that the highest-ranked officer in the Myanmar military
denies the fact that the army systematically persecuted
the Rohingya Muslim minority, claiming that any
allegation in that respect is an insult to his country’s
honour. If this man refuses to believe the eyewitness
testimony of thousands of raped women and orphaned
children who fled for their lives and found shelter in
Cox’s Bazaar, how can we believe official Government
rhetoric on bringing perpetrators to justice? Is there any
hope left for any scraps of accountability? We call upon
the Government of Myanmar and the security forces
to ensure that security, rule of law and accountability
prevail in the country, including in Rakhine, Kachin
and Shan states. In this manner we also hope that the
postponed visit of United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), Mr. Filippo Grandi, to Rakhine
will finally take place immediately after the conditions
on the ground are assessed as enabling such visit.

(spoke in Spanish)
Before I conclude, I would also like to congratulate
and thank you, Mr. President, for your excellent
presidency of the Security Council this month.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to start with
words of appreciation, since this is the last open
discussion in this Chamber under your leadership,
Mr. President. I would like to express my appreciation
to you, Sir, and your team. I commend you personally, as
well as your colleagues, for your leadership, creativity
and professionalism. It has been a pleasure to work with
Equatorial Guinea during this very busy month.
Allow me also to thank our guest, Special Envoy
Christine Schraner Burgener, for her informative
briefing. She can count on our support. We appreciate
her efforts to find a durable solution to the crisis in
Rakhine state. Again, we are very pleased.
I would also like to very warmly welcome Foreign
Secretary Shahidul Haque and commend the authorities
of Bangladesh for the generosity extended to the
refugees from Rakhine state.
Poland believes that our primary goal as members
of the Security Council should be to seek comprehensive
and durable solutions that address the root causes of
the problems in Myanmar, including the elimination of
statelessness, discrimination and underdevelopment,
as outlined in the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State. The ongoing Rohingya
crisis requires close cooperation among all relevant
actors, with special responsibility falling on the
Government of Myanmar.
We repeatedly underline the need to establish
conditions conducive to the safe, voluntary, dignified
and sustainable return and reintegration of displaced

We further reiterate the call on the Myanmar
Government to take all measures to defuse tensions
between communities and grant full, safe and
unconditional humanitarian access without delay.
In this regard, we look forward to any progress in
the implementation of the arrangement between
Myanmar and Bangladesh on the return of displaced
persons from Rakhine state and the memorandum of
understanding signed by Myanmar, the UNHCR and
the United Nations Development Programme. We have
not forgotten about the two Reuters journalists jailed
and sentenced for investigating the killing of Rohingya
villagers in Rakhine state and call on officials for their
immediate and unconditional release.
In conclusion, I wish to underline that we have
not forgotten that Myanmar remains a country with a
fragile economy and prone to natural disasters and that
its internal capabilities need to be further developed.
We are aware that rebuilding Rakhine will be a long

19-0586811/22

S/PV.8477

The situation in Myanmar

process. We therefore offer our support and call on the
international community to focus on developing a longterm strategy to assist Myanmar in a rebuilding process.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Like the
speakers who have preceded me, and as this is the last
public meeting over which you preside, Mr. President,
I should like first of all to express to you and your
team the warm congratulations of my delegation on the
dexterity and wisdom with which you have conducted
the work of the Security Council throughout the
month of February. I would also like to congratulate
Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Myanmar, for her informative
briefing, which once again challenges the Council on
the situation in that country.
The issues of Rohingya internally displaced
persons and refugees and of human rights, particularly
in Rakhine state, remain a source of concern for the
international community. Indeed, the precarious
security situation in the north of the state makes
humanitarian access and refugee return difficult.
In this regard, Côte d’Ivoire calls for the effective
implementation of the tripartite agreement signed on
6 June 2018 with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the United
Nations Development Programme. This agreement
is a necessary step towards establishing a framework
for cooperation between the United Nations and the
Government in order to create conditions conducive
to the voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable
repatriation of refugees and to help create improved
and resilient livelihoods for all communities living
in Rakhine state. Similarly, Côte d’Ivoire invites the
Government of Myanmar to strengthen its cooperation
with Bangladesh on the repatriation of refugees.
My country would like to commend the mobilization
of the international community in support of vulnerable
and affected communities. This mobilization has
resulted in the campaign launched in recent weeks in
Geneva upon the initiative of UNHCR, the International
Organization for Migration, the World Food Programme
and non-governmental organizations, in order to raise
the necessary funds to provide assistance to more than
900,000 refugees from Myanmar and 300,000 people
in host communities in Bangladesh. It is appropriate
to commend the efforts of the Government of Japan,
which recently decided, in coordination with eight
United Nations agencies, to fund emergency assistance,
12/22

28/02/2019

protection, confidence-building and crisis resilience
projects in Shan, Kachin and Rakhine States.
On the strength of its commitment to the respect
and protection of human rights, my country would
like to commend the efforts made by the stakeholders
to implement the findings of the fact-finding mission,
including the establishment of the Independent
Commission of Enquiry. In this regard, it calls on the
international community to take the necessary measures
to bring to justice the perpetrators of human rights
violations committed, in particular against women and
children, before the competent courts.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support
for Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener and urges the
international community to increase its assistance
to refugees through adequate funding of the United
Nations joint response plan.
Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa) We would like
to thank the Special Envoy, Ms. Christine Schraner
Burgener, for her informative briefing following her
recent visit to the region. We also wish to commend
Ms. Burgener for her continued efforts aimed at finding
solutions to this crisis, including through engagement
with all parties. We would also like to acknowledge
the presence of the Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh
and again extend our thanks to his Government for the
sterling work they are doing in hosting the refugees in
his country. We also acknowledge the presence of the
representative of Myanmar.
At the outset, South Africa condemns the deadly
attacks and violence that took place in Rakhine state
in January 2019. It is of paramount importance that
the parties immediately cease all acts of violence that
can only serve to further perpetuate the crisis and
prolong and worsen the unbearable human suffering
that it has brought about. On this point, South Africa
remains deeply concerned by the serious humanitarian
crisis that persists, affecting inter alia almost 1 million
Rohingya refugees, including women and children.
South Africa commends the efforts of the
Government of Bangladesh and host communities in
Bangladesh in assisting these vulnerable persons, and
calls on the Government of Myanmar to work with all
relevant actors including the United Nations to urgently
facilitate the conditions that will allow a voluntary
return of displaced persons to take place in conditions
of safety and dignity.
19-05868

28/02/2019

The situation in Myanmar

S/PV. 8477

We appreciate the positive developments reported
to us by Ms. Sсhranеr Burgener, which, in summary
were that, first, she has been given permission to open
an office in the capital, Naypyidaw; secondly, there
are processes under way to discuss constitutional
amendments; thirdly, the verification process has been
shortened from two years to five months; and, fourthly,
the Myanmar authorities have allowed Ms. Sсhranеr
Burgener to have more access to all parties and travel
more freely around Myanmar. We must also express
our appreciation for the efforts of China, India and
Japan and their contributions to the construction of
transit camps.

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me too start by
expressing my gratitude for the briefing the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar. I
commend her for all her efforts over the past month. As I
said earlier today, with regard to the new Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General on Syria (see S/PV.8475), it
is so important that he be in contact with all of the
parties involved. From what has been said and what
we have heard, I congratulate Ms. Sсhranеr Burgener
on building the necessary contacts to open her Office
in the capital of Myanmar. As we know, Myanmar is
a rather reclusive country. Entering the country and
being accepted as a partner is very important.

It is evident from the Special Envoy’s briefing and
reports that the humanitarian crisis is being perpetuated
by the lack of access to life-saving humanitarian
assistance, including restrictions on access to health
care, education and other essential services, as well as
on ways to make a decent living and live a full life. In
that regard, South Africa encourages the Government
of Myanmar to fully implement the memorandum of
understanding signed on 6 June 2018 with the United
Nations Development. Programme and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
address those challenges. In that regard, it is also critical
that those agencies receive the necessary resources to
allow them to address the humanitarian crisis.

I would also like to recognize the positive steps
that have been taken. However, I would like to again
touch on remarks made by my Kuwaiti colleague in
his intervention. He recalled the trip that the Security
Council made last year to see at first hand the conflict,
the suffering of the people and the situation in Cox’s
Bazar. We must admit that almost one year later, we
have made hardly any progress. I would also echo those
who have expressed gratitude to Bangladesh. I would
like to thank Bangladesh, through its Foreign Secretary.
Bangladesh has a number of challenges in hosting the
refugees and the fact that it continues to do so warrants
our gratitude.

The Council should also take on board the views of
India, China, Japan, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, as well as all other interested parties, across
religious lines, to facilitate unity among the people of
Myanmar. We should also pay attention to the plight of
other ethnic minorities.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution to the crisis is a negotiated,
inclusive, fair political settlement, which puts the
interests and well-being of all communities, including
the Rohingya people, front and centre, and allows for the
essential processes of truth, justice and reconciliation,
towards lasting peace and healing.
Lastly, we would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Equatorial Guinea for its excellent
presidency and the manner in which it has elevated
the interests of our continent during the past month.
Sir, you have made us proud and inspired us with
your commitment and the vigour with which you have
undertaken your work and conducted yourself. It has
been a pleasure and honour to work under your guidance.

We are afraid that, perhaps in a year or two or
three, we will still be meeting to discuss the refugees
in Cox’s Bazar. We have heard that the situation there
is extremely dire. The risk is that those in the camps
will radicalize and become more extreme. Under such
circumstances, providing proper education to the many
children living there is quite a challenge. If they are
not educated, they will become radicalized. What kind
of generation will grow up there? There are no jobs.
We must therefore do everything possible to allow
the refugees to return. When I say that we must do
everything possible, it means we must have the proper
conditions. There can be no alternative to the safe,
voluntary and dignified return of the refugees. They
must have their legal documents, including those that
prove their citizenship, and they must also be able to
move around freely.
I would like to touch upon one of the activities
underlined by the Special Envoy — one which I believe
is key — and that is taking into consideration the many
ethnic groups in the country in order to establish a
sustained intercommunal dialogue. We must strengthen
mutual understanding among the various ethnic groups.

19-0586813/22

S/PV.8477

The situation in Myanmar

The Rohingya must be accepted on an equal basis
with the other population groups. The hatred that the
majority of the population has expressed towards the
Rohingya must cease. I come back to what I said earlier
today about accountability in Syria. There is no need
for me to go into detail.
My colleagues from Belgium, the Dominican
Republic and the United Kingdom have all stressed the
importance of accountability. Those responsible for the
terrible crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity must be brought to justice, including the
military responsible for them. We have to make progress
on the issue. The mechanism must be complementary.
In that context and because women were especially
targeted in such crimes, I fully support the proposal
made by our French colleague to have Pramila Patten,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, brief the Council on what
is being done to alleviate the suffering of the victims.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my
colleague from Indonesia, a member of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), for all of
ASEAN’s efforts. I think it is wonderful that ASEAN
is active and plays a key role. I would also like to
commend ASEAN’s neighbours, in particular China,
its largest neighbour, for their role. The representative
of China said no pressure should be brought to bear. I
would say that China should do its utmost to encourage
the Government of Myanmar to do the homework the
international community expects it to do.
I would like to thank the President of the Council
and his team. I will not be long because we would like
to go to your party later, Sir. You leave big shoes for
the French and German presidencies to fill in March
and April.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to thank you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting
and Ms. Christine Sсhranеr Burgener for her briefing
on her progress in addressing the serious plight
of Rohingya refugees and in promoting justice,
accountability and reconciliation in Myanmar. We also
welcome the presence of Mr. Haque, Foreign Secretary
of Bangladesh, as well as the Permanent Representative
of Myanmar.
We note with concern the clashes that have taken
place in Rakhine state between the Myanmar police and
the so-called “Arakan Army”. We condemn such attacks
and regret the deaths, while at the same time deeming it
14/22

28/02/2019

important to avoid any disproportionate military action
that could lead to an escalation of violence.
Peru believes that we must not lose sight of the
fact that the main objective of our efforts must be the
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable repatriation
of the more than 1 million Rohingya refugees by
addressing the structural causes of the situation,
which have made that community one of the most
discriminated against in the world.
In that regard, we wish to reiterate our appreciation
to Bangladesh for its solidarity and to the international
community for its important contribution in supporting
refugees and host communities. We believe it crucial
that Bangladesh and Myanmar maintain an ongoing
dialogue to prevent situations of distrust and a possible
escalation of tensions.
I would like to mention three elements that we
believe to be key. First, we must reiterate the importance
of effectively implementing the memorandum of
understanding signed with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme. A few months before
the expiration of the memorandum, we must regret
the limited results seen mainly due to bureaucratic
obstacles and, recently, the new limitations on access
to Rakhine state.
We recognize the efforts of the Special Envoy
during her most recent visit to address the situation of
the Rohingya who are in internally displaced persons
camps. In that regard, we welcome the initiative of the
Government of Myanmar to develop a national strategy
to close those camps, whose effective implementation
would send a positive message to the Rohingya who are
in Bangladesh.
Secondly, the sustainability of those efforts
depends mainly on the ability of the Government to
bring about the profound changes that would make it
possible to establish a truly democratic and inclusive
society. To that end, the full implementation of the
recommendations of the Annan Commission for the
development of Rakhine state remains the main frame
of reference.
Among the various recommendations, we stress the
urgency of removing the restrictions on the freedom of
movement of the approximately 300,000 Rohingya who
remain in Myanmar and who cannot access adequate
means of subsistence and basic services. We hope
19-05868

28/02/2019

The situation in Myanmar

that in the short term that will contribute to resolving
the issue of citizenship. We recognize the regulatory
efforts in that regard but we believe that greater and
deeper changes are required.
Thirdly, we underline the need to carry out
investigations into the human rights violations that have
occurred since 25 August 2017. We hope that the efforts
of the independent commission of inquiry, as well as
those of the investigative mechanism of the Human
Rights Council, contribute to the goal of achieving
justice in that territory.
Among those efforts, we would also like to
acknowledge the recent visit of Ms. Pramila Patten
and the signing of a communiqué between the United
Nations and the Government of Myanmar to prevent and
respond to sexual violence in conflict. In that regard,
we join the call of the Special Representative to adopt
a law on the prevention of violence against women in
accordance with international norms.
We also highlight the role of regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the involvement
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
including through the Centre for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Assistance, to address the situation. We
believe that such efforts could be complemented by the
United Nations.
Finally, I underline the need for our efforts to be
translated into concrete progress on the ground. To
that end, we reiterate the importance of the Council
continuing its close attention to the situation and its full
support for the work of the Special Envoy.
Before concluding, Peru would also like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your team
on having efficiently led our work in the month of
February and to wish the delegation of France every
success during its presidency of the Council, which
begins tomorrow.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Equatorial Guinea
completing its presidency of the Council. I thank
Special Envoy Schraner Burgener for her briefing and
for her important work on Myanmar. I welcome the
Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh and thank him for
joining us and for all that his country has done for the
Rohingya people.
The United States remains deeply concerned
about the situation in Myanmar, especially in Rakhine

S/PV. 8477

state. Progress on the ground has been limited. As our
Vice-President said in his meeting with State Counsellor
Aung San Suu Kyi, the violence and persecution by the
military and vigilantes that resulted in driving 700,000
Rohingya to Bangladesh are without excuse. We
agree with the assessment of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) that conditions
in Myanmar are not yet conducive for voluntary returns
and that the responsibility to improve those conditions
rests with Myanmar.
The return of refugees and internally displaced
persons must be voluntary, safe, dignified, sustainable
and consistent with international principles. Returns
should be based on reliable information about
the conditions in the relevant areas of Myanmar.
Unhindered access for humanitarian assistance,
media and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) is
necessary to understand conditions in areas of return
and to allow refugees and internally displaced persons
to make informed choices.
We continue to urge the Government of Myanmar
to create conditions for voluntary repatriation and to
address the root causes of the crisis in Rakhine state.
That requires improving the living conditions for those
ethnic Rohingya remaining in Rakhine state, including
a transparent and efficient citizenship verification
process, freedom of movement, access to livelihoods,
security reform, ensuring accountability and other key
recommendations of the Annan Commission.
In addition, the Government of Myanmar’s
memorandums of understanding with UNHCR and
the United Nations Development Programme expire in
June. It is imperative that the work streams outlined
in those documents be implemented. The international
community is willing to help but must be allowed to
do so with unhindered humanitarian, media and NGO
access. We urge Myanmar to play a constructive
role in resolving this crisis, including by ensuring
accountability for those responsible for human rights
violations and abuses.
The United States supports the multiple efforts
and mechanisms at the United Nations to foster
accountability for human rights abuses in Myanmar,
including in northern Rakhine state. In addition to the
Special Envoy’s role, we strongly support the United
Nations fact-finding mission on Myanmar.
We
have
monitored
the
expeditious
operationalization of the independent investigative

19-0586815/22

S/PV.8477

The situation in Myanmar

mechanism for Myanmar, whose mandate is to collect,
consolidate, preserve and analyse evidence of the most
serious crimes. In addition, we have also called upon
the authorities in Myanmar to resume cooperation with
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in Myanmar. This year we look forward to working
with Member States on a General Assembly resolution
that addresses the human rights situation in Myanmar.
For the 1 million ethnic Rohingya who fled the
violence to Bangladesh, the situation is urgent. We
applaud Bangladesh’s generosity in continuing to host
1 million Rohingya refugees, and we will continue to
seek creative ways to increase access to education,
livelihoods and durable shelters for Rohingya refugees,
while maintaining pressure on Myanmar to create the
conditions necessary for voluntary repatriation.
The international community cannot ignore the
world’s largest refugee camp. We can and must take
steps to effect change on the ground and to resolve this
humanitarian crisis.
We again thank Special Envoy Schraner Burgener
for her briefing, and we look forward to further
discussions on these issues. We sincerely hope the
democratic reforms and humanitarian efforts that the
United States has supported in Myanmar will ultimately
result in a peaceful, successful civil society and a new
beginning for all the people of Myanmar.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank Ms. Christine Schraner
Burgener, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Myanmar, for her thorough briefing on the situation in
the country. On the whole, we agree with her assessment
and support the desire to continue shuttle diplomacy.
We remain of the view that seeking to resolve the
situation, including by ensuring the return of internally
displaced persons and humanitarian assistance, must be
done in a constructive and non-politicized way, above
all bilaterally between Bangladesh and Myanmar.
We note that international assistance must be
provided to both Bangladesh and Myanmar impartially,
while respecting the sovereignty of both countries. We
express the hope that dialogue will continue between
Myanmar and Bangladesh, including with the assistance
of the Special Envoy, all constructive-minded parties
and the entire United Nations system, in line with their
mandates. We note with satisfaction that the recent visit
to the region by the Special Envoy was overall carried
out constructively. Ms. Schraner Burgener is absolutely
16/22

28/02/2019

right that it is necessary to build bridges, not burn them.
She can count on our full support in that, as well as
in building confidence and supporting direct dialogue
between Dhaka and Naypyidaw.
We welcome Myanmar’s attitude to developing
constructive cooperation with the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). We believe that
regional organization can play a very positive role.
A delegation from ASEAN’s secretariat and its
Coordination Centre for Humanitarian Assistance
on Disaster Management visited Rakhine state at
the beginning of February. The ASEAN Emergency
Response and Assessment Team has begun its work,
and we support those efforts. The activity of the
independent commission established by Naypyidaw
to investigate human rights violations in Rakhine is
gradually gaining momentum. The foreign members
of the commission visited Myanmar again at the end
of January. We are glad that the commission has not
refused to engage in dialogue with international
bodies, as the Special Envoy just noted. The ceasefire
announced on 21 December of last year by the military
command is continuing until 30 April. As far as we
know, the authorities are willing to hold a peaceful
dialogue with the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army if
it refrains from violence and separatist demands.
Issues relating to the peaceful coexistence in
Rakhine of members of the various ethnic and religious
groups, including questions regarding the granting of
citizenship, freedom of movement, access to social
benefits and so forth, should be resolved in the spirit
of the recommendations of the Annan Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State and should also take
Myanmar’s national legislation into account. For our
part, we have consistently supported taking a balanced
and non-confrontational approach to discussing
the situation in this country and finding ways to
normalize the humanitarian situation in Rakhine state,
including solving the problem of displaced persons.
We want to point out the systematic efforts that the
Myanmar authorities have made to implement the
Annan Commission’s recommendations with a view
to achieving a comprehensive settlement of the crisis.
We would like to take advantage of the presence in the
Chamber today of the Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh
to once again pay tribute to the hospitality and patience
of Bangladesh’s authorities and ordinary Bangladeshis,
whose efforts to provide the refugees with everything
they need we should all support as actively as possible.
19-05868

28/02/2019

The situation in Myanmar

We greatly appreciate the steps that have been taken to
establish the infrastructure needed in Rakhine state for
receiving and accommodating future returnees.
We believe firmly that the key to resolving the
refugee issue is to be found in the relations between
the two neighbouring States involved. In our view,
the legal framework agreed on by the parties and the
existing coordination mechanisms between Myanmar
and Bangladesh enable immediate practical steps to be
taken on the issue. In our view it is counterproductive
to delay the start of the repatriation process artificially
and we do not support attempts to politicize the subject,
which do not bring us any closer to resolving the
problem of the Rohingya’s return to Myanmar. We call
on the United Nations staff on the ground to remember
this. A great deal depends on their professionalism
and impartiality.
At this point we consider it a priority to ensure
international assistance in mitigating the worst
humanitarian consequences of the crisis. We also urge
the Council to remember that the underlying problems
in Rakhine state are multifaceted and complex. They
can be resolved only through peaceful political and
diplomatic methods and by fostering a dialogue
between the Naypyidaw and Dhaka authorities and
representatives of all nationalities and faiths involved.
We are ready to continue to assist the Governments of
Myanmar and Bangladesh in resolving the situation
regarding Rakhine in a spirit of equality and mutual
respect. We once again urge all our colleagues in the
Council and the States of the region to act responsibly
and with restraint in order to avoid relapses into an
escalation of the situation.
In conclusion, we would like to thank our friends
from Equatorial Guinea, whose presidency ends today
and who have worked very hard and productively this
month, and we wish our French friends, who will take
over tomorrow, every success.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Equatorial Guinea.
I thank Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, for the concise updates
she has given us on her trip to Myanmar and Bangladesh
at the end of January. I also thank the delegations of the
United Kingdom, France, Germany, Belgium, Poland,
Kuwait, Peru, the Dominican Republic and the United
States for requesting this important meeting.

S/PV. 8477

We are concerned about the information in
Ms. Schraner Burgener’s important report on the
continuing protracted delays in the voluntary return to
Myanmar of the Rohingya refugees who have been in
camps in Cox’s Bazar and other parts of Bangladesh
for more than a year. Despite all the support they
have received internationally and from Myanmar’s
neighbour Bangladesh, the serious challenges presented
by the living conditions in refugee camps mean that life
there cannot be compared to a normal existence, and
yet the refugees still resist returning to their places
of origin. Another cause for concern is the very poor
implementation of the memorandum of understanding
signed on 18 May 2018 between the Government of
Myanmar, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
Barely two months after we joined the Security
Council in January of last year, the Governments
of Myanmar and Bangladesh, on the basis of their
friendly relations and good-neighbourliness, signed
an agreement on repatriating the people who had
been displaced from Rakhine state. We believe it was
an important step, but we were all in agreement that
the return was voluntary, and that as the refugees’
country of origin, the Government of Myanmar had
to deal with certain issues in order to ensure their
healthy, dignified and safe return. We also thought the
signing of the memorandum of understanding between
the Government of Myanmar, UNHCR and UNDP
was important as a first essential step in establishing
a framework for cooperation between the United
Nations and the Government with the aim of creating
the conditions for the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable repatriation of the refugees in Bangladesh
and helping to improve the livelihoods and resilience of
all communities in Rakhine state.
In a letter to the President of the Security Council
dated 27 June, the Permanent Representative of
Myanmar updated the Council on the progress that
had been made and the measures taken to address
a number of issues, as the Council had requested in
May. In another letter, of 20 July, he again listed the
developments and the Government’s initiatives in
the three main areas that the Security Council had
identified, that is, humanitarian access, responsibility
for human rights abuses and the implementation of
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State.

19-0586817/22

S/PV.8477

The situation in Myanmar

What we want is for all the essential basic
requirements for the Rohingya’s successful return to be
addressed and ensured in a reasonable time, keeping in
mind that hundreds of thousands of people from that
ethnic group have been living for more than a year in
very insecure conditions. If they have to remain in that
situation any longer it will jeopardize the future of their
children, who, like the rest of us in this world, deserve
to grow up in decent conditions. In that regard, and
without discounting the important steps that Myanmar
has taken so far, including the agreements it has already
signed and the written updates we have had from its
Permanent Representative in New York, I want to urge
the Government of Myanmar once again to redouble
its efforts to ensure a full settlement of the problem in
Rakhine state.
In the same way, we call on the countries of the
region such as China, regional organizations such as
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the United
Nations and the international community to spare no
effort in their support for Myanmar and Bangladesh so
that we can at last ensure the normal and unhindered
flow of humanitarian aid to the vulnerable population of
Rohingya refugees, as well as their return to Myanmar,
their country of origin, under humane and dignified
conditions and with the necessary security guarantees
to avoid any return to the previous situation that led to
their displacement to Bangladesh.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): I would like to congratulate
you for chairing this important meeting and for
Equatorial Guinea’s successful and commendable
presidency of the Council for the month of February.
I thank Ambassador Christine Schraner Burgener
for the objective and comprehensive briefing this
afternoon and I would also like to acknowledge and
welcome the presence among us of Mr. Shahidul Haque,
Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh.
In the spirit of cooperation with the United Nations
and as a demonstration of our desire to addressing the
issue of Rakhine, we agreed to the appointment of the
Special Envoy. We have provided her with all necessary
support in discharging her mandate. We appreciate
her tireless efforts and dedication in undertaking her
mandate with objectivity and impartiality. The Special
18/22

28/02/2019

Envoy has made five official visits to Myanmar in
the nine months since her appointment. Her office in
Naypyidaw is now fully functioning. We will continue
to work closely with her in our effort to resolve the
issues relating to the situation in Rakhine state.
Soon after assuming its state responsibilities,
the National League for Democracy Government has
placed a high priority on bringing sustainable peace,
stability and development to Rakhine. We have been
implementing most of the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, formerly led
by the late Mr. Kofi Annan, which was set up by the
Government voluntarily even before the humanitarian
crisis took place as a result of Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army (ARSA) terrorist attacks. In the
process of implementation, we identified five priority
areas: citizenship, freedom of movement, closure of
displaced persons camps, education and health. We are
also finalizing a strategy for closure of the remaining
displaced persons camps.
Some delegations previously alluded to the question
of freedom of movement. The national verification
card is the necessary step in the citizenship application
process and also provides proof of residency in Rakhine
state and facilitates freedom of movement. This requires
the cooperation of people to apply for such cards, which
is a totally voluntary process. Concerning humanitarian
access, due to the present security situation in northern
Rakhine state, access has been limited to certain
areas, however humanitarian supplies can be delivered
through the International Red Cross or through the
Rakhine state Government.
The most urgent task of the Government at hand
is to commence the repatriation process as soon as
possible to resolve the humanitarian situation. We are
ready to receive verified returnees in a voluntary, safe
and dignified manner, in accordance with the bilateral
agreements and arrangements with Bangladesh. We
have proposed recently to Bangladesh that the joint
working group resume its meetings in April. We are
confident that we can make the repatriation plan a
success if we both act strictly in compliance with
the agreements.
On the other hand, we have been working with the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) to create conducive conditions
in accordance with the trilateral memorandum
19-05868

28/02/2019

The situation in Myanmar

S/PV. 8477

of understanding. We have agreed to implement
35 quick impact projects as soon as the security
conditions permit. Another 36 quick-impact projects
are under consideration. The project assessments
will also be extended to other designated villages in
northern Rakhine.

with accountability issues. In that respect, I would
like to reiterate our firm position, as I did before in
this Chamber on 24 October last year, that Myanmar
has categorically objected to the fact-finding
mission since its establishment. We also reject its
narrative-based report.

Moreover, we are also working with the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to facilitate
the repatriation process. We have invited ASEAN
Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on
Disaster Management to dispatch a needs assessment
team to identify possible areas of cooperation in Rakhine
state to assist with repatriation. The terms of reference
of the needs assessment team were agreed during the
visit of the ASEAN Secretary-General to Myanmar in
December last year. The ASEAN Emergency Response
and Assessment Team will be sent to Rakhine as soon
as possible. The presence of the ASEAN assessment
team in the repatriation process will enhance trust and
confidence of the returnees.

The report of the fact-finding mission was totally
biased and one-sided. Its investigation targeted only
Myanmar security forces and excluded the violations
committed by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
(ARSA). The report was prepared mainly on the
basis of interviews and information gathered from
non-governmental organizations and human rights
groups. Moreover, the report fully authenticates the
stories of Muslim displaced persons while rejecting
any contradictory evidence. The fact-finding mission
has ignored reports revealing massacres by the ARSA
and has discounted its atrocities. Most importantly,
the conclusions of the report are politically motivated
and aim to inflict maximum damage on the image of
Myanmar and its leadership.

While we are engaging constructively with the
United Nations in our efforts to resolve the multitude of
challenges we are facing as a nascent democracy, some
groups and countries in the United Nations system
continue to exploit various United Nations mechanisms
to exert discriminatory and illegitimate political
pressures on Myanmar with malicious intent.
One vivid example, among many others, is
the establishment of the Independent Investigative
Mechanism on Myanmar by the Human Rights
Council. That action is yet another step in a series
of unprecedented discriminatory examinations
of a member State. We strongly objected to the
establishment of the Mechanism. The reasons are
simple. The Mechanism was set up beyond the Council’s
mandate. It represents selectivity and a discriminatory
and double-standard practice on the part of the United
Nations human rights body. In addition, its terms of
reference are very intrusive to a sovereign country’s
domestic jurisdiction. The Mechanism will only serve
the political purposes of those who wish to exploit
the Human Rights Council for their political agenda.
Such intrusive measures, without the consent of the
country concerned, will only further polarize different
communities and exacerbate tensions.
Some members of the Council in this Chamber
have just made reference to the report of the Human
Rights Council fact-finding mission in connection

The ARSA is alive and active. On 25 February,
news media reported the death of one of the top ARSA
military commanders, Nurul Alam, in a gunfight with
Bangladesh Rapid Action Battalion at Muchuni camp
in Cox’s Bazar. Bangladesh local media also reported
recently on abductions, murders, disappearances and
rape committed by members of ARSA in 30 camps of
Ukhia and Teknaf, in the district of Cox’s Bazar. They
are also threatening people who wanted to go back
to Rakhine.
The Government of Myanmar has repeatedly stated
that it will not condone human rights violations and will
take action against perpetrators according to the law
if the allegations are supported by sufficient evidence.
Therefore, the Government of Myanmar has established
an Independent Commission of Enquiry to investigate
all allegations of human rights violations following
ARSA terrorists attacks in August 2017 in northern
Rakhine. The mandate of the Commission is to seek
accountability and reconciliation. The Commission
is carrying out its mandate with independence,
impartiality and objectivity.
The Commission is also requesting access to the
refugees camps in Cox’s Bazar, in Bangladesh. We
urge the Government of Bangladesh to facilitate the
Commission’s visit to the camps and to meet with
the alleged victims of abuse. The Commission’s work

19-0586819/22

S/PV.8477

The situation in Myanmar

28/02/2019

will be evidence based. Therefore, the international
community should support the work of the Commission.

different communities in Rakhine. We want to resolve
the issue as quickly as anyone.

The Government of Myanmar is willing and able
to address the issue of accountability. Therefore,
we strongly reject any move to bring the issue to
the international judicial system. With this firm
commitment and in the spirit of cooperation with the
United Nations, the Government of Myanmar has signed
a joint communiqué with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.
The Government of Myanmar has recently facilitated
the visit of Special Representative Patten.

While the primary responsibility to address the
situation in Rakhine rests with the Government and
the people of Myanmar, the objective and constructive
contribution and support of the international community
will be crucial to the success of Myanmar’s national
efforts. I wish to express our sincere appreciation to
all our friends who are helping and supporting us in
various ways to resolve the challenges in Rakhine at
this critical juncture. We shall continue to work in good
faith with the United Nations and with all our friends to
end the suffering of the people of Rakhine and rebuild
the state into a land of peace, harmony and prosperity
for all communities.

We have also been working very closely with the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Gamba.
The Government is now in the process of forming a
ministerial committee on the prevention of the six
grave violations affecting children. We conducted
training on the six grave violations in December
2018. We have been cooperating closely with Special
Representative Gamba.
The issue of Rakhine is not one of religious
persecution, as wrongfully portrayed in the massive
media campaign against Myanmar. Myanmar is
a multi-ethnic and multi-religious country where
different faiths, including the majority of the Muslim
population, have lived in harmony across the country
for centuries. The issue of Rakhine state is a political
and economic issue involving prolonged cross-border
illegal migration since colonial times, poverty, a lack
of rule of law and national security. The issue of
northern Rakhine state is not a threat to international
peace and security. The recent outbreak of fighting in
north Rakhine state, ignited by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army’s attacks against three police outposts,
has further complicated the situation. It has also
highlighted the urgent need to achieve a nationwide
ceasefire agreement under the ongoing national
peace process.
We are fully aware of the urgent need to solve
the humanitarian problems, but we want to seek
the Council’s understanding of the practicality and
possibilities on the ground. There are huge physical and
psychological barriers that hinder the implementation
of the repatriation, building peace and stability and
development efforts. It takes time and patience, as
well as courage, to build trust and confidence among
20/22

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh.
Mr. Haque (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to deliver
a statement to the Council. We appreciate in particular
the efforts of nine Council members in organizing
this briefing. We also thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Myanmar for her briefing.
We appreciate the willingness of the international
community, in particular the members of the Security
Council, to resolve this protracted humanitarian and
human rights crisis. At the same time, we cannot
hesitate to express our frustration as nothing concrete
has happened so far to convince us or the Rohingyas
living in camps in Bangladesh that there will be an early
resolution of the crisis, including the safe, dignified,
voluntary and sustainable return of the Rohingyas to
their homeland. Is there anything more disappointing
than discovering that despite our wholehearted efforts,
the repatriation cannot start due to non-conducive
conditions in Rakhine state of Myanmar? Is Bangladesh
being made to pay the price for being responsive
and responsible in showing empathy to a persecuted
minority group of a neighbouring country?
Bangladesh does not have any agenda or ulterior
motive to support terrorism anywhere, in particular
in Myanmar. We are successfully implementing our
zero-tolerance policy towards terrorism and violent
extremism. In fact, the problem of the Rohingyas is
an outcome of a multidimensional and multi-layered
geopolitical construct, with its genesis in Myanmar.
It is the result of the decades-long state practice of
deprivation, disenfranchisement and atrocities. Its
19-05868

28/02/2019

The situation in Myanmar

solution therefore has to be found in Myanmar and by
Myanmar. It is most unfortunate that the Myanmar
authorities are now accusing us of harbouring
terrorists, which is a clear attempt to shift the blame
on Bangladesh.
The Permanent Representative of Myanmar referred
to certain incidents, concerning which we will report to
the Council after the necessary verification at our end.
In the face of such ridiculous allegations, we cannot but
reiterate that our Government, under the leadership of
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, is firmly committed to
not allowing any group from any other country to use
our soil or resources for terrorism. The high level of
alertness and effective prevention measures undertaken
by law enforcement agencies, in line with our zerotolerance policy, render it absolutely impossible for
any terrorist outfit to be present in Bangladesh. In fact,
Bangladesh has been providing enormous support to
Myanmar over the past few years and conducted many
combing operations against the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army. We have always reminded Myanmar of
the potential risks of fanning the fire of extremism and
stoking nationalist feelings to demonize the Rohingyas
in Rakhine.
It is not only Rohingyas who are suffering; our own
people, the host community, are also suffering through
no fault of their own. The prolonged presence of the
Rohingyas in Bangladesh has been posing formidable
challenges and adversely impacting our economy,
environment, social fabric and security. We are also
faced with the threats of human and drug trafficking
and radicalization, with further ramifications for the
region and beyond. In order to inform the Council of
what the local communities are thinking, let me refer
to a January 2019 report of Ground Truth Solutions, an
international non-governmental organization supported
by Switzerland and the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development that researches the
views of people in crises. The report says:
“Their attitudes have shifted from the start of
the crisis, where they felt much more supportive and
welcoming of Rohingya but now are much less so,
feeling that Rohingya have ‘been here too long.’”
The idea of the long-term hosting of Rohingyas
by Bangladesh is not at all a viable proposition. Even
if the repatriation started today, it would take another
12 years, based on the estimation that 300 Rohingyas
would return per day.

S/PV. 8477

In diplomacy, there is no such thing as an
exhaustive list. Yet, I must mention that we have tried
everything bilaterally with Myanmar for the voluntary,
safe, dignified and sustainable return of Rohingyas and
are now continuing our bilateral engagements despite
Myanmar’s hollow promises and various obstructionist
approaches. We have also engaged with regional
partners. Yet, not a single Rohingya has volunteered to
return to Rakhine due to the absence of a conducive
environment there.
As to our friends in the international community
who advocate a bilateral approach to the repatriation
of Rohingyas, we would like to reassure them of our
goodwill and genuine intent to resolve this crisis,
following that path. But they must also fulfil their
part of the commitment, as agreed by Bangladesh
and Myanmar, on the scope and role of “interested
international partners” in the return and reintegration
process. Investing in Rakhine without guaranteeing
the return of Rohingyas with basic human rights, is not
likely to produce any result. The policy of appeasement
is clearly not working here, just as it has not worked
anywhere in the past.
Regrettably, as far as repatriation is concerned,
the situation has gone from bad to worse. In a press
release of 18 January, the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar, Ms. Yanghee,
Lee expressed alarm over escalating violence in
northern and central Rakhine state and in Chin state.
According to her statement, since November 2018
the Myanmar military has been engaged in heavy
fighting, resulting in deaths and injuries to civilians
and the renewed displacement of people. As a result,
we have had an influx even of Rakhine Buddhists
into Bangladesh. These developments only serve to
corroborate what we have been saying from the very
beginning of the crisis — it is about repression of all
the ethnic minorities in the Rakhine state, not just
Muslim Rohingyas, who have been the traditional focus
of atrocity crimes. The Rakhine state Government has
prohibited the humanitarian activities of international
agencies in several areas, which has made the prospects
of return by Rohingyas more uncertain.
I regret to inform the Council that Bangladesh
will no longer be in a position to accommodate more
people from Myanmar. Our priority is nothing but
the safe, voluntary, sustainable and dignified return
of the Rohingyas. This requires building confidence
among them about returning. Some specific measures

19-0586821/22

S/PV.8477

The situation in Myanmar

on the part of Myanmar, demonstrating its sincerity
about return, may be helpful in the short term. Let me
mention a few.
First, Myanmar should address the accountability
issue. Myanmar’s own investigation processes seem
to have failed time and again. Therefore, the existing
United Nations mechanisms need to be operationalized.
Secondly, we must ensure the full implementation
of the memorandum of understanding between
the Myanmar Government, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as
of the recommendations of the Kofi Annan Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State. We have been hearing
that most of the recommendations contained in the
report of the Annan Commission have already been
implemented. Had that been so, I can assure the Council
that the situation on the ground would have improved
vastly. It is therefore very natural for one to ask why the
Rohingyas are not willing to return voluntarily and why
we are still seeing fresh arrivals up to this very day.
Thirdly, the existing camps for internally displaced
persons must be dismantled. In these ghettoes inside
Rakhine, some 130,000 Muslim inmates have been
detained for over the past six years in inhuman
conditions. The several thousand Rohingyas languishing
in the so-called zero line of the Bangladesh-Myanmar
border must be taken back.
Although we expect the Security Council to
maintain its custodianship so as to ensure Myanmar’s
compliance with the agreed provisions of bilateral
arrangements for return with Bangladesh, the Council’s
pronouncements thus far have had no impact on
improving the situation on the ground. Circumstances
now necessitate concrete actions on the part of the
Council before the situation spins out of control. In that
context, we would like to make three specific proposals
for the Council’s consideration.
First, a new draft resolution must be negotiated to set
out a regular reporting cycle as an oversight mechanism
on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission and progress in investigations of
human rights violations.
Secondly, a select group of Council members, if
not the full Council, should again visit the Rohingya
camps in Cox’s Bazar and Rakhine state to assess the

22/22

28/02/2019

developments since their visit to the region in April and
May 2018.
Thirdly, civilian-run safe zones must be created in
the conflict-affected areas in Myanmar in order to ensure
the safety and security of all civilians, irrespective of
their ethnic or religious identity, as proposed by our
Honourable Prime Minister in the general debate of
seventy-second session of the General Assembly (see
A/72/PV.14). The safe zones may be non-military and
civilian in nature, administered by humanitarian and
human rights actors, including from the countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. If the Council
agrees, we can provide further ideas in that regard.
As for the Special Envoy, we expect her to
further intensify her efforts to attain her mandated
goals, particularly the safe, voluntary, dignified and
sustainable return of Rohingyas to their areas of
origin. We should not allow Myanmar to turn the clock
backward on any grounds, and therefore we urge the
Council to act in a decisive manner.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the
last scheduled meeting of the Council for the month
of February, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of Equatorial Guinea to
the members of the Council, especially my colleagues
the Permanent Representatives, their respective staff
and the Secretariat of the Council for all the support
they have given to us. Indeed, it has been a busy
month, and one in which we have rallied to consensus
on several important issues within our purview. We
could not have done it alone or without the hard work,
support and positive contributions of every delegation
and the representatives of the Secretariat, including the
conference service officers, interpreters, translators,
verbatim reporters and security staff. It has been a very
enriching experience for us and we apologize for any
difficulties that may have arisen
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council in wishing good luck to the delegations
of France and Germany during their joint presidency in
the months of March and April.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

19-05868
