S/2015/813

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 October 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the twentieth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Council resolution 2165
(2014) and paragraph 5 of Council resolution 2191 (2014), in which the Council
requested me to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by
all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to the United
Nations agencies on the ground, from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and from open sources. Data from United Nations agencies and partners on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to 30 September
2015. More recent data have also been included when available.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Widespread conflict and high levels of violence continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic in September. Indiscriminate and disproportionate aerial
bombings and ground attacks in places with a large presence of civilians, including
the use of barrel bombs by government forces and indiscriminate shelling by
non-State armed opposition groups and designated terrorist groups 1 continued to
kill, injure and displace civilians. The conduct of hostilities by all parties continued
to be characterized by widespread disregard for international humanitarian law and
their obligation to protect civilians.
4.
On 30 September, air strikes from Russian forces commenced and wer e
reported principally in Hama, Idlib, Homs and Ladhiqiyah; limited strikes were also
reported in Raqqah, Dayr al-Zawr and Rif Dimashq governorates. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) received reports

__________________
1

15-18103 (E)

On 30 May 2013, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusrah Front were
designated as terrorist groups by the Security Council in accordance with resolution 1267 (1999).
The two groups operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.

221015

*1518103*

S/2015/813

that Zaafarani village was struck, killing at least 11 civilians and wounding more
than 50 others. Rastan was also struck, killing six civilians, four of whom were
children. Residential neighbourhoods in Tallbisah were also reportedly hit, killing at
least 15 civilians.
5.
In Damascus and Rif Dimashq governorates, high levels of fighting and
violence between Government forces and non-State armed opposition groups
resulted in death and injury to civilians. On 10 September, non -State armed
opposition groups made advances from eastern Ghutah towards Tall al-Kurdi and
reached positions close to Adra Prison and Dahiyat al-Asad in Rif Dimashq. Around
15,000 civilians were temporarily displaced from Dahiyat al -Asad and surrounding
areas as a result. Government forces subsequently halted the advances in Dahiyat
al-Asad. Non-State armed opposition groups captured part of the main road from
Damascus to Homs resulting in the closure of the road for three days. The road has
officially reopened, but traffic remains diverted as Government forces attempt to
regain the area from non-State armed opposition groups. Furthermore, non-State
armed opposition groups continued shelling civilian areas inside the capital during
the reporting period, launching more than 80 mortars, which killed some
38 civilians and injured around 250 more.
6.
Government forces continued their aerial and ground attacks in Duma in
eastern Ghutah during the reporting period, including on civilian areas, killing at
least 25 civilians and injuring at least 270 more. A school in Duma reportedly
suffered significant damages on 20 September as a result of the bombardments.
Other locations in eastern Ghutah were also subject to attack. For example, in
nearby Harasta town, reports indicate that government jets hit a residenti al area on
6 September, killing four civilians. On 7 September, OHCHR received reports that
government forces hit the vicinity of the Kaws Bakkin checkpoint, where displaced
residents of Zabadani were crowding, killing six civilians.
7.
On 22 September, a conditional ceasefire agreement was reached for Zabadani
and Madaya in Rif Dimashq governorate and Foah and Kafraya in Idlib governorate,
as well as some surrounding areas. Prior to the agreement, pro -government and
Hizbullah forces had continued to make advances in Zabadani in early September,
seizing control of the Jisr district and pushing fighters and inhabitants into the city
centre. Pro-government advances in Zabadani were accompanied by bombardments
on Madaya and Buqayn, causing casualties among civilians. Meanwhile, in Foah
and Kafraya, Jaish al-Fateh (comprising non-State armed opposition groups and the
Nusrah Front) had continued to attack both villages prior to the ceasefire: on
19 September, nine vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices and more than
1,200 rockets were fired, killing 60 people and injuring 300 more.
8.
After the conditional ceasefire agreement, on 26 September, government
warplanes bombarded Taftanaz, a town near Foah and Kafraya included in the
ceasefire agreement. Non-State armed opposition groups retaliated by shelling Foah
and Kafraya with more than 20 mortars. Despite these developments, and unabated
fighting in nearby areas, the ceasefire agreement continued to hold as at 14 October.
While the United Nations was not a party to the agreement, signatories requested
the United Nations and other humanitarian actors to facilitate the humanitarian
provisions of the agreement, including evacuation of the critically injured and
delivery of humanitarian assistance. On 2 October, the United Nations and partners
had to suspend their planned humanitarian intervention mission in support of the

2/14

15-18103

S/2015/813

ceasefire agreement because of insecurity along the proposed route and last minute
disagreements among the parties. However, the joint team made up of the United
Nations and other partners has made all necessary preparations and remains ready
immediately to implement the humanitarian provisions of the agreement when
conditions allow. On 12 October, my Special Envoy for the Syrian Arab Republic,
Staffan de Mistura, urged the Governments of the Russian Federation and the Syrian
Arab Republic to allow critical humanitarian support in the areas covered by the
agreement.
9.
Fighting continued in Idlib governorate during the reporting period. Jaish
al-Fateh seized control of Abu al-Duhur airbase on 9 September, the last remaining
government-held military installation in Idlib. Civilians in Al-Duhur town and
surrounding villages fled to other, safer areas in Idlib governorate during the
advance. On 16 September, eight civilians were killed when government helicopters
dropped barrel bombs on Safoohan village in Idlib, according to reports received by
OHCHR. On 30 September, government air strikes reportedly hit the town of Dana
in north-west Idlib near the border with Turkey, killing and injuring several people.
10. In Aleppo governorate, fighting continued in Aleppo city during the reporting
period. Pro-government forces and non-State armed opposition groups continued
mutual shelling inside the city, causing a number of casualties among civilians. On
15 September, more than 35 people, including 17 children, were reportedly killed
and some 160 others were injured as a result of shelling by non -State armed
opposition groups on the Midan, Salaheddine, Hamdaniyah and New Aleppo
neighbourhoods. In eastern Aleppo city, OHCHR reported that more than
20 civilians were reportedly killed and dozens injured on 21 September, when
government planes reportedly fired missiles on a market and residential area of the
Shaar neighbourhood. Elsewhere, clashes erupted in late September between the
Kurdish People’s Protection Units and the Nusrah Front, as well as other non -State
armed opposition groups, in the Al-Sheikh Maksood neighbourhood, resulting in
multiple civilian deaths and injuries and temporarily affecting access to eastern
Aleppo city. A truce was later agreed. Meanwhile, government forces also continued
air strikes on other parts of Aleppo governorate; for example, on 24 and 25 September
attacks against the town of Hayyan allegedly killed two civilians.
11. Attacks continued to be launched by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) in various governorates during the reporting period. In northern Aleppo
governorate, ISIL sustained its offensive on Mare’a town, which is under the control
of non-State armed opposition groups. However, non-State armed opposition groups
continued to withstand the offensive. International coalition air strikes against ISIL
also continued in the area. On 9 October, ISIL advanced south of Ma re’a, seizing a
number of villages in the Handarat area of the Aleppo countryside, close to Aleppo
city.
12. In Hasakah governorate, ISIL conducted two attacks using vehicle -borne
improvised explosive devices on 14 September: the first exploded in the Al -Mahatta
area, reportedly killing at least 12 civilians; the second occurred in Khashman
district, killing five and wounding 70 more. In Damascus governorate, ISIL
launched an offensive in the first few days of September against the Assali district
in southern Damascus city (which was under local agreement between the
Government and non-State armed opposition groups), gaining control of almost half
of the district. In early October, ISIL and non-State armed opposition groups

15-18103

3/14

S/2015/813

reportedly reached a ceasefire agreement covering Assali and Qadam. In Homs,
ISIL advanced in the eastern part of the governorate, gaining control of the Jazal
oilfield following fighting with government forces. Jazal was the last remaining
oilfield under government control.
13. Fighting continued between ISIL and government forces in Dayr al -Zawr
governorate; ISIL continued its attacks on the Dayr al-Zawr military airbase,
capturing two military camps near the airport and reportedly killing tens of
pro-government forces on 10 September. Meanwhile, on 28 September, an air strike
by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in the vicinity of the marketplace in
Mayadin resulted in the death of at least 40 civilians.
14. In Hama governorate, heavy fighting was reported between the Nusrah Fro nt
and non-State armed opposition groups, and government forces, in various locations
along the Ghab plain. Non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusrah Front
made advances on government positions along the Ghab plain, notably the
mountains overlooking rural Ladhiqiyah governorate. Reports of non-State armed
opposition groups shelling on Ladhiqiyah city, including Bassel al -Assad airport,
were also received. In early October, government forces launched a major offensive
in northern Hama to reverse these gains. Approximately 7,000 families were displaced
from northern Hama and nearby areas in Idlib as a result. In Ladhiqiyah
governorate, government forces launched an offensive on non -State armed group
positions, seizing several villages and contesting the major town of Salma. Air strikes
by the Russian Federation were also reported in the area.
15. In Homs governorate, government forces continued their aerial bombardment
on areas held by non-State armed groups in the northern countryside. For example,
OHCHR sources reported that government forces carried out six aerial attacks on
Rastan city on 1 September, killing at least five people. In response, non -State
armed opposition groups launched an operation known as “150 rockets and
missiles” on government positions in north Rastan. Meanwhile, in Homs city, a
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device in the government-controlled Al-Zahra’
neighbourhood killed one civilian and injured 15 others on 22 September. On
23 September, another such device exploded at a roundabout in the Akrama
neighbourhood, killing two civilians and injuring seven others. In the last week of
September, rockets reportedly landed in the government -controlled Zahra’,
Abbasiyah, Walid and Wadi al-Dahab neighbourhoods, resulting in two deaths.
16. In the Wa’r district of Homs city, multiple shelling and attacks from
pro-government forces in the surrounding areas were reported in September. On
4 and 5 September, five civilians were killed and more than eight injured as a result
of shelling from pro-government groups. On 26 September, a government-launched
surface-to-surface missile hit a playground, close to an orphanage, killing
22 civilians, including 14 children. On 30 September, surface -to-surface rockets hit
a school used as a shelter for internally displaced persons, resulting in one civilian
casualty. Since 31 August, pro-government forces have closed all roads leading to
Wa’r. Negotiations between the parties on a local agreement continued, but
humanitarian supplies have not been allowed to enter Wa’r.
17. Fighting in the southern governorates of the Syrian Arab Republic was also
reported during September. In Suwayda governorate, on 4 September, reports
indicate that an improvised explosive device detonated in Suwayda city near a
convoy of Sheikh Wahid Al-Balous (a Druze spiritual leader and head of the Rejal

4/14

15-18103

S/2015/813

al-Karama movement) killed several people, including Al -Balous, and injured many
more. The initial attack was followed by a second such device in the vicinity of the
nearby National Hospital, to which the injured from the first attack had been taken.
In total, at least 33 people were killed in both attacks. The attacks were followed by
a period of unrest in Suwayda city, which led to government forces cutting all main
routes to and from the city for three days. In Qunaytirah governorate, non -State
armed opposition groups reportedly made advances against government positions in
the north-east of the governorate, with the aim of opening a supply line from
Qunaytirah to western Ghutah in Rif Dimashq governorate.
18. In Dar’a governorate, OHCHR reported that government forces fired a
surface-to-surface missile on a residential neighbourhood in Dar’a al -Mahata on
11 September, killing six members of the same family, including three children . On
16 September, at least 20 civilians were killed and at least 40 more wounded when
government forces reportedly dropped barrel bombs on a market in Busra al -Sham.
The day before, on 15 September, the Free Syrian Army’s Southern Front
announced the halt of its attack on Dar’a city. This came after three unsuccessful
attempts to capture the city over the past few months.
19. Displacement continued throughout the Syrian Arab Republic in September
and early October, with over 80,000 people displaced from v arious areas in Homs,
Aleppo, Rif Dimashq, Dayr al-Zawr, Hama and Idlib governorates owing to ongoing
fighting. There were also reports of forced relocation of some 1,000 people in early
September by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic from Bludan a nd
Mamoura Isha’at to Buqayn town. Since mid -August, some 2,200 formerly
displaced families, 80 per cent of whom were Palestine refugees, returned to
Husayniyah in Rif Dimashq from other parts of the governorate.
20. Civilian infrastructure continued to be targeted during the reporting period.
Water was not available for a total of 17 days in Aleppo city, affecting some
2.1 million people. The unavailability was due to a combination of cuts by non -State
armed opposition groups and general degradation of infrastructure. As a result of the
water shortages, many people resorted to drinking from untreated and unsafe water
supplies. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) used trucks to bring in
water for some 700,000 people per day when the water system was down.
Meanwhile, in Raqqah governorate, ISIL reportedly cut electricity supply to Raqqah
city for two weeks in September, on the basis that people were not paying their
electricity bills. The electricity supply reportedly remained available in rural areas
to ensure irrigation of agricultural lands. Separately, in Raqqah governorate, amid a
shortage of potable water, UNICEF delivered water treatment materials for
100 million litres of water.
21. Cultural heritage continued to be targeted during the reportin g period. In early
October, the antiquities chief of the Syrian Arab Republic confirmed that the Arch
of Triumph, a second century monument, had been destroyed by ISIL in Palmyra.
22. In addition to the above-mentioned ceasefire agreement in Zabadani, Madaya,
Foah, Kafraya and surrounding areas, there were developments regarding several
local agreements. On 17 September, an agreement was concluded between the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and representatives of Tiba, a town south
of Damascus city. In accordance with the terms of the truce, the road between Tiba
town and Khan Dannun was reopened and many people displaced from Tiba
returned to their homes. In Barzeh, the local agreement came under pressure after

15-18103

5/14

S/2015/813

government forces killed one civilian and arrested another on 2 September. In
response, non-State armed opposition groups blocked the road passing through the
district to Tishreen Hospital used by the Government and civilians. However, as of
mid-September, a reconciliation accord was reportedly reached, enabling the
reopening of the road into the city and the movement of civilians.
23. In Qudsaya, Rif Dimashq, reconciliation negotiations continued, with non -State
armed opposition groups reportedly agreeing to halt fighting on 9 September, with
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic concomitantly sending wheat flour and
vegetables to the area. On 13 September, it was reported that government and
private sector employees, as well as students, could move in and out of Qudsaya. In
Madamiyet, where an initial local agreement had been in place, there was repeated
shelling by government forces during the reporting period, including on a bread
distribution centre killing two people on 2 September, as well as increased
movement restrictions around government checkpoints.
24. The Special Envoy continued his consultations with international, regional and
Syrian interlocutors, including the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
non-State armed and political opposition groups, in support of the thema tic working
groups and towards forming a contact group. These consultations took place in the
region with the League of Arab States and the European Union, and in the margins
of the high-level debate of the General Assembly. On 22 September, the Special
Envoy announced the appointment of the facilitators to lead the four working groups .

B.

Human rights
25. The scale and severity of abuses and violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law remained grave over the reporting period. OHCHR continued
to receive allegations and to document cases of arbitrary detention, sexual and
gender-based violence, torture and other ill-treatment, and deaths in custody inside
government detention centres. Victims interviewed by OHCHR reported that they
were subjected to torture and other ill-treatment in Mezzeh military airport in
Damascus and the Air Force Intelligence Branch in Bab Tuma, both of which fall
within the oversight of the Ministry of Defence. Witnesses also spoke of other
detainees, including women, being subjected to torture in these facilities. OHCHR
also received allegations from former detainees who reported witnessing sexual and
gender-based violence and death while in detention as a result of torture in the
Palestine Branch of Syrian Military Intelligence in Damascus. OHCHR has seen no
indication of the Government undertaking any investigation i nto allegations of
crimes committed by its forces.
26. Non-State armed opposition groups and designated terrorist groups also
detained civilians in areas under their control. Dozens of residents of Idlib
governorate were arbitrarily arrested and detained by the Nusrah Front during the
reporting period. For example, on 2 September, Nusrah Front fighters detained an
unknown number of protestors in Khan Shaykhun after they demonstrated against
the detention of a local religious leader.
27. OHCHR received reports of ISIL executing seven men in Homs governorate
on 22 September because of their sexual orientation. On 20 September, ISIL
executed a woman in Dayr al-Zawr governorate for allegedly cooperating with
non-State armed opposition groups. Separately, on 24 September, ISIL reportedly

6/14

15-18103

S/2015/813

killed three Assyrian captives who were detained along with over 200 other
Assyrian people in February 2015 in Tall Tamr, Hasakeh governorate.
28. On 10 September, Nusrah Front fighters, as well as other non-State armed
opposition groups, reportedly executed over 50 captured government soldiers
following the takeover of Abu al-Duhur military base in Idlib governorate.
29. In my statement to the General Assembly in New York on 28 September,
I called for the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic to be referred to the
International Criminal Court.

C.

Humanitarian response
30. United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach millions
of people in need in September through all modalities from within the Syrian Arab
Republic and across borders pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014)
and 2191 (2014). The World Food Programme (WFP) delivered food assistance for
over 4 million people in 12 governorates. The World Health Organization (WHO)
distributed medicines and supplies for over 750,000 treatments in eight governorates.
UNICEF reached 2.5 million people with multisector support, including through the
launch of the Back to Learning campaign targeting some 2.2 million children
attending school, and other programmes targeting 700,000 out-of-school children
with non-formal learning initiatives. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reached around 175,000 people with core
relief items and protection services in three governorates. The United Nations
Population Fund delivered, through implementing partners, 315,000 reproductive
health and gender-based violence services, including emergency obstetric care and
family planning in support of 106,000 people. The United Nations Foo d and
Agriculture Organization reached almost 50,000 people with food and agricultural
assistance. The International Organization for Migration delivered basic relief items
for over 40,000 people. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) provided support to more than 324,000
Palestine refugees. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic continued to
provide basic services to areas under its control, as well as in many areas beyond its
control.
31. Cross-border deliveries continued during the reporting period. As at
30 September, the United Nations and its implementing partners had sent
189 shipments (127 from Turkey and 62 from Jordan) to the Syrian Arab Republic
under the terms of Security Council resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). These
included food assistance for over 2.1 million people; non -food items for 1.5 million
people; water and sanitation supplies for over 1 million people; and medical
supplies for almost 2.5 million treatments in Aleppo, Dar ’a, Hama, Idlib,
Ladhiqiyah and Qunaytirah governorates. In line with resolutions 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014), the United Nations notified the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic in advance of each shipment, including details regarding the content,
destination and number of beneficiaries.
32. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism continued its operations in Jordan
and Turkey. During the reporting period, the Mechanism monitored 14 United
Nations humanitarian shipments consisting of 329 trucks, confirming the
humanitarian nature of each and notifying the Syrian authorities after each

15-18103

7/14

S/2015/813

shipment. The Mechanism continued to benefit from excellent cooperation with the
Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
33. One inter-agency cross-line convoy to Hula was completed in three phases: on
22 and 29 September and, following a delay due to insecurity, on 8 October.
Multisector assistance was delivered to 19,500 families, including 12,000 in hard to-reach areas. Government authorities prohibited water, sanitation and hy giene
items and some medical items from being loaded.
34. Both international and Syrian non-governmental organizations (NGOs) continued
to deliver multisector assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic in September,
including the provision of services, in line with previous months.
Humanitarian access
35. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to many of the 12.2 million people in
need of assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic remained extremely challenging in
many areas because of active conflict and insecurity, as well as deliberate
restrictions by the parties, including burdensome administrative procedures.
36. Access to the 4.6 million people living in hard-to-reach areas remained of
critical concern. In September, United Nations agencies and partners reached 31 of
the 127 hard-to-reach locations (24 per cent) overall. They reached 16 locations
with food assistance for around 275,000 people, 13 locations with health support for
over 90,000 medical treatments, seven locations with water, sanitation and hygiene
assistance for more than 358,000 people and seven locations with relief items for
over 60,000 people. Over half of the people in hard -to-reach areas are in ISILcontrolled areas, to which the United Nations did not deliver assistance in
September, aside from water treatment materials from UNICEF.
37. Active conflict in several governorates hindered the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance, as well as people’s access to essential services. For
example, fighting and insecurity continued to prevent the delivery of life-saving
food assistance to over 1.2 million people in parts of Rif Dimashq, rural Homs and
rural Hama governorates in September. Meanwhile, United Nations deliveries from
Jordan through the Ramtha border crossing with Jordan were suspended between
9 and 16 September owing to the presence of landmines on the route used by
convoys, which were subsequently cleared. The Bab al-Hawa border crossing was
temporarily closed between 10 and 13 September following the death of a Turkish
soldier in the vicinity of the crossing point after shots were fired at Turkish soldiers
on patrol duty in Turkish territory. In Aleppo governorate, fighting between the
Kurdish People’s Protection Units and other non-State armed opposition groups in
the Al-Sheikh Maksood neighbourhood at the end of September resulted in the
temporary closure of a key access route linking eastern Aleppo city to the Bab
al-Salam border crossing. The route was subsequently opened again.
38. Deliberate interference and restrictions by the parties also continued to prevent
aid delivery. WFP continues to be unable to reach some 720,000 people in need in
ISIL-controlled areas as plans to deliver assistance to these areas have been
suspended owing to the inability to work independently and monitor activities.
Meanwhile, Syrian authorities restricted the inclusion of 37 midwifery kits and
water, sanitation and hygiene items in the United Nations inter -agency convoy to
Al-Hula, Homs governorate, which would have benefited 1,850 pregnant wo men. In

8/14

15-18103

S/2015/813

Idlib, the planned delivery of food to 42,500 people in Idlib city was suspended
owing to interference and lack of agreement with non -State armed opposition
groups on the distribution of wheat flour.
39. No WFP shipments went through the Nusaybin/Qamishli crossing in September
because of delays in obtaining the necessary approval from the Turkish authorities
on account of the security conditions in north-eastern Syrian Arab Republic. Syrian
authorities had approved shipments to cross the border. Nonetheless, WFP
completed the dispatch of 90 per cent of the plan for Hasakah governorate in
September using stock that had been shipped from Turkey in August with the
consent of the Governments of Turkey and the Syrian Arab Republic. On 9 October,
Turkish authorities gave approval for WFP to conduct shipments through the
crossing, while UNICEF was also approved to use the crossing to import
$2.5 million worth of life-saving supplies.
40. As at 30 September, 23 out of the 85 inter-agency requests made in 2015 by
the United Nations had been approved in principle by the Syrian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs; 46 requests were pending approval; and three requests had been put
on hold by the United Nations because of insecurity. The remaining 13 requests are
ones that had been previously submitted but were then overtaken by newer requests.
Nine of the original requests were put on hold by the United Nations because of
insecurity and the other four requests went unanswered by the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic within a three-month time period and were resubmitted. On
30 September, the United Nations requested an additional 48 inter -agency convoys
to hard-to-reach and besieged locations during the coming three months.
41. Of the 23 requests approved in principle by the Syrian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, 10 convoys have been completed and one has been partially completed. Of
the remaining 12 requests for convoys approved in principle, five convoys have
been unable to go because of lack of approval from the security forces of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic; two are held up because of a lack of
agreement between the United Nations, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the
Government on the access route; two are stalled by lack of approval by non -State
armed opposition groups for safe passage; and one remains pending because of the
security situation. The remaining two requests have been approved in principle and
are under preparation.
42. In addition to inter-agency convoys, a number of requests for single -agency
convoys remain pending until approval is received from Syrian authorities. WFP
had six requests that have not been approved by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic on account of security conditions in several locations in Dar’a and
Rif Dimashq governorates during the reporting period, preventing the delivery of
assistance to 33,000 people. In September, UNHCR had nine facilitation letters for
the movement of core relief items that had not been approved by Syrian authorities
on account of insecurity at the requested locations. A UNICEF cross-line mission to
Madamiyet in Rif Dimashq, planned for 15-24 September, to deliver education and
relief supplies for 10,000 children, is pending approval as at 14 October.
43. All UNRWA operations in Yarmouk remained suspended during the reporting
period. The most recent UNRWA mission inside Yarmouk was conducted on
28 March. The passageway between Yarmouk and Yalda is a volatile area under the
control of non-State armed opposition groups. Increased restrictions at the
passageway were reported from 19 to 21 September, including a prohibition on

15-18103

9/14

S/2015/813

males older than 16 years of age passing through the checkpoint. These restrictions
were subsequently lifted, although civilian access to the passageway remains
unpredictable and risky. UNRWA was permitted to conduct six missions to Yalda
during the reporting period, but was only permitted to provide medical services
during these missions in response to a suspected outbreak of typhoid. UNRWA was
not permitted to provide food and other much-needed forms of humanitarian
assistance. The Syrian authorities have indicated that additional humanitarian
assistance and services from UNRWA would be superfluous as civilians in the area
are already adequately provided for. Other humanitarian organizations have reportedly
been allowed to continue their operations and deliver assistance in Yalda, Babila and
Bayt Saham. The local agreement reached in these three areas is holding and the
authorities have continued to authorize a limited range of commercial goods to enter
the area on a daily basis.
44. No major changes in the administrative procedures required by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
were reported in September. The current administrative procedures continued to
delay or limit the delivery of assistance by United Nations agencies and partners.
Regarding the importation of health and nutrition goods more specifically, a new
procedure was enacted stipulating that clearance of these items from any port of
entry required additional approval from the Ministry of Health. This has delayed the
clearance of four shipments containing nutrition supplements despite prior approval
of the shipments having been received from the Ministry of Forei gn Affairs.
45. Progress continued to be made with regard to visas for United Nations staff
members. In September, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic approved
120 visas for United Nations staff from 11 different offices, of which 36 were new
visas and 84 were renewals. A total of 90 per cent of the approved visas in
September were granted within the agreed 15 working day review period. As at
11 October, 31 United Nations visa requests (either new visas or renewals) remained
pending, only nine of which were beyond the agreed 15 working day review period.
No visa applications were rejected in September. The total number of visas rejected
in 2015 is 39, exclusive of the four United Nations staff that were declared personae
non gratae in February.
46. A total of 15 international NGOs are authorized to operate in the Syrian Arab
Republic. These organizations continued to face a series of administrative hurdles
and restrictions that have had an impact on their ability to operate. They remain
restricted in their ability to partner with national humanitarian organizations, open
sub-offices, conduct missions, join inter-agency convoys or undertake independent
needs assessments. Six visas for staff of international NGOs remained pending as at
30 September, four of which were submitted in August or September. Four visas
were approved in September, including one that was submitted during the same
month. The United Nations Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator
continues to lead discussions with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
regarding visas and the operating framework for international NGOs.
47. Four additional national NGOs were authorized by the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic to partner with United Nations organizations in Septemb er.
Two national NGOs were authorized to operate in Rif Dimashq, one in Aleppo and
one in Damascus governorate. Overall, the number of national NGOs authorized to
partner with United Nations organizations stands at 135 working through 218 branches .

10/14

15-18103

S/2015/813

Besieged areas
48. Of the 4.6 million people living in hard-to-reach areas, some 422,000 remained
besieged in the Syrian Arab Republic. This included 167,500 people besieged by
Government forces in eastern Ghutah and Darayya; 26,500 people besieged by
non-State armed opposition groups in Nubul and Zahra’; and 228,000 people
besieged by ISIL in the government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Dayr
al-Zawr city.
49. The parties to the conflict continued to entirely or heavily restrict access to
besieged areas during the reporting period. During September, some 7,800 people
were reached with water, sanitation and hygiene assistance in one besieged location
(1.8 per cent). No food, health or other relief items reached any besieged area. The
flow of commercial supplies through official routes remained largely blocked,
leading to high prices for those commodities reaching besieged areas through
unofficial and irregular supply lines. Freedom of movement remained heavily
restricted, although certain groups, such as students and members of reconciliation
councils, were occasionally allowed to leave and return to besieged areas.
50. In eastern Ghutah, Rif Dimashq, some 163,500 people remain besieged in
multiple locations by government forces. No United Nations assist ance reached the
besieged areas in eastern Ghutah during September.
51. In Darayya, Rif Dimashq, about 4,000 people remain besieged by government
forces. No United Nations assistance reached the area during the reporting period.
People in Darayya have not been assisted by the United Nations since October 2012.
52. In Nubul and Zahra’, Aleppo governorate, about 26,500 people remain besieged
by non-State armed opposition groups. No United Nations assistance reached the
two villages in September. There continued, however, to be consistent and credible
reports that access to and from the enclave for both commercial goods and people
had improved.
53. Some 228,000 people living in the government-controlled western
neighbourhoods of Dayr al-Zawr city are besieged by ISIL. In partnership with
Syrian Arab Red Crescent, UNICEF distributed hygiene supplies and conducted
hygiene promotion activities for some 7,800 people living in shelters for internally
displaced people in the besieged part of the city.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
54. Access to medical care continued to be restricted by insecurity and restrictions
imposed by parties to the conflict, resulting in increased prices for medicines, a
reduction in pharmaceutical production and a shortage of medical supplies in local
markets. The shortage of qualified medical staff and the degradation of essential
services has further affected access to adequate medical care. The availability of
life-saving health services, especially paediatric and maternal health services and
routine vaccinations, are of critical concern in the north-eastern governorates, in
Dar’a, Idlib, Hama and Aleppo governorates and the hard -to-reach and besieged
areas of Rif Dimashq governorate. According to recent assessments by the Syrian
Ministry of Health, supported by WHO and UNICEF, routine immunization
coverage in the Syrian Arab Republic has dropped from 95 per cent in 2010 to
64 per cent in 2014 nationwide and in some places it was as low as 20 per cent.

15-18103

11/14

S/2015/813

55. In September, WHO did not make any further new individual requests to the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic for shipments to hard -to-reach and
besieged areas. Requests by WHO to deliver medical assistance through an
inter-agency convoy to Zabadani, Rif Dimashq and Foah and Kafraya and
surrounding areas in Idlib governorate were approved by the Syrian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs following the recent ceasefire agreement in these locations;
however, the operation is still on hold because of security considera tions and
disagreements among the parties to the agreement. Two requests to provide Douma
in Rif Dimashq with trauma and surgical supplies and haemodialysis sessions are
still pending. Meanwhile, the United Nations and health sector partners continue to
face extreme challenges in the delivery of medical supplies and the provision of
preventative and curative services in ISIL-controlled areas.
56. In September, Physicians for Human Rights documented six attacks on
medical facilities. All six were by government forces. Two attacks each occurred in
Aleppo and Dayr al-Zawr governorates and one each in Idlib and Rif Dimashq
governorates. In terms of medical personnel, Physicians for Human Rights
documented the deaths of nine medical personnel, all of whom were ta rgeted or
killed in the line of duty. Eight medical personnel were killed by shelling and
bombing by Syrian government forces and one doctor was executed by ISIL. Three
were killed in Damascus governorate, three in Rif Dimashq, one in Dayr al -Zawr,
and one in Idlib and one in Raqqah governorates.
Safety and security of staff and premises
57. On 29 September, three staff members of a Syrian NGO were killed in an
attack on a medical facility in Kafr Batna in Rif Dimashq.
58. On 25 September gunfire occurred in front of the UNHCR office in Qamishli
reportedly wounding five civilians.
59. On 15 September, a mortar hit a UNICEF-supported child friendly space in
Aleppo, killing six and injuring two children. Two humanitarian work ers were also
injured in the attack. On the same day, a UNHCR-funded community centre in
Aleppo was hit by several mortars. The centre was forced to close.
60. On 3 September a UNHCR armoured vehicle was caught in the middle of a
demonstration in Aleppo city. Demonstrators tried to attack the vehicle and shouted
slogans against the United Nations. Government forces intervened and the vehicle
left the area safely.
61. A total of 36 United Nations staff members, 31 from UNRWA, one from the
United Nations Development Programme, three from UNHCR and one from
UNICEF, continue to be detained or missing. The total number of humanitarian
workers killed in the conflict since March 2011 is 81. This includes 17 staff
members of the United Nations, 48 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent, eight volunteers and staff members of the Palestinian Red Crescent
Society and eight staff members of international NGOs. Of the 81, 15 have been
killed since 1 January 2015.

12/14

15-18103

S/2015/813

III. Observations
62. After nearly five years of fighting, the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
continues to be characterized by a complete disregard for international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, in particular with regard to civilians,
including women and children, in the context of hostilities. Parties to the conflict
carry out attacks, lay siege to helpless communities, attack protected facilities, such
as schools and hospitals, summarily kill civilians and commit acts that constitute
torture and other ill-treatment. Serious violations have become the norm in many
parts of the Syrian Arab Republic, often without any comment or attention being
paid to them.
63. I strongly condemn the practice of indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks
by any party to the conflict, including through the use of barrel bombs, heavy
artillery, mortars and other explosive weapons in densely populated areas. The use
of explosive weapons in populated areas will have a severe long -term humanitarian
impact in the Syrian Arab Republic, resulting from the destruction of housing and
essential infrastructure on which civilians depend. Such attacks must stop
immediately. Those who carry out such serious violations and abuses of
international human rights law and international humanitar ian law must be held to
account. I repeat my call for the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic to be referred
to the International Criminal Court.
64. In addition to conflict and insecurity, efforts to expand humanitarian assistance
to those most in need continue to be met with delays and obstruction. However,
I welcome the recent progress on approvals for visas for United Nations staff
members by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. I strongly urge that the
progress on visas continue, and that it be followed by urgent and significant
progress on approval for United Nations inter-agency convoys to hard-to-reach and
besieged locations. Humanitarian actors must be allowed to do their jobs without
interference and the parties must allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded
humanitarian access to affected people throughout the country. With further and
sustained pressure from members of the Security Council and other Member States,
the United Nations and its partners would be able to reach more people in n eed.
65. Despite the demands of the Security Council, resolution 2139 (2014) largely
goes unimplemented month after month. We need a commitment from the parties to
the conflict to fully implement the resolution. As a matter of urgency, more progress
must be achieved in the five areas I outlined earlier this year: (a) addressing the
relentless and indiscriminate attacks on civilians; (b) lifting the sieges; (c) ensuring
access for the delivery of medical and surgical supplies to all parts of the country;
(d) ending the practice of using the denial of key services as a weapon of war; and
(e) rebuilding the education system in the Syrian Arab Republic.
66. The arrival of hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees in Europe has drawn
fresh attention to the appalling humanitarian crisis unfolding in the Syrian Arab
Republic and neighbouring countries. While the United Nations and international
and national NGOs continue to deliver aid to millions of people in need,
humanitarian needs inside the Syrian Arab Republic continue to grow and deepen.
In the absence of a political solution, we must continue to place focus on how best
to help and support the Syrian people, whose hopes of returning to their homes and
their country are diminishing by the day. I strongly encoura ge donors to maintain

15-18103

13/14

S/2015/813

and, where possible, increase, their generous support for life -saving humanitarian
operations, as well as recovery and resilience activities, in 2016.
67. There is no military solution to the Syrian crisis. Only serious political acti on
can address the aspirations of the Syrian people and resolve the root causes of the
conflict. It must also be stressed again that humanitarian efforts, however essential
they are, are no substitute for a credible political process, based on the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012, in particular the agreed principles and guidelines for
a Syrian-led transition. The Council must turn its words into deeds in the face of the
continuing atrocities and need for a political solution. The absence of a political
solution is condemning Syrians to live in chaos and is severely affecting future
generations.

14/14

15-18103
