42

General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

Bearing in mind that, while an equitable geographical
distribution has to a large extent been attained in the
membership of other commissions, Africa remains unduly under-represented on the Commission on Human
Rights,
Calls upon the Economic and Social Council, in the
elections to membership in the Commission on Human
Rights, to bear in mind the principle of equitable geographical distribution and, in particular, the necessity
of having Africa equitably represented.
1274th plenary meeting,
S December 1963.

1958 (XVIll). Membership of ihe Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme
The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 965 B (XXXVI) of 25 July 1963,
Recalling its resolution 1166 (XII) of 26 November
1957, which provided for the establishment of an
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme to consist of representatives of from twenty
to twenty-five States Members of the United Nations
or members of any of the specialized agencies, to be
elected by the Economic and Social Council on the
widest possible geographical basis from those States
with a demonstrated interest in, and devotion to, the
solution of the refugee problem,
Recalling its resolution 1783 (XVII) of 7 December
1962 relating to the continuation of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Noting that the Executive Committee has at present
a membership of twenty-five,
Bearing in mind the continued interest of Member
States in the work of the Office of the High Commissioner and the increase in the membership of the
United Nations,
1. Decides to enlarge the Executive Committee of
the High Commissioner's Programme to thirty members so as to achieve the widest possible geographical
representation ;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
elect the five additional members of the Executive Com. mittee during its resumed thirty-sixth session.
1279th plenary meeting,
12 December 1963.

1959 (XVID). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees 8 and having heard his
statement, 9
Taking note of the progress achieved in the international protection of refugees and in the search for permanent solutions to refugee problems through voluntary repatriation, integration in countries of asylum or
resettlement in other countries,
8 Official Records of the General Assembl3•, Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/5511/Rev.l) and Supplement
No. 11 A (A/5511/Rev.1/Add.1).
9 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Third Committee, 1270th meeting.

Noting with satisfaction the efforts made by the High
Commissioner, in his various fields of activity, for
groups of refugees for whom he lends his good offices,
Recognizing the importance of an adequate assistance
programme for the over-all effectiveness of the work
of the High Commissioner,
Commending the non-governmental organizations
working for refugees for their untiring activity on behalf
of refugees throughout the world,
Noting with appreciation that since the seventeenth
session of the General Assembly six more States have
adhered to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees, 10 bringing to forty-two the number of
States parties to the Convention ;
1. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to afford international protection to refugees and to pursue his efforts on behalf
of the refugees within his mandate and of those to whom
he extends his good offices, by giving particular attention
to new refugee groups, in conformity with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the directives
of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme;
2. Invites States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to continue to lend
their support to the alleviation of refugee problems:
(a) By facilitating the voluntary repatriation, resettlement or local integration of refugees;
( b) By improving the legal status of refugees residing in their territory, particularly in new refugee
situations, inter alia, by acceding as appropriate to the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and
by treating new refugee problems in accordance with
the principles and the spirit of the Convention;
( c) By providing the High Commissioner with the
necessary financial means for the accomplishment of the
tasks incumbent upon him and, in particular, by enabling
him to reach the financial targets established with the
approval of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme.
1279th plenary meeting,
12 December 1963.

1960 (XVIll). Draft International Covenants on
Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1843 B and C (XVII) of
19 December 1962,
H avinq dfvoted its attention once again to the draft
Internation::il Covenants on Human Rights and, in
particular, to the issues connected with the measures
of implementation. which are vital for the adoption and
effectiveness of the Covenants,
!Ja~...·ng rr_(Jard to the presence of many new Member
States. which have not had an opportunity to express
thei,: views on me:-isures of implementation owing, in
rmrt1cubr; t0 the cbte 011 which the Commission on
Human Rights apnroved the draft International Covenants on I-I un:an Rights,
. Considrring also the many different views expressed
m the dektte on measures of implementation,
I. Reaffirms its belief that final adoption of the draft
International Covenants on Human Rights is urgent
10 United

'.\atirns, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), '.\o. 2545.
