A/64/PV.34

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

34

th plenary meeting
Monday, 2 November 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Agenda item 85 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (A/64/257)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.7)
Mr. Camp (United States of America): The
United States would like to make a brief explanation of
its position on draft resolution A/64/L.7 on the report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
The United States has co-sponsored this draft
resolution as an expression of its strong support for the
Agency in all facets of its work and its determination
to cooperate with other Member States to strengthen
the Agency’s capabilities.
However, we would like to note our reservations
as to a particular resolution, on Israeli nuclear
capabilities, GC(53)/RES/17, adopted at the IAEA
General Conference in September. The United States
believes that any effort to address the complexities at
play regarding nuclear-related issues in the Middle
East must be done in a comprehensive and
non-politicized atmosphere.
The United States is committed to seeking
multilateral solutions to global challenges, and it is a
sponsor of this resolution as a symbol of its support for
the Agency as an institution. The United States remains
committed to working with other Member States to

support the IAEA in its dual mission of expanding
peaceful uses of nuclear energy while preventing the
proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for presenting the
annual report on the work of the Agency. On behalf of
the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, we wish to give him our cordial, fraternal
greetings. We also wish to acknowledge the presence
of the Permanent Representative of Malaysia,
Ambassador Hamidon Ali, who this morning
introduced the draft resolution entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency” (A/64/L.7), as
Chairman of the Board of Governors of the IAEA.
Venezuela supports the report and the draft resolution.
The IAEA has consolidated itself as a competent
body for scientific and technical cooperation in the
area of nuclear energy and for verifying compliance
with the obligations contracted to in accordance with
the respective safeguards agreements with member
States.
My delegation expresses its concern at actions
which seek to undermine the Agency’s legitimacy. No
other international body can assume the responsibilities
which States parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) have
given as sovereign States to the IAEA when it comes to
nuclear matters.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-59092 (E)

*0959092*

A/64/PV.34

At times, when undue interference has occurred,
there were serious violations of the principles of
international law and international humanitarian law.
Peoples have experienced acts of aggression and
crimes against humanity and suffered from the
destruction of their economies, their cultural
development and their political and religious systems.
Last 24 September, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1887 (2009) on non-proliferation. By
attempting to take jurisdiction solely over questions of
non-proliferation, the transparency required by the
entire disarmament and non-proliferation mechanism is
endangered, especially the technical process of
verification.
My delegation rejects any initiative that attempts
to ignore and delegitmize the multilateral disarmament
regime previously negotiated in the relevant
multilateral forums or that seeks to undermine the
technical, non-political character of institutions created
to deal with this matter.
The IAEA works on the basis of the inalienable
right of States to develop peaceful uses of nuclear
energy in compliance with the international
commitments made in accordance with article IV of the
NPT. For this reason, we stress that any attempt to
redefine the delicate balance of the rights and
obligations contained in the NPT can result in
undermining the system that the Treaty has established —
a system which relies on general acceptance.
My delegation recognizes the laudable efforts of
the IAEA to strengthen international cooperation in
nuclear safety, radiation safety, safe transportation and
the management of nuclear waste.
We wish to highlight the progress made in the
various activities intended to maintain and increase
security, including those having to do with the
networks of information and communication for
nuclear and radiation security and those oriented
towards the strengthening of national regulatory
infrastructures with jurisdiction over the control of
radioactive sources.
As a signatory to the NPT, Venezuela has
maintained active participation in established
cooperation machinery. In 2007-2008, it chaired the
technical cooperation body for Latin America and the
Caribbean, known as the Regional Cooperation
Agreement for the Advancement of Nuclear Science

2

and Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean
(ARCAL), and it held the chair of the ARCAL
representatives body, known as ORA, and the so-called
tripartite forum.
Our country has benefited from technical and
financial cooperation provided by the IAEA through
ARCAL. Several projects moved forward within the
framework of that cooperation in the biennium 20072008. We viewed as highly significant Mr. ElBaradei’s
visit to Venezuela last March, where he had extremely
productive meetings with senior authorities in the
energy, oil and science and technologies sectors. He
was welcomed by Ms. Cilia Flores, Speaker of the
Venezuelan National Assembly.
Our country was elected by acclamation as a
member of the Board of Governors of the IAEA for
2009-2010 in elections held from 14 to 18 September.
Venezuela will contribute to maintain the Agency as
the single forum with jurisdiction over nuclear energy,
and the promotion and defence of all of its objectives,
including disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and
verification, and the sovereign right to assist all States
to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
Allow me to express again our appreciation of the
efforts made by outgoing Director General
Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei during the 12 years that he
led this organization. We also wish to express the
support of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela for the
new Director General, Mr. Yukiya Amano.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): This is the last time that Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei will submit the annual report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to the
General Assembly. Allow us, at the outset, to express
to him our deepest appreciation and gratitude for the
exemplary efforts he has made to enhance the role of
the IAEA and expand its activities, especially in
strengthening its role in verifying information with the
utmost credibility and honesty.
I would also like to commend the efforts of the
Agency itself in assisting developing countries in the
area of the peaceful use and development of nuclear
technology. Libya reaffirms the right of all States to
obtain nuclear technology for peaceful purposes,
without discrimination, and to receive the assistance
both of the IAEA and other countries able to extend
such assistance.

09-59092

A/64/PV.34

We believe in the important role that the IAEA
plays in preventing the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. At the same time, however, we regret that the
role of the Agency is not universal, since it does not
include oversight of the nuclear activities of nuclearweapon States, a shortcoming for an Agency that
should be universal and not exclude any States. We
hope the international community can succeed in
reviewing the IAEA’s mandate so that it can oversee
nuclear activities without discrimination, especially
regarding the reductions in nuclear arsenals announced
by nuclear-weapon States and aimed at achieving total
and comprehensive nuclear disarmament.
Libya affirms the need to bolster the credibility of
the IAEA in its vital role as the only specialized
authority
responsible
for
verification
and
implementation of the safeguards arrangements by
member States within the framework of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), in
order to prevent channelling nuclear power away from
peaceful uses towards use in nuclear weapons or other
forms of nuclear explosives.
The IAEA is considered the international
coordinator for technical cooperation in the nuclear
field and must continue to play this role alone, with no
competition. My country would like to take the path of
dialogue and negotiation in dealing with certain
pending issues with some States so that adequate
solutions can be found through peaceful means. Libya
affirms the need to designate regions free of nuclear
weapons and to strengthen such regions. We also stress
the importance of strengthening the NPT.
We are deeply concerned that there has been no
progress in making the Middle East a region free of
nuclear weapons, only because the Israelis, as the only
entity in the region possessing nuclear weapons,
continue to be obstinate in this regard. Unfortunately
this country still refuses to place all its nuclear
facilities under the IAEA’s comprehensive safeguards
regime. The international community must, therefore,
deter this country and force it to place its nuclear
facilities under international oversight. Such an
intransigent position will keep the region in a constant
state of tension and hamper the achievement of
security and stability both in the region and around the
world. In this regard, we welcome the resolution
adopted by the IAEA in September on Israeli nuclear
capabilities, and we call for its implementation.

09-59092

Libya has excellent cooperative ties with the
IAEA, and we look forward to continued cooperation
so that Libya may gain maximum benefit from peaceful
uses of nuclear energy after its voluntary disposal of its
weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have now
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/64/L.7. Before giving the floor to the representative
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position before we
take action on the draft resolution, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote or position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Sin Song Chol (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea wishes to highlight the
following position with regard to draft resolution
A/64/L.7, entitled “Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency” (IAEA). The current draft takes note
of the IAEA report and its resolution GC(53)/RES/15,
adopted at the General Conference of the Agency,
which refers to the nuclear issue on the Korean
peninsula.
Regrettably, the IAEA has once again shown its
prejudice and has taken an unfair position by urging
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
implement the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and return to talks without preconditions. My
delegation categorically rejects this. Such behaviour by
the IAEA is nothing but intentional disregard of the
nature of the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula.
Acting in concert with one side, it places artificial
obstacles in the way of resolving the issue.
My delegation would like to point out the
following for the better understanding by United
Nations Member States on the nuclear issue. First, the
nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula is a direct
product of United States nuclear threats and its hostile
policy towards the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. The United States nuclear threat against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is no fiction at
all. The threat began as early as the Korean War of
1950 to 1953, and consequently inflicted on millions of
Koreans the new sufferings of separated families. The
United States has gone even further today to target the

3

A/64/PV.34

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea within its
pre-emptive nuclear strike zone, making its threat all
the more realistic.
Secondly, the hostile policy of the United States
towards the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has now become so reckless that the United States
wants to deprive our country, by means of force, of its
right to explore and use outer space for peaceful
purposes. Although the satellite launch of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was conducted
pursuant to the relevant international legal procedures,
the United States committed unprecedented hostilities
such as singling out the launch only at the Security
Council to condemn it and translate sanctions into
concrete actions.
Thus far, the process aimed at denuclearizing the
Korean peninsula had been undertaken on the basis of
the principle of sovereign equality. Nevertheless, the
hostile acts of the United States resulted in the
breakdown of the whole process of dialogue and
unavoidably pushed the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to take strong countermeasures, such as
conducting the second nuclear test.
The United States pushed the situation on the
Korean peninsula to the brink of war by ignoring the
repeated demands of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea for the conclusion of a peace treaty to replace
the current armistice agreement and by deliberately
staging nuclear war exercises with our country as the
target.
Moreover, the United States, which had
aggravated the tension on the Korean peninsula and
systematically obstructed the process of improving
inter-Korean relations and reunification, came recently
to pledge to provide a so-called expanded deterrence to
South Korea. That surely increases the tension on the
Korean peninsula and darkens the perspective of
denuclearization. It is not at all in harmony with the
current climate of dialogue resumption and is making
the security environment on the peninsula escalate into
an unpredictable phase.
That being the case, the IAEA remains indifferent
to the hostile acts carried out against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea by the United States, which
have pushed our country into possessing nuclear
weapons, reversed the situation on the Korean
peninsula by worsening the confrontation and called
into question the exercise by the Democratic People’s

4

Republic of Korea of its sovereign right. This stance of
the Agency can in no way be justified.
Thirdly, the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea remains unchanged in its
position aimed at denuclearizing the Korean peninsula
and the rest of the world. The denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula was the lifelong wish of our
President Kim Il Sung. As we know from looking back
to the origin of the nuclear issue, and as we have
learned from the past process of dialogue, the
prerequisite for the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula is, first and foremost, the termination of the
hostile policy of the United States towards the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
already made it clear that it is ready to participate in
the multilateral talks, depending on the outcome of
bilateral talks with the United States, and that such
multilateral talks must also include the Six-Party Talks.
As we have reiterated time and again, the mission
of the nuclear deterrence of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is aimed purely at deterring war by
safeguarding the peace and security not only of the
Korean peninsula, but also of the region, from the
nuclear threat and military attacks of the United States.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea does not
pursue a nuclear arms race and will fulfil its
responsibilities vis-à-vis the management and use of its
nuclear weapons and with regard to non-proliferation
and nuclear disarmament while possessing those
nuclear weapons.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea stands in full support of and
solidarity with the majority of United Nations Member
States that aspire to a nuclear-free world and calls for
the complete dismantlement of nuclear weapons. At the
same time, we reiterate once again that the IAEA
should observe the principle of impartiality in all its
activities.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea would like to request the Secretariat
to duly and correctly reflect the aforementioned
position of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
in the official records of this meeting.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of position.

09-59092

A/64/PV.34

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/64/L.7. I should like to announce that,
since the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors: Benin,
Chad, the Dominican Republic, Madagascar and the
United Republic of Tanzania.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.7?
Draft resolution A/64/L.7 was adopted (resolution
64/8).
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Israel, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
May I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Itzchaki (Israel): Israel asked for the floor to
express its disappointment at the results of this year’s
General Conference of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). Israel believes that this year’s General
Conference has impaired the ability of the Conference
to constructively address issues pertaining to the
Middle East.
Unfortunately, at the IAEA General Conference
this year, States in the region failed to demonstrate the
necessary will to promote regional talks on the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone, as
demonstrated by the resolutions on the Middle East,
including the one-sided, discriminative resolution on
the so-called Israeli nuclear capabilities, which was
adopted by a narrow majority. That resolution sought
to divert attention away from the blatant cases of
non-compliance by several Middle Eastern States with
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.
It should be noted that, prior to and during the
General Conference, Israel made every effort to regain
a consensus on the Middle East package. Israel trusts
and hopes that the unfortunate circumstances that have
cast a dark shadow over the handling by the IAEA
General Conference of the resolutions pertaining to the
Middle East will not recur next year. Israel will
continue to dedicate all its efforts to achieving a stable
environment of peace and reconciliation in the Middle
East. We call upon our neighbours to do the same.
Finally, Israel wishes to disassociate itself from
the reference in the report with regard to the so-called

09-59092

Israeli attack on the Dair Alzour site in Syria. That
politically motivated reference contradicts the longstanding practice of the Agency’s professionalism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 85?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 116
Follow-up to the commemoration of the twohundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/299)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.10)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Slavery and the
400-year-long transatlantic slave trade were abhorrent
and inhumane and marked the lowest point in the
history of humanity. The horrific and dehumanizing
nature of the slave trade, whereby the captives were
shackled and forced into detention and transported as
human cargo and mere chattels across the Atlantic to
the so-called New World, constituted the worst form of
moral depravity on the part of the captors and is a
source of shame for all of humanity.
That loathsome human disaster engendered the
destruction of human possibility and necessitated the
redefining of African humanity to the world. It
poisoned the relations of Africans with others, who
only saw African people through the stereotyping lens
of slavery, thus hobbling any truly human relations
among peoples.
Although that horrendous practice has been
brought to an end, its effects and consequences
continue to be with us. That remains true in spite of the
adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
in 1948, the Slavery Convention Protocol in 1955, the
Durban Declaration in 2001 and more. Racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and other related forms of
intolerance are still rife today, 200 years after the
abolition in 1808 of the slave trade.
At today’s commemoration, therefore, we must
resolve to take concrete steps not only to ensure that
this dark aspect of human history never resurfaces

5

A/64/PV.34

again, but that its consequences are fully addressed.
Tangible efforts must be made to redress the imbalance
caused by the slave trade. Lest we forget, the United
Nations and the entire international community must
continue to inform the world of this conscience-jolting
chapter in our history.
In this regard, Member States may wish to
support the voluntary fund established pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 62/122 towards the
erection of a permanent memorial in honour of the
victims of slavery and the slave trade.
Let us also applaud the unbelievable magnanimity
and generosity of the victims, who managed to retain
their humanity and the ability to forgive in the face of
indescribable suffering and dehumanization.
I now give the floor to the representative of Saint
Kitts and Nevis to introduce draft resolution A/64/L.10.
Mr. Bart (Saint Kitts and Nevis): I would like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/64/L.10 the following countries have become
sponsors: Albania, Armenia, Austria, Belarus, Bulgaria,
Canada, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Ecuador,
Estonia, France, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, India,
Israel, Japan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Malta, Monaco,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, the
Philippines, the Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovenia,
the Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United States of America and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
I have the honour, on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),
along with the 54 members of the African Group and
the other Members of the United Nations sponsoring
this text, including those that I have just identified, to
introduce draft resolution A/64/L.10, entitled “Permanent
memorial to and remembrance of the victims of slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade”.
The draft resolution before us today contains
some procedural updates and also provides information
on developments that have taken place during the
course of the past year. We have maintained a focused
text that serves a dual purpose. It speaks to the annual
remembrance as well to as the initiative to erect a
permanent memorial to honour the victims of slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade, both endorsed by the
General Assembly.

6

The States members of CARICOM are justifiably
proud that as a result of our initiative the United
Nations acknowledged in 2006 that the system of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, which spanned
the 1500s to the 1800s, represent one of the lowest
points in the history of humankind. As we gather once
again to contemplate the issue, we pause and recall the
forced removal of more than 18 million people from
Africa to the Americas, the Caribbean, the United
States, Brazil and other parts of Latin America, as well
as to Europe.
With this in mind, we deeply appreciate the
designation of 25 March as the annual International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade. In this context and on behalf
of the States members of CARICOM, I wish to thank
the Secretary-General for the update provided in his
report in document A/64/299, on activities held earlier
this year to commemorate the anniversary of the
abolition of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
We look forward, Mr. President, to deepening our
collaboration with you, the Secretary-General, the
Secretariat and, in particular, the Department of Public
Information, for similar commemorative activities on
25 March 2010, reflecting the solemnity that should be
accorded to such events, with due regard for the
dignity of a race and people that were mercilessly
robbed of their human dignity and worth and plundered
and pillaged under the pernicious system of slavery.
As we reflect on our shared history, CARICOM
member States are mindful of the resulting legacy of
social and economic inequality, hatred, bigotry, racism
and prejudice — a legacy that is linked to current
economic and social inequalities worldwide and that
continues to pervade the international community. We
highlight with pride the fact that our initiative is a
tangible outcome of the process of the Durban World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, as indicated in
the fourth and fifth preambular paragraphs. The
General Assembly will note that for structural reasons
we have sought to keep the Durban-related paragraphs
together. As a result, we have moved the former sixth
preambular paragraph of resolution 63/5 to its current
place as the fifth preambular paragraph of the text
before the Assembly today.
We have included a new paragraph, the eighth
preambular paragraph, to highlight the fact that our

09-59092

A/64/PV.34

initiative, in terms of both the commemorative
activities and the permanent memorial, complements
the work being done at UNESCO. Here, I make special
reference to the existing UNESCO International Day
for the Remembrance of the Slave Trade and its
Abolition, and the UNESCO Slave Route Project.
We are pleased with the progress made by the
committee drawn from all geographical regions of the
United Nations that oversees the permanent memorial
project. Importantly, the States members of the
Caribbean Community and the African Union are
playing a primary role in advancing the work of the
Committee under the chairmanship of Jamaica.
In the interest of transparency and accountability,
the voluntary fund, the Permanent Memorial Fund,
established in keeping with resolution 62/122, under
the custody of the Permanent Mission of Jamaica, has
now been closed, and the United Nations Trust Fund
for Partnerships — Permanent Memorial has been
established under the auspices of the United Nations
Office for Partnerships. We are convinced that the
Trust Fund ensures enhanced transparency and
accountability of the Fund’s management in a manner
that will be acceptable to all Member States. That new
information is indicated in operative paragraph 3, and
we are pleased to report that voluntary contributions
received from Member States currently amount to
$346,118. Additionally, this week we were advised that
the first private contribution of $10,000 was made to
the Trust Fund.
In response to enquiries about the budgetary
implications arising from the adoption of this draft
resolution, let me clarify that there are no such
implications for the permanent memorial initiative. It is
our hope that the permanent memorial will become a
reality through the generous contributions received
voluntarily from Member States, as well as the
resource mobilization activities that will be organized
by the Permanent Memorial Committee. On behalf of
the group of CARICOM States, I wish therefore to
acknowledge with appreciation the contributions and
pledges already received towards the Trust Fund from
Member States, while also encouraging Member States
and other interested parties to join in this important
effort.
One of several initiatives to mobilize resources
for the permanent memorial was the appointment in
May of this year of a Goodwill Ambassador to assist in

09-59092

that effort, as indicated in paragraph 4. The Goodwill
Ambassador is the businessman, entertainment mogul
and philanthropist Mr. Russell Simmons. We anticipate
that next year we will be in a position to provide a
comprehensive report on his efforts and on the other
fund-raising initiatives and their outcomes. At the same
time, the importance of sustained voluntary
contributions in order to achieve the goal of erecting a
permanent memorial in honour of the victims of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade cannot be
overstated; hence the inclusion of a new paragraph,
paragraph 5, to highlight that.
CARICOM continues to be appreciative of the
invaluable support, technical advice and assistance
received from the Secretary-General, the Secretariat
and the members of the Committee for the
implementation of the permanent memorial project. An
important element to move the project forward is the
launch of an international design competition to make
this a truly global effort. We feel that UNESCO could
undertake that on our behalf. It is to be noted that we
are in a position to mobilize resources, et cetera, for
UNESCO headquarters to run the initial phase of the
competition, which, we envisage, could take place over
a two- or three-month period. The intention is for
UNESCO to collect a pool of applications, using its
global network of field offices and National
Commissions, and to provide the Committee with a
short list of designs, from which an international jury
can select the winning entry. That international jury
would, of course, comprise individuals with some
expertise in contemporary art, sculpture, design and/or
related disciplines. The second phase of the
competition would be convened by the Committee in
New York. Initial discussions have begun with the
organization, hence the references made in paragraphs
9 and 10.
Mr. Christian (Ghana), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
In view of UNESCO’s unique experience with the
Slave Route Project, its extensive history, its tradition
of
conducting
international
competitions,
its
international standing and its status as part of the
United Nations family, we are convinced that such a
partnership is imperative for this global project.
Moreover, as part of the United Nations system, it
makes it infinitely easier to deal with the organization
in a seamless manner, rather than negotiating with an

7

A/64/PV.34

outside entity, since the Committee is obliged to follow
United Nations rules and procurement guidelines.
It is clear that racism, racial discrimination and
prejudice continue to cast a destructive stain on many
societies across the globe, and the genesis, as well as
the linkages with slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade are undoubtedly established. In that context, in
paragraph 11, we seek to continue our collaboration
with the Department of Public Information to take
appropriate steps to enhance world public awareness of
the commemorative activities and the permanent
memorial initiative, as well as to continue to facilitate
efforts to erect the permanent memorial at United
Nations Headquarters.
The horrific and dehumanizing nature of slavery
and the slave trade, whereby the captives were forced
into detention and transported as human cargo,
continues to jolt the conscience. The horrific images of
human beings emasculated, sold and robbed of their
culture, their skins branded by hot irons, recall and
reinforce the depths of man’s inhumanity to man.
Consequently, we have reiterated the request made in
resolutions 61/19 and 63/5 for Member States that have
not already done so to develop educational programmes,
including through their school curricula, designed to
educate and inculcate in future generations an
understanding of the lessons, history and consequences
of slavery and the slave trade.
Through the present draft resolution, the General
Assembly will request the Secretary-General, in
collaboration with and building upon the work
undertaken by UNESCO through the Slave Route
Project, to continue the outreach programme in order to
inculcate future generations with an understanding of
the causes, consequences and lessons of the
transatlantic slave trade and to inform of the dangers of
racism and prejudice. The General Assembly, by its
adoption of this important draft resolution by
consensus, will acknowledge the continued impact of
slavery and the horrific transatlantic slave trade on the
African diaspora and its descendants, many of whom
are in this Assembly today.
In conclusion, the group of CARICOM member
States sincerely thanks the many sponsors and
supporters of the current draft resolution and now calls
upon the General Assembly to give its unequivocal
support to its adoption within the forthcoming week. In
closing, I take this opportunity to remind the General

8

Assembly of the theme of the permanent memorial
initiative: “Acknowledging the tragedy, considering the
legacy, lest we forget”.
Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia): The African Group is
pleased to take part in this important debate on agenda
item 116, entitled “Follow-up to the commemoration of
the two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade”. We also lend our support to
the draft resolution contained in document A/64/L.10,
relating to the permanent memorial to and
remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade, at the time of its introduction
and adoption by the Assembly.
Allow me at the outset, to convey our
appreciation and commend the States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) for their
commitment and efforts in ensuring that we continue to
reflect and examine the past injustices that had an
adverse impact on our history. But, more importantly,
we celebrate the resilience of the human spirit to
survive such adversity and the efforts that ensued to
bring this unfortunate period of history to an end.
Resolution 62/122 designated 25 March as the
International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of
Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade. This year
the United Nations observed the second International
Day to commemorate the victims of the slave trade,
which was celebrated under the theme “Breaking the
Silence: Beating the Drum”. The occasion was marked
by a cultural evening of dance and concert and other
events, including documentaries and discussions with
producers. A briefing by NGOs was designed to raise
awareness about the slave trade and its aftermath.
Other activities were also organized throughout the
year, targeting various communities. Through education,
therefore, present and future generations will learn
about the causes and consequences of the slave trade
and will be cautioned about the dangers of racism and
prejudice, which unfortunately confront us to this day.
We commend the Department of Public Information
for implementing resolution 63/5, which called for a
programme of educational outreach on the transatlantic
slave trade.
The slave trade had a tragic impact on the African
people and continent. Its scars still remain. It is indeed
our collective responsibility — and more particularly
that of Africans and those of African descent — to
commemorate the abolition of slavery and to recall its

09-59092

A/64/PV.34

historical legacy in order to ensure that this unfortunate
episode in our history is not forgotten and will never
recur. The African Group therefore welcomes the
important initiatives that have taken place since the
adoption of the previous year’s resolution, including:
the establishment of a committee of interested States to
oversee the permanent memorial project, with member
States of the Caribbean Community and the African
Union playing a primary role in collaboration with
UNESCO, representatives of the Secretariat and other
institutions; the establishment of a Trust Fund for the
Permanent Memorial; the appointment of a Goodwill
Ambassador to, among other things, garner
international attention to the dangers of slavery and its
legacy of discrimination, raise awareness through
media outreach and mobilize the necessary resources.
Several countries have contributed to the Trust
Fund for the Permanent Memorial. I am glad to report
that several African countries are among the
contributors. In this regard, the African Group would
like to congratulate all those who have contributed and
we invite other countries to contribute to this worthy
project.
The African Group remains firmly committed to
this project. As we indicated last year in this Assembly,
the Permanent Memorial will serve to remind us of the
heroic actions of the slaves and other abolitionists, who
in the face of grave danger and adversity stood up to be
counted. It will also serve as an educational resource
and a statue of lifelong learning, a reconstruction of the
past moulding the future and a constant reminder of
how vulnerable humanity is.
Regrettably, in spite of international efforts in
developing the normative framework to guard against
human rights abuses, we continue to face challenges in
the implementation of various human rights
instruments, in particular the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination,
the
Durban
Declaration
and
Programme of Action of the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance. New forms of slavery, such as
human trafficking and sexual exploitation, are also
emerging. There are also several incidences of bias and
hate crimes in our societies. It is therefore incumbent
upon us to firmly stand up to and reject any and all
notions of supremacy or supremacist ideology. We
have to guard against such vices and the danger of
slipping back into the past. We must strive to be our

09-59092

brother’s keeper and work relentlessly towards unity
and development, by which all persons may be
guaranteed a life of dignity.
By adopting this draft resolution, we shall further
be pointing out the importance of gaining a better
understanding of slave trade and slavery in general. We
shall be committing ourselves to ensuring that
information relating to the slave trade and slavery is
available and disseminated as appropriate to all
sections of society, in particular in institutions of
learning, so that they too can join efforts in the
promotion of a cohesive society based on knowledge
and understanding of our history and so as to ensure
that society does not slip back into the brutality of the
past. By encouraging learning about slavery, we will
reduce the danger of making in the future the same
mistakes we made in the past.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the African
Group’s support for draft resolution A/64/L.10 and to
express support for the efforts by the United Nations
system and countries to create awareness of issues
relating to slavery and the transatlantic slave trade over
the past year. It is our sincere hope that more will be
done in the coming year to honour all those gallant
victims of slave trade, the brave abolitionists and the
collective international efforts that led to the abolition
of the slave trade and slavery.
Mrs. Kolontai (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Slavery and the transatlantic slave trade have been
among the most flagrant violations of human rights.
The transatlantic slave trade was an exceptional
phenomenon in the history of slavery — exceptional
because of its duration, scope and legal basis, including
its legitimacy embodied in law. There can be no doubt
that the result of the transatlantic slave trade was the
destruction of a wide range of languages, cultures and
religions of millions of enslaved Africans. It has left a
legacy of racism and stereotypes.
The Republic of Belarus endorses the report of
the Secretary-General entitled “Programme of
educational outreach on the transatlantic slave trade
and slavery” (A/64/299). We agree with the view that,
despite the fact that the transatlantic slave trade enjoys
considerable attention in world history, we still do not
know enough about its long-term results as they are felt
in today’s world or about the important contribution
that slaves made to the building of the socio-economic
prosperity of the countries that enslaved them. We

9

A/64/PV.34

believe that the problems of history must be solved by
filling gaps and enhancing the awareness of the
descendants of those who were enslaved and other
people as to the historic aspects of that tragedy, as well
as to the threat inherent in racism and racial
discrimination. We are certain that these goals can be
effectively served in the outreach programme proposed
by the Secretary-General in cooperation with UNESCO.
We welcome the holding this year of a number of
activities together with the United Nations on the theme,
“Breaking the Silence: Beating the Drum”. Those
activities have enabled us to shed light on the history of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade and stimulate a
discussion of the reasons, consequences and legacy of
the slave trade.
We support the efforts of the member States of the
Caribbean Community and the African Union to erect at
the United Nations a permanent memorial to those who
have suffered from slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade and to name a goodwill ambassador to coordinate
these activities. We welcome also the adoption by the
General Assembly of a resolution that, inter alia,
proclaimed 25 March the International Day of
Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade (resolution 62/122).
Today, we commemorate the abolition of the slave
trade but we must recognize the fact that the struggle
against slavery continues. Two hundred years later,
millions of people are still being taken from their homes
and families to be transported hundreds or thousands of
miles and sold into slavery. According to International
Labour Organization data, at least 12.3 million people,
adults and children, are subjected to forced labour, or are
forced to work to pay off debts or to offer sexual
services. It must be acknowledged that illicit human
trafficking is nothing other than a contemporary form of
the slave trade that cannot be ignored.
Bearing in mind the experience and potential of the
United Nations, Belarus has in fact advocated for the
creation of a thematic global partnership against human
trafficking and slavery in the twenty-first century. This
partnership is still an informal mechanism that took
shape at the Vienna Forum to Fight Human Trafficking
held in February 2008. For such a mechanism to be
effective, it would have to take some sort of institutional
form as part of, for instance, a global plan of action
adopted by the General Assembly to combat human
trafficking. In the Third Committee at the sixty-fourth

10

session Belarus has proposed a draft resolution to
improve coordination of efforts to combat human
trafficking. We believe that the implementation of the
provisions of the draft resolution, one of which contains
a call for active participation in drafting a global plan of
action to combat human trafficking, would be a
significant contribution to the international efforts aimed
at eliminating this shameful contemporary phenomenon.
We call upon States to join the sponsors in supporting
this draft resolution.
As we support the noble goal of ending
contemporary forms of slavery and recognize the need to
coordinate a United Nations approach to dealing with
that problem, the Republic of Belarus has also joined the
sponsors of the draft resolution to erect a permanent
memorial to the victims of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade (A/64/L.10).
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
proclaims that no one should be held in slavery or kept
in servitude and that slavery and the slave trade should
be banned in all its forms. Our duty is to see to it that
such a situation never arises again in the future.
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): My delegation wishes to
associate itself with the statements made by the
representatives of Saint Kitts and Nevis, who spoke on
behalf of the 14 member States of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), and of Zambia, who spoke on
behalf of the 54 members of the Group of African States.
It is an honour to participate in the discussion on
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, particularly as I
represent the country, and indeed the region, from
whence the idea to include this issue on the United
Nations agenda originated. It is with a distinct sense of
honour and pride that, given our historical realities and
ancestral links, I draw attention to the strong partnership
that has developed between the member States of
CARICOM, on the one hand, and the Group of African
States, on the other, as we jointly seek to make the
erection of a permanent memorial at the United Nations
a reality. It is on this basis that our 68 member States
jointly co-sponsor the annual resolution under this
agenda item (A/64/L.10).
Although much had been said about the tragedy of
slavery and its horrific nature, neither the grave
humanitarian injustice of the pernicious system nor the
attendant human rights abuses have ever been properly
addressed at the global level. Additionally, the legacy of
hatred, bigotry, racism and prejudice, have, among other

09-59092

A/64/PV.34

things, given rise to social and economic inequalities
that exist in many countries today.
For these reasons, the intention is to secure
continued international recognition and acknowledgement
of the tragedy of slavery, which represents a dark period
in the history of humankind; to educate and inform
current future generations about the causes,
consequences and lessons of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade; and to inculcate new values in successive
generations so that this mammoth historical tragedy is
never repeated.
Let me solemnly state that, as chairman of the
committee established to oversee the initiative, I will
now take a few moments to provide an overview of some
of the work we have been undertaking behind the scenes
with a view to implementation. During the course of
2009, our focus has been on establishing the
administrative framework and on mobilizing resources.
Against this background, the committee concluded a
memorandum of understanding with the United Nations
Office for Partnerships (UNOP) and outlined a broad
framework for collaboration, with a view to
implementing the decision to erect a permanent
memorial. Just recently — about a week ago — and
following very lengthy and detailed consultations, the
committee came to an agreement on a budget.
As stated in the draft resolution (A/64/L.10) to be
adopted by the General Assembly, voluntary
contributions are encouraged from Member States and
other interested parties. However, in order to achieve the
target of approximately $4 million, the project will also
target corporations, philanthropists and other private
individuals.
It is with that in mind that the committee appointed
a goodwill ambassador to assist with the dual objective
of raising international awareness and mobilizing
resources. In the next couple of weeks, with the
assistance of UNOP, we will also establish an advisory
board to follow through on the previously stated
objectives. In the not-too-distant future, we also intend
to find a mechanism through which we can obtain
contributions from ordinary citizens around the world,
since we believe this project to be a truly global effort.
During the course of this month, our first fundraising event will be held at the Ana Tzarev Gallery, here
in New York. Members of the public will be invited to
participate in a silent auction of paintings exhibited
under the theme “Grace of Africa” to raise funds for the

09-59092

initiative. A high-level grand gala event is scheduled for
February 2010, in keeping with the celebration of Black
history month, and a number of other creative events for
raising funds will also be held during 2010. Information
on these activities will be shared with Member States, as
appropriate.
Since we last discussed voluntary contributions by
Member States in this Hall, the Citibank account under
Jamaica’s control has been closed. We worked in tandem
with the United Nations Office for Partnerships to
establish the Trust Fund for Partnerships — Permanent
Memorial, to which the funds from Citibank and interest
accruing thereto were transferred. As mentioned by the
Permanent Representative of Saint Kitts and Nevis and
reflected in the draft resolution before us today, the
number of countries that have made voluntary
contributions now stands at 34 and that the amount
contributed has reached $346,118. We are equally
pleased that the first private contribution of $10,000 was
recently made to the Trust Fund.
May I thank the Governments of Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, the Bahamas, Barbados,
Belize, Botswana, Brazil, Ecuador, Egypt, India,
Indonesia, Haiti, Luxembourg, Libya, Malaysia, Malta,
Mozambique — which contributed on behalf of the
Southern African Development Community — Namibia,
Portugal, Qatar, South Africa, Spain, Saint Lucia, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the
Sudan, Suriname, Syria, Turkey, the United Kingdom
and my own country, Jamaica, for their contributions.
We envisage that other countries will follow in their
footsteps in making contributions to the Trust Fund for
the Permanent Memorial. I would also like to make
special mention here of Denmark and the Netherlands,
which have made pledges to the Fund.
Let me take this opportunity to encourage Member
States to lend support to the permanent memorial
initiative within the context of UNESCO. As we seek to
take steps towards implementation of the decision to
erect the permanent memorial at United Nations
Headquarters, we feel that collaboration with UNESCO
headquarters is of critical importance to the conduct of
the international design competition. This view was
already specifically mentioned in the statement made by
the Chairman of CARICOM, the Permanent
Representative of Saint Kitts and Nevis.
Jamaica and other CARICOM member States have
been given a mandate by the Council of CARICOM

11

A/64/PV.34

Foreign Ministers to engage the Caribbean diaspora in
this initiative. Accordingly, the Permanent Memorial
Committee will undertake steps to do so in the first
quarter of 2010. We anticipate that this engagement will
extend to other sections of the African diaspora, and
indeed to non-governmental and other civil society
groups within the African continent. In so doing, we
hope to connect with and secure the support of Africans
and persons of African descent under the theme we have
selected: “Acknowledging the tragedy, considering the
legacy, lest we forget”.
In closing, I note that the lingering consequences
of the transatlantic slave trade continue to impact the
descendants of the victims even today. It has farreaching implications at the international level and
therefore
deserves
global
recognition
and
acknowledgment. Consequently, the placement of the
permanent memorial at United Nations Headquarters
will be an appropriate symbol of what the United
Nations represents — the promotion and preservation of
the dignity and worth of all human beings — principles
that are central to the Charter of the United Nations.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): During his first visit to Africa
in 2003, President Lula acknowledged our historic debt
to Africa and referred to the millions who were victims
of the transatlantic slave trade. Many of them had Brazil
as their destination.
This tragedy has marked our history, but it has also
left a positive legacy through the extraordinary
contribution of the Afro-descendant population to
Brazilian society. We are proud of our African heritage,
which has permeated our culture in all its aspects. We
are furthermore particularly committed to promoting
social equality for the Afro-descendant population and
combating racial discrimination in our country and
elsewhere. At the regional level, we have sponsored
many initiatives, including an enhanced convention on
the fight against racism in the Organization of American
States.
The
remembrance
of
the
two-hundredth
anniversary of the abolition of the transatlantic slave
trade should also remind us that a worldwide consensus
on the relevance of that date is not enough. We should
spare no effort to achieve genuine equality of rights for
all. Prejudices of all sorts still defy us. Individuals,
enterprises, non-governmental organizations and States
must work together to eradicate intolerance and, in

12

particular, to fulfil the provisions of the Durban
Declaration.
The Brazilian Government has put in practice
many of the measures contained in the Declaration and
its Programme of Action. The promotion of racial
equality is consistent with basic features of Brazilian
culture and an integral part of our own social and
economic development process. Issues such as the
interaction among different ethnic groups and the history
of Afro-Brazilian and African cultures are increasingly
being incorporated into school curricula. They are now
part of policies intended to promote social integration.
Special attention has been devoted to traditional AfroBrazilian communities known as the Quilombola
communities, with positive results having been achieved
in the promotion of their rights during the past few
years. These policies are aimed at redressing the
injustices suffered by the victims of racial
discrimination.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the programme of educational outreach on the
transatlantic slave trade and slavery (A/64/299). We
appreciate his continued efforts and the Secretariat’s
contribution to promoting the initiative of creating a
permanent memorial at United Nations Headquarters to
acknowledge the tragedy of slavery and the slave trade.
The report calls for the implementation of an outreach
programme aimed at educating present and future
generations about the causes, consequences, lessons and
legacy of a transatlantic slave trade that endured for 500
years and to communicate the dangers of racism and
prejudice. Brazil fully supports those goals. We would
also like to recognize and commend the leadership of
Jamaica in this matter.
Brazil is honoured to be a sponsor of draft
resolution A/64/L.10, just introduced by the Permanent
Representative of Saint Kitts and Nevis. We welcome the
commemoration since 2008 of 25 March as the annual
International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of
Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade. We also
welcome the appointment of a Goodwill Ambassador to
help raise awareness of the legacy of slavery and help in
other activities supported by the Permanent Memorial
Committee. As a member of the Committee and initial
contributor to the Trust Fund for Partnerships —
Permanent Memorial, Brazil is fully committed to efforts
to raise awareness and re-engage international attention
on the horrific nature of slavery, the transatlantic slave

09-59092

A/64/PV.34

trade and its legacy of discrimination, while honouring
the victims.
In 1910, Brazil lost Joaquim Nabuco, a statesman
and a leading voice of the abolitionist movement in
Brazil. The centennial of Nabuco’s death will remind us
of the struggle for the abolition of slavery in Brazil.
Nabuco campaigned against slavery in the House of
Representatives
and
established
the
Brazilian
Anti-Slavery Society in 1880. As a columnist for the
Journal of Commerce of Rio de Janeiro, Ambassador
Nabuco once wrote:
“Slavery is a word which may have lost all its
meaning for certain people, but which marks, like a
red-hot iron, a sign of degradation on the foreheads
of others.”
Almost 100 years after his death, his example still
inspires us to redouble our efforts to eliminate racial
discrimination. One step in that direction would be the
full implementation of the Durban Declaration. More
importantly, we hope that the General Assembly will
continue to play a prominent role in advising future
generations of the consequences, lessons and legacy of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade and the dangers
of racism and prejudice.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The bloody historical chapters written by the
transatlantic slave trade, which are undeniably part of
our contemporary history, can be neither justified nor
ignored. In Cuba, as in almost the entire Latin American
continent and the West Indies, we can clearly see the
traces of the slave trade, the fruit of the colonizing drive
and greed of European traffickers who used slave labour
to build their colonial empires. Five centuries ago, as
part of that cruel trade, approximately 1.3 million
African slaves arrived on our island, most of them from
sub-Saharan Africa.
We Cubans are proud of our African roots. The
identity of the Cuban people is the fruit of the
transcultural forces set in motion by the arrival of the
Lucumi, Carabali, Congo, Ganga, Mina, Bibi, Yoruba
and other African ethnic groups in the colonial society of
that time. We are a mixture of Hispanic and African
roots. The cultural wealth of my country and the
idiosyncrasy of my people are also expressions of the
cultural heritage of African peoples. They enriched us
with their wisdom, their traditions, their languages, their
religious beliefs, their music, their temperament and
their rebellious spirit. Those slaves who rose up against

09-59092

exploitation and fled the lash of the overseer to become
fugitives laid the foundation for the freedom-loving
spirit of my people. The courage and daring of those
runaway slaves nourished Cubans’ deep-rooted sense of
independence. Africa is an indissociable part of our
existence. For Cubans, Africa is an extension of our
homeland.
We are therefore proud to proclaim today that the
people of Cuba are direct natural heirs of the gallantry,
valour and culture of resistance of Africa, which fought
heroically for centuries to confront challenges that
persist to this day.
The slave route was an intrinsic part of the ruthless
exploitation and impoverishment of Africa and the cruel
discrimination that its descendants endured too long in
the Western hemisphere. The former colonial capitals
must honour their historical debt to those who suffered
under slavery and the transatlantic slave trade for
centuries.
This is all the more true in the midst of the
worldwide crisis we are facing today as a result of an
international institutional order built on the
impoverishment and exclusion of many countries,
including those that were victims of slavery. We affirm
that the former colonial capitals cannot disassociate
themselves from their past through some sort of selfimposed historical amnesia now that those who were
rich in years past are even more powerful today and the
overwhelming majority of nations are relegated to
squalid underdevelopment.
We recognize the importance of the activities being
carried out by the Department for Public Information in
conjunction with Member States, particularly members
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the
African Union, to plan future commemorative events on
this subject. We also support the initiative to build a
permanent memorial to the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade at United Nations Headquarters.
We commend the role of UNESCO in distributing
educational material on this topic and the efforts of the
United Nations information centres.
Many are the efforts being carried out by Member
States to promote the 200th anniversary of the abolition
of the transatlantic slave trade. Unfortunately, a small
number of countries decided to unilaterally withdraw
from the collective action of the international
community in the fight against racism during the Durban
Review Conference held in Geneva in April 2009. Such

13

A/64/PV.34

behaviour undermines the efforts of the international
community to develop communities of understanding
and to fight intolerance, objectives that were reiterated
in the Declaration and Programme of Action adopted in
Durban in 2001 and the outcome document adopted at
the Review Conference.
Shortly after the triumph of the Cuban revolution
in 1959, Cuba began to pay off — in a modest way — its
enormous debt to those hundreds of thousands of African
slaves who made Cuba their homeland and dedicated
their lives to its independence. Over 381,000 Cuban
soldiers and officers have fought selflessly to defend the
sovereignty and integrity of brotherly African countries
over almost three decades. We returned from Africa with
only the remains of our fallen comrades and the honour
of having fulfilled our duty. Almost 2,400 Cubans are
currently serving in 35 African countries to foster
development there in areas as diverse as public health,
education, agriculture, sports, construction and others.
Cuba will continue to contribute, as it has to date,
its human capital and its experience in cooperation with
many African countries. Through its comprehensive
health programme alone, almost 1,120 Cuban doctors
and medical personnel are working in 23 African
countries. Their services reach a total of over 48 million
individuals. There are currently over 2,200 youth from
45 African countries attending our universities and
polytechnic institutes, and to date almost 32,000 young
Africans have graduated from our universities in various
specializations.
We call not for paternalism towards Africa, but for
equality of opportunity. Above all, Africa needs and
deserves solidarity and respect. For all these reasons,
and as in previous years, Cuba firmly supports and
sponsors the draft resolution (A/64/L.10) on this subject
presented to the Assembly by the CARICOM member
States.
Mr. Webb (United States of America): The United
States is proud to be a sponsor of the draft resolution
regarding a permanent memorial to the victims of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade (A/64/L.10).
On 19 June 1865, over 140 years ago, Union
soldiers rode into Galveston, Texas, to carry the news of
the end of the United States civil war. With their arrival,
word finally reached the frontiers of the United States
that the war had ended and that the slaves of the
Confederacy were free. The ratification of the thirteenth
amendment to the United States Constitution later that

14

year guaranteed the end of slavery in the United States.
We continue to struggle with overcoming the legacy of
slavery as we pursue our efforts to eliminate racial
discrimination.
Speaking at the conclusion of his trip to Ghana this
summer, President Obama reflected on seeing his
daughters walk through the doors at Cape Coast Castle, a
place where men, women and children were sold into
slavery, saying:
“It was a remarkable reminder that while the future
is unknowable, the winds always blow in the
direction of human progress.”
The United States remains committed to this
progress, to educating our youth about the slave trade
and to honouring both the victims and the efforts of
those who sought to end this despicable practice. We are
happy to sponsor this draft resolution.
Mr. Sardinha (India): As the representative of
India, I am indeed honoured to address the Assembly on
the subject of the follow-up to the commemoration of
the two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade.
Two years ago, when resolution 62/122 on the
commemoration of the two-hundredth anniversary of the
abolition of the transatlantic slave trade was adopted by
consensus by the General Assembly, India was proud to
sponsor it. We are again happy to co-sponsor the followup draft resolution (A/64/L.10) that has been presented
by the Caribbean Community today. In this connection, I
would also like to welcome the Secretary-General’s
report on the programme of educational outreach on the
transatlantic slave trade and slavery (A/64/299).
Slavery is one of the greatest scars on the history
of nations and humanity. For one man to enslave another
is truly a crime of the highest degree. It is therefore
imperative that we commemorate the great struggles and
battles that have been fought to get rid of this scourge. A
Greek historian noted of ancient India that “it is
remarkable in India that all Indians are free, and no
Indian is a slave”. However, this changed after we were
colonized and India was forced to endure a form of
indentured servitude for nearly 200 years. The agony of
slavery and the degradation that it leads to are therefore
well understood by us.
The transatlantic slave trade ravaged African and
Caribbean nations to satisfy the rapacious economic
greed and exploitation of the colonizers. The effects of

09-59092

A/64/PV.34

its violence and of the human suffering it inflicted are
still visible today.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.

Lest we forget, it is important that the international
community take at least a first step in the right direction
by paying homage to the victims of slavery and the slave
trade and by acknowledging the tragedy. We are
humbled and honoured to be part of the initiative to erect
a memorial in honour and memory of the various victims
of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade. The
permanent memorial will be a small commemoration of
the millions of victims who suffered silently, with no
hope of freedom, before they disappeared into the night.

At the request of the sponsors, action on draft
resolution A/64/L.10 will be taken at a later stage, to be
announced.

The memorial will not only serve as a hallmark to
which we may pay our respects, but will also be a
reminder for the international community to raise
awareness about the issues surrounding the great evil of
slavery, of which the transatlantic slave trade was one of
the most abhorrent manifestations.
We welcome the establishment of the Committee
led by the Caribbean and African countries to oversee
the permanent memorial project. In this context, we feel
that it would be befitting for UNESCO to undertake the
task of launching the international design project for the
permanent memorial.
We also recognize the importance of education to
current and future generations about the history, causes
and impact of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
We support the initiatives undertaken by the United
Nations and recognize that the appointment of the
Goodwill Ambassador is a step forward in spreading
awareness about this important issue.
We welcome the initiatives undertaken by States in
reaffirming their commitment to implementing
paragraphs 101 and 102 of the Durban Declaration of the
World
Conference
against
Racism,
Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance,
aimed at countering the legacy of slavery and
contributing to the restoration of the dignity of the
victims of slavery and the slave trade.
Slavery and the slave trade are symptomatic of the
evils that are still manifested in the form of racism and
xenophobia. Our work at the United Nations will not be
complete unless we can abolish all forms of slavery,
including its present manifestations. This requires that
we work together in a spirit of international cooperation
to rid our world of these modern forms of slavery.

09-59092

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 116.
Agenda item 75 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Draft resolution (A/64/L.9)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held the debate on agenda item 75 at its
29th and 31st plenary meetings, held on 29 and
30 October 2009, respectively.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Netherlands to introduce draft resolution A/64/L.9.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I have the honour to
introduce, under agenda item 75, draft resolution
A/64/L.9, entitled “Report of the International Criminal
Court”. In addition to the 93 countries listed in
document A/64/L.9, which contains the text of the draft
resolution, the following countries have indicated their
wish to be included as sponsors of the resolution: Chad,
the Dominican Republic, Georgia, Mongolia, San
Marino and Timor-Leste. This brings the total number of
sponsors to 99.
On 29 October, the President of the International
Criminal Court, Judge Sang-Hyun Song, presented the
fifth annual report of the International Criminal Court
(A/64/356) to this body. We had a very constructive and
in-depth debate then, and I would like to highlight a few
elements.
First of all, the debate once again made clear that
the establishment of the Court was the most significant
development of the past decade in our long and ongoing
struggle to eradicate impunity — a struggle that
continues. For success in this struggle, universal
adherence to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) will be crucial.
We are therefore very pleased to welcome the
countries that have recently become parties to the Rome
Statute: Chile and the Czech Republic. It is our sincere
hope that others will join soon. We look forward to
welcoming many more States as parties to the ICC by

15

A/64/PV.34

the 2010 Review Conference, which will be held in
Kampala.
Secondly, the International Criminal Court’s
annual report and the debate in the Assembly last week
also underlined the role of the Court in our common
efforts to build an international community characterized
not only by the rule of law and respect for human rights,
but also by peace and security. Sustainable peace cannot
be achieved if perpetrators of the most serious crimes are
not brought to justice. Peace and justice are
complementary requirements.
Thirdly, as the President of the International
Criminal Court pointed out, the biggest obstacle to the
conduct of judicial proceeding remains the lack of
arrests and surrender of suspects. The cooperation of
States, international organizations and civil society is
essential to the Court’s functioning, in relation not only
to arrests and surrender, but also to the provision of
evidence, the protection and relocation of victims and
witnesses, and the enforcement of sentences.
We are therefore pleased that the United Nations
continued to assist the Court over the past year in its
endeavours through implementation of the Relationship
Agreement. We also welcome the assistance provided
thus far by the States parties and the non-States parties,
and call on all States to continue to support the Court’s
efforts in this regard.
Last but not least, the President of the Court, in his
address to the General Assembly, stressed the fact that
the hallmark of the Court is its independent judicial
nature. At the same time, that judicial institution
operates within the political world and it needs States to
not just cooperate with it, but also to respect, to protect
and to enhance its judicial independence.
Allow me now to turn to the draft resolution itself,
which serves three main objectives. First, it provides
political support for the International Criminal Court as
an organization and for its mandate, its aims and the
work it carries out. Secondly, it underlines the
importance of the relationship between the Court and the
United Nations on the basis of the Relationship
Agreement. As the President of the ICC rightly pointed
out last week, both the United Nations and the ICC have
an equally central role in enhancing the system of
international criminal justice. Lastly, the draft resolution
serves to remind States and international and regional
organizations of the need to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court in carrying out its tasks.

16

The Netherlands hopes that the draft resolution
will be adopted by consensus and that it will lead to even
greater support for the Court in the fight against
impunity and its attempts to hold the perpetrators of
serious crimes accountable for their actions.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/64/L.9.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position before action is taken on the draft resolution,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote or
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats?
Ms. McLeod (United States of America): The
United States is not in a position at this time to join in
the adoption of draft resolution A/64/L.10. If a vote had
been called on the draft resolution, we would have
abstained. We emphasize, however, that the United
States remains steadfastly committed to promoting the
rule of law and helping to bring violators of international
humanitarian law to justice, wherever the violations may
occur, and will continue to play a leadership role in
righting these wrongs. As we have emphasized, we
cannot ignore the terrible crimes that have occurred in
places like Darfur and the massive human suffering that
the world has witnessed.
Mr. Sanusi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): My country will join the consensus on draft
resolution A/64/L.10, keeping in mind the general
inclination of the majority of the Member States.
However, Libya reaffirms its position on the Rome
Statute and its reservations with regard to its content.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position before the Assembly
takes action on the draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/64/L.9. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.9?
Draft resolution A/64/L.9 was adopted (resolution
64/9).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 75?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

09-59092
