S/2019/563

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 July 2019
Original: English

United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2466
(2019), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) until 15 October 2019 and requested me
to report to the Council on the implementation of the resolution, including any
instances of mandate implementation failures and measures taken to address them,
every 90 days starting from 12 April 2019. The report covers significant developments
that have occurred since the issuance of my previous report ( S/2019/198) on 1 March
and progress on the benchmarked exit strategy and provides an update on the gradual,
phased withdrawal of MINUJUSTH personnel in advance of 15 October 2019 for a
seamless transition to a special political mission beginning on 16 October 2019, as
stipulated in resolution 2466 (2019).

II. Significant developments
A.

Political situation and related security developments
2.
During the reporting period, the security situation became more precarious as a
result of the persistent political crisis, the related upsurge in gang and criminal
activity and the continued deterioration of the economic environment concurrent with
the further depreciation of the Haitian gourde.
3.
On the political front, increasing tensions at the highest levels of the executive
branch prevented the development of a common understanding on a way out of the
crisis and the holding of a comprehensive and inclusive political dialogue. Tensions
between the President, Jovenel Moïse, and the Prime Minister, Jean-Henry Céant,
escalated following violent demonstrations that paralysed the country in February and
led, on 18 March, to a vote of no confidence in the Lower Chamber of Parliament,
prompting the resignation of Mr. Céant on 21 March and the appointment of Jean Michel Lapin as Prime Minister ad interim.
4.
On 9 April, Mr. Lapin, a seasoned civil servant and former Minister of Culture
and Communication, was formally designated as Prime Minister and immediately
began consultations with the Parliament regarding the composition of his cabinet. To
form his third Government since assuming office in 2017, the President issued a series

19-11594 (E)

150719

*1911594*

S/2019/563

of successive orders, beginning on 8 May, proposing the composition of an 18 member ministerial cabinet, including 3 women, which is awaiting confirmation by
the two chambers of the Parliament. Simultaneously, the President continued to
engage in direct dialogue with representatives of eight moderate opposition political
parties.
5.
The Senate held two sessions, on 12 and 14 May, in which prolonged procedural
questions, as well as disorderly debates and violence, led to delays in the presentation
of the Prime Minister’s general policy statement. Ahead of another attempt to resume
the suspended session to ratify the general policy statement, four opposition senators
ransacked the Senate chamber during the early morning hours of 30 May. In a
statement issued the same day, the Core Group denounced the acts of vandalism
committed in the Senate chamber and called for an open and inclusive national
dialogue.
6.
The deadlock in the effort to confirm a new Government has paralysed the
functioning of the Parliament and has blocked the passing of important laws,
including the 2018/19 budget law and the electoral law, both of which are essential
for the holding of legislative, and possibly municipal, elections according to the
constitutionally prescribed calendar. In the absence of a fully functioning
Government, several bilateral and multilateral donors, including the International
Monetary Fund and the Inter-American Development Bank, have put their financial
support to Haiti on hold.
7.
The radical opposition continued to call for countrywide demonstrations to
demand the President’s resignation. On 29 March, which marked the thirty-second
anniversary of the adoption of the Haitian Constitution, small demonstrations were
reported in Cap-Haïtien (North Department), Port-au-Prince (West Department) and
Saint-Marc (Artibonite Department). However, on 9 and 10 June, demonstrations in
9 out of the 10 Departments (North-West being the exception) resulted in the
mobilization of larger crowds of several thousands, in particular in Port -au-Prince and
in the Artibonite, North and South Departments. MINUJUSTH has c onfirmed that
one civilian was killed and another five were injured during the protests. In addition,
private and public property was damaged and major road networks were blocked with
burning barricades.
8.
An inclusive and comprehensive national dialogue, widely seen as the vehicle
for leading the country out of the crisis, has yet to take shape in a meaningful manner.
At the request of the Government of Haiti, the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs deployed a member of its Standby Team of S enior Mediation
Advisers to provide training to the committee appointed on 22 February by the
President to facilitate an inter-Haitian national dialogue, his third attempt at such an
initiative. However, the committee lacked the convening power and the fin ancial and
logistical means to organize consultations among key stakeholders throughout the
country. In its final report, released on 4 June, the committee stressed the need to
pursue the national dialogue while highlighting the growing disconnect between the
majority of the Haitian population and the elites.
9.
Meanwhile, a final report on the national sector-based dialogue, launched in
March 2018 by the President, was released on 12 April. The report, which provides
an overview of the obstacles to the country’s modernization, is based on information
collected from more than 600 organized groups, five departmental forums (in Nippes,
North, North-East, North-West and South-East), two national preparatory forums and
two international forums, gathering thousands of participants, including from the
Haitian diaspora. The analysis and many of the proposals made in the report are in
line with some of the recommendations of the Lower Chamber special commission
on the amendment of the Constitution, including abolishi ng the Senate and the
2/32

19-11594

S/2019/563

position of Prime Minister. The report also highlights the lack of independence of the
judiciary and the interference by the executive and legislative powers in judicial
affairs, the weaknesses of political parties, economic monopolie s, a reliance on
imports, the lack of access to credit for small businesses and a weak education system
as impediments to the development of the country.
10. Popular demand for accountability in the alleged mismanagement of
PetroCaribe funds persisted. According to the report of the Superior Court of Auditors
and Administrative Disputes, the total value of the PetroCaribe agreement over the
period 2008–2018 was $4.2 billion, of which Haiti reimbursed the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela $1.98 billion and used $2.26 billion, including $1.6 billion
spent on projects. On 13 March, the Port-au-Prince prosecutor announced that he had
requested an investigating judge to open an inquiry into the allegations of
mismanagement of the PetroCaribe funds. On 21 March, the judge ordered the
freezing of the assets of several individuals and companies under investigation. At
the same time, the Court expanded its inquiry to include projects conducted by the
Parliament and financed with PetroCaribe funding. In response, a numb er of
parliamentarians threatened to file criminal charges against members of the Court,
which transmitted its final report to the Senate on 31 May.
11. The final 612-page audit report, which follows a preliminary report issued on
31 January, contains an analysis of the management of $6.75 million in project funds,
authorized through 14 governmental resolutions adopted between 2008 and 2016 and
managed by 11 different State institutions, including the Senate, the Lower Chamber
and five ministries. Haitian and international media, as well as other interlocutors,
such as the “PetroChallengers” groups, have predominantly highlighted the Court’s
allegations that companies tied to the President before he took office in 2017 were
involved in an apparent double-billing scheme with the Ministry of Public Works,
Transport and Communications. They have also pointed out that more than 200
million gourdes (approximately $4.4 million at the time) were used by the Lower
Chamber to pay for operating expenses (i.e., salaries) instead of investments.
12. The lack of socio political reform, the continued devaluation of the gourde,
social discontent with governance, corruption scandals and civil unrest resulting in
the lockdown of metropolitan areas for days at a time contribute d to a serious
deterioration of the economic situation. Over the past 12 months, the downward trend
has intensified and the gourde has lost 38 per cent of its value. The governor of the
central bank, members of the Parliament and economic experts have prop osed various
solutions focused on controlling State expenditure to halt inflation, the year -on-year
rate of which was estimated at 17.7 per cent in April.
13. The persistent political crisis and the deteriorating economic situation have
contributed to an upsurge in gang activity since February, with a marked increase of
gang-on-gang violence in the poorest and most densely populated neighbourhoods of
Port-au-Prince. The situation has triggered serious concern within the Superior
Council of the National Police and has led to an intensification of anti-crime
operations in several gang-controlled areas amid resource constraints. While
criminality in general has expanded, with long-standing gangs seeking to increase
their illicit activities, the consolidation of criminal activities by two prominent gangs
in the Artibonite Department is posing a specific challenge to the authorities.
14. Despite the increased pace of its operations, the national police regularly found
itself ill-equipped to intervene in gang-affected areas. The La Saline neighbourhood
of Port-au-Prince and the commune of Cité Soleil experienced sustained violence
after three years of relative peace. On 8 and 13 March, confrontations among gangs
in La Saline for the control of the Croix des Bossale s market reportedly led to the
deaths of five to nine gang members. Related confrontations also affected Delmas 2,
19-11594

3/32

S/2019/563

and fighting among rival gangs occurred in Cité Soleil in March and April. Reports
indicate an estimated 10 to 20 fatalities.
15. On 27 March, a delegation led by the Ambassador of Chile to Haiti was
confronted by unidentified armed individuals in the Croix-des-Bouquets commune
(West Department) while visiting a project supported by a Chilean non -governmental
organization. The incident resulted in the killing of one of the organization’s drivers
and the injury of the Ambassador’s driver. The embassy security detail successfully
repelled the assailants, who fled to a nearby location where approximately 10 national
contractors of the organization were taken hostage and subsequently released
unharmed. The following day, the national police opened a criminal investigation and
conducted an operation in the area, leading to the arrest of two suspects.
16. On 6 and 7 April, MINUJUSTH received images of burned houses and
businesses in the Tokyo area of Port-au-Prince, where 14 gunshot victims were
hospitalized. On 16 April, an armoured personnel carrier transporting a formed police
unit came under fire in La Saline. The increasingly overt level of crimina l gang
activity continued to fuel a heightened perception of insecurity in Port -au-Prince and
elicited a strong public outcry.
17. The national police, with the support of MINUJUSTH, launched an operation
against a prominent gang in the Artibonite Department on 4 April. During the
operation, police forces came under heavy fire from armed individuals, forcing them
to evacuate two police stations and withdraw to Gonaïves in order to avoid civilian
casualties. During their retreat, national police officers wer e ambushed on National
Road 1, leading to the death of an officer and the injury of five others. The same day,
another officer was shot and wounded by armed individuals during a patrol on
National Road 1, between Saint-Marc and Gonaïves (Artibonite Department). Since
then, increased criminal activities have been reported in the area, with a number of
passenger and commercial vehicles hijacked and robbed, including one of five trucks
subcontracted by the International Organization for Migration (IOM) to tran sport
non-food items between Port-au-Prince and Gonaïves in preparation for the hurricane
season. The financial damage amounted to $20,220.

B.

Humanitarian situation
18. Between March and June 2019, approximately 2.6 million people were
estimated to be food insecure; of those, 2 million were in crisis phase (phase 3) and
571,000 were in emergency phase (phase 4), according to the Integrated Food
Security Phase Classification. During the month of February 2019, the price of the
food basket increased by 11 per cent, bringing the increase over the previous 12
months to 26 per cent. According to the Famine Early Warning System Network and
the Haitian Institute of Statistics and Information Sciences, the price of locally
produced food, such as plantain, cassava and breadfruit, has increased by as much as
41 per cent. Furthermore, the depreciation of the gourde has created inflationary
pressure on the price of staple foods, such as rice and cooking oil, most of which are
imported. The slowdown in agricultural production is likely to exacerbate food
insecurity, since the sector is the main source of livelihoods for most Haitian
households.
19. On 31 May 2019, the President conveyed to me his concerns about the high level
of food insecurity in Haiti and its deepening impact on vulnerable households and
requested the support of the United Nations. United Nations entities are seeking to
strengthen their efforts to support the Government of Haiti in addressing the issue,
including by mobilizing additional financial resources to reach the rising number of
Haitians requiring assistance. I call upon donors to increase their funding for the 2019

4/32

19-11594

S/2019/563

humanitarian response plan and to provide support to the Directorate of Civilian
Protection of Haiti to ensure a front-line national response. The plan is aimed at
providing urgent assistance to the 1.3 million most vulnerable, but it was only 16 per
cent funded as at 9 July 2019, with $20.6 million received out of the $126.2 million
required.
20. Forced repatriation and voluntary returns from the Dominican Republic have
continued to be observed. Since the beginning of 2019, the trend has remained the
same as in 2018, with an average of more than 10,000 expulsions per month. As at
June 2019, Haiti had hosted 10 refugees and asylum seekers, placed under the care of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. In an effort to find
durable solutions, eight refugees, including three women, have departed for
resettlement in third countries, five of whom left during th e peak of the violence in
March.
21. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration of the United States of
America has forecasted the likely occurrence of 9 to 15 named storms in 2019, of
which 2 to 4 could become major hurricanes. United Nations ag encies and partners
have continued to support the Directorate for Civil Protection in contingency
planning, the pre-positioning of emergency stocks, the rehabilitation of emergency
shelters, the training of key stakeholders and the raising of public awaren ess. More
resources are required to enable the Directorate to fully implement its mandate and
increase assistance to vulnerable Haitians.
22. Substantial progress continued to be registered in the efforts to combat cholera.
From 1 January to 20 April 2019, the Ministry of Public Health and Population
reported 308 suspected cases of cholera and three related deaths, compared with 1,257
and 12, respectively, during the same period in 2018. Those figures represent a 76.5
per cent decrease in the number of suspected cases reported. The Ministry of Public
Health and Population published data showing 11 consecutive weeks with no
confirmed cases nationwide, marking an important turning point in the interruption
of cholera transmission in Haiti. However, continued vigilance will be required to
maintain zero cases over the medium and long terms.
23. The Government of Haiti, led by the Ministry of Public Health and Population
and the National Directorate for Water and Sanitation, launched, together with
partners, a revised national plan to eliminate cholera in April 2019. In the plan, the
Government calls for continued support to achieve the total elimination of cholera in
Haiti by 2022. To that end, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Pan American
Health Organization and partners are working to further minimize the risk of
outbreaks and strengthen prevention activities, with the aim of responding to all
suspected cases of cholera. Simultaneously, the United Nations, including the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Office for Project
Services (UNOPS), with support from the Office of the Special Envoy for Haiti,
continues to advance the consultative process with victims of cholera to provide
material support. On 10 April, the United Nations multi-partner trust fund issued
grants to expand Track 2 of the United Nations consultative process to 20 additional
communities in the north most severely affected by cholera, bringing to 25 the number
of communities reached by the efforts undertaken under Track 2.

III. Mandate implementation
A.

Community violence reduction (benchmark 6)
24. Against the backdrop of the current economic downturn, political instability and
a rise in gang activity, MINUJUSTH promoted dialogue for peace and offe red

19-11594

5/32

S/2019/563

income-generating projects in fragile communities in “hotspots” in the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area. Community violence reduction projects increased from 5 during
the 2017/18 financial period to 15 during the current 2018/19 period. Since July 2018 ,
a total of 9,334 women and girls and 7,813 men and boys from marginalized and
at-risk communities have benefited from: (a) vocational training and the enhancement
of financial management capacity; (b) opportunities to generate income through the
distribution of professional kits and small business incubation; (c) high labour intensive initiatives involving the local population for the rehabilitation of drainage
canals, access paths and community spaces, as well as waste management;
(d) mediation and capacity-building for community leaders and neighbourhood-based
dialogue to promote peace; and (e) family reunification efforts and support for
children living on the streets to attend school.
25. Four community violence reduction projects implemented in Cap -Haïtien
(North Department), Hinche (Centre Department), Mahotière (North -West
Department) and Port-au-Prince (La Saline and Martissant neighbourhoods, West
Department) were drawn down during the reporting period. The projects provided
vocational training and professional reinsertion support to 2,298 youth (50 per cent
of whom were young women) at risk of domestic and street violence, recruitment by
gangs or otherwise exploited to engage in violent public protests.
26. Since the beginning of its mandate, MINUJUSTH has supported 81 countrywide
conferences and town hall meetings on the rule of law, attracting 6,843 participants,
including 2,577 women. The activities were aimed at de -escalating existing conflicts
and opening spaces for dialogue in communities prone to electoral violence and gang
activity. Recurrent themes discussed included the circulation of illegal weapons;
reasons that lead communities to arm themselves; interactions between the national
police, civil society and the justice system; informal fra meworks to address
community conflicts; the interrelation between youth, drugs and gang activity; and
electoral violence. Along with local authorities, civil society and academia,
parliamentarians also participated in the events, thereby strengthening poli tical
engagement in the most violent communes across Haiti. The various forums ended
with the adoption of recommendations for action, and, in six communes, civil society
entities created follow-up committees, endorsed by the communal and municipal
authorities.
27. Through the three outreach projects to promote dialogue between
parliamentarians and their constituencies across the country, which were highlighted
in my previous report (S/2019/198, para. 29), dialogue on ways to improve the rule
of law, including through the adoption of the draft criminal code and the draft code
of criminal procedure, continued to be enhanced.
28. MINUJUSTH has been assisting the National Commission for Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration, relaunched by the President in February, in
defining areas of work that the United Nations could support, such as a weapons and
ammunition management programme, community violence reduction activities and a
national strategy to implement concrete measures for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. On 28 May, a criminal gang leader from the Port -au-Prince
neighbourhood of Cité Soleil handed over eight of his gang ’s firearms (three
handguns, two shotguns, one submachine gun and two assault rifles) in a symbolic
act of good faith.

B.

Security and police development (benchmarks 1, 4, 5 and 6)
29. Since March, the national police has faced significant challenges in countering
the resurgence in criminal gang activities, including shootings and hijackings

6/32

19-11594

S/2019/563

involving gang members, especially in the Port-au-Prince metropolitan area and the
Artibonite Department. The force has demonstrated sustained capabilities in public
order management. Of the 244 public order operations conducted dur ing the reporting
period, 27 received support from MINUJUSTH (see annex I, indicator 4.6).
Nevertheless, the number of reported homicides for 2019 has doubled in comparison
with 2018, with 523 cases from 1 January to 6 June (see annex I, indicator 6.3) versus
274 for the same period in 2018. Moreover, 22 police officers were killed from
1 January to 10 June 2019, compared with 17 during the entirety of 2018.
30. The national police mobilized all specialized units and conducted 37 anti -gang
operations, including 10 with limited support from MINUJUSTH. Operations such as
the one conducted in the aftermath of the killing of 8 civilians and the injuring of 10
others on 24 April in the Port-au-Prince neighbourhood of Savane Pistache
demonstrate the capacity of the national police to draft and execute plans to
successfully dismantle gangs. However, the national police is underresourced with
regard to its efforts to combat the new levels of gang-related crime. Unless provided
with the necessary logistical support, the national police will be unable to sustain such
anti-crime interventions.
31. Law enforcement agencies, including the national police, corrections facilities
and customs and immigration agencies, continue to suffer from the lack of funding
required to operate adequately and have been underresourced for the past four years,
while thousands of new officers have been recruited but inadequately remunerated
and equipped. The 692 police recruits who graduated in September 2018, 188 of
whom are women, work in extremely difficult conditions, including without personal
firearms, and continue to face substantial delays in salary payments. The national
police development plan for the period 2017–2021 had received 7.3 per cent of the
projected funding at the end of its second year of implementation. As a result, the
operational budget and logistical resources, such as communication equipment,
armoured vehicles, firearms and ammunition, face critical limitations. Of the 111
priority actions that were to be initiated from 2017 to 2019, only 2 have been
completed, 103 are ongoing and 6 have not begun (see annex I, indicator 4.1). Those
funding constraints hinder the conduct of sustained police operations over extended
periods and jeopardize officer safety. They have also impeded intelligence-led and
community policing initiatives.
32. Recruitment and training efforts continue to support the objective to increase
the overall strength of the national police. To date, the police force is composed of
14,908 officers, including 1,483 women (9.94 per cent; see annex I, indicator 4.3),
for an officer-to-population ratio of 1.31 per 1,000 inhabitants (the objective is 1.45
per 1,000 inhabitants; see annex I, indicator 4.2). Concurrently, 11,577 candidates,
including 1,893 women, participated in the written tests conducted on 5 May 2019
for the next class of approximately 650 recruits, including new officers for the prison
administration. Some of those recruits will also include women from the most
violence-prone areas of Port-au-Prince, who will be admitted as part of a project
aimed at strengthening the capacity of the national police in establishing a gender sensitive recruitment mechanism. The initiative was launched on 29 April, with the
support of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) and MINUJUSTH through its community violence reduction
programme.
33. Initiatives to improve the human resources and infrastructure of the police
included a countrywide campaign to train police supervisors on the new annual
performance appraisal system. In addition, seven out of nine national police
infrastructure projects funded under the United Nations joint rule of law programme
and quick-impact projects have been completed. The police component of
MINUJUSTH continued to support the national police in securing funding and
19-11594

7/32

S/2019/563

drafting the directive for the decentralization of the General Inspectorate of the
national police in four regional bureaus to expand the oversight capacity and the
access for public complaints across the country.

C.

Justice and anti-corruption (benchmarks 1, 2, 5, 6 and 10)
34. Since the beginning of 2019, the revitalization of judicial activities in the
jurisdiction of Port-au-Prince and better collaboration within the jurisdiction between
the chief prosecutor, the dean of the court of first instance and the president of the bar
association have contributed to significant progress in the efforts to reduce the number
of prolonged pretrial detentions. To reinforce that positive t rend, MINUJUSTH
continued to provide technical and financial support to the jurisdiction. Penal chain
committee meetings continued to be held on a monthly basis, which accelerated the
processing of cases before the court of first instance. On 8 May, in a meeting
facilitated by MINUJUSTH, the Port-au-Prince chief prosecutor and the Director
General of the national police sought to improve working relations between their two
institutions and to implement new measures to lower the pretrial detention rate.
35. MINUJUSTH and UNDP, through the joint rule of law programme, supported
the forum of the court of first instance of Port-au-Prince on 26 April. The gathering,
which was the first of its kind, allowed participants to assess progress registered in
the jurisdiction since January 2019 and created a space for judicial actors to share
best practices in the efforts to reduce the number of prolonged pretrial detentions. At
least 80 judicial and penitentiary actors, police officers, representatives of human
rights organizations and journalists, including 21 women, attended the forum.
Participants also shared lessons learned on the ways in which improved judiciary
activities of the court decreased the number of detainees in the prison facilities in the
West Department.
36. MINUJUSTH support to legal aid offices, as part of the effort to reduce the
number of pretrial detentions, also shows improved results. The legal aid offices of
the Port-au-Prince bar association, which were established with support from
MINUJUSTH, opened 1,679 backlog cases (dating back to the period 2010–2015)
and 1,394 recent cases (from the period 2016–2018), held 2,117 consultations, filed
at least 134 habeas corpus requests and contributed to the closure of 590 cases, which
resulted in the release of 448 pretrial detainees. The office operated by the Mobile
Institute for Democratic Education and located at the Rehabilitation Centre for
Minors in Conflict with the Law contributed to the release of 135 minors, leaving
only 50 in detention (compared with 105 at the beginning of 2019). Regarding women
detainees, the legal aid office supported by UN-Women at the prison for women of
Cabaret opened 159 cases and obtained 20 releases.
37. The number of pretrial detainees in the main prisons of the metrop olitan area
(Cabaret, Carrefour, Delmas and Port-au-Prince) decreased during the reporting
period. As at 9 July, the proportion of detainees at the national penitentiary (West
Department) who had been in pretrial detention for more than two years decreased to
63.3 per cent (compared with 65 per cent during the previous reporting period), with
the number of detainees falling to under 4,000 for the first time since the beginning
of MINUJUSTH (see annex I, indicator 1.8). Between October 2017 and April 2019,
prosecutors received 1,784 penal cases in the Port-au-Prince jurisdiction, 56.6 per
cent of which were processed in real time. During the same period, the investigating
judges closed 575 files and the court of first instance adjudicated 531 cases (see annex
I, indicators 1.9 and 1.10).
38. Notwithstanding those positive developments, delays continued in the
installation of the National Council on Legal Aid, tasked with providing legal

8/32

19-11594

S/2019/563

assistance to the most vulnerable. The State has yet to define its nationa l legal
assistance strategy and the related action plan and to allocate funding therefor.
39. Tensions between the executive branch and the Superior Council of the
Judiciary reappeared owing to the President’s designation, on 30 April, of a president
of the court of appeal of Port-au-Prince from among the judges already on the court.
In response, two associations of judges held strikes from 20 to 31 May, referring to a
legal requirement that the designation be approved by the Council. The association of
clerks also held a two-day strike, on 23 and 24 May, to demand an improvement in
its members’ working conditions.
40. MINUJUSTH continued to support the Superior Council of the Judiciary in the
vetting of judges, a legal requirement to control the integrity and qualifications of
magistrates. On 18 April, the Council published a list of 39 vetted judges, 32 of whom
were certified and 7 of whom were revoked owing to, inter alia, falsified or
non-applicable academic documents, corrupt practices, immoral conduct or mental
health issues. On the same day, the Council also published a list of five judges who
were suspended pending the outcome of disciplinary proceedings against them.
During the period under review, benchmark indicator 5.1 was fully achieved, with 18
courts of first instance and 5 courts of appeal inspected as part of the MINUJUSTH
support to promote judicial inspections (see annex I).
41. In order to support the initiatives of the State to combat corruption, the joint
MINUJUSTH-United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) programme
partnered with the national Anti-Corruption Unit to build the capacity of judicial
actors, to help to assess the current national anti-corruption strategy and define a new
one and to support the conduct of an inquiry on governance and corruption in Haiti.
Within that framework, a three-day workshop was organized in April 2019 to assess
the implementation of the national anti-corruption strategy adopted in 2009, with a
view to developing a new one. Furthermore, an online course on judicial ethics, based
on the broadly accepted Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct developed by
UNODC, was launched on 7 June.

D.

Corrections (benchmarks 1, 3 and 5)
42. Despite the concerted effort by MINUJUSTH and some Haitian judic ial actors
to reduce the number of pretrial detentions, the penitentiary system continued to be
characterized by severe overcrowding (with a 348 per cent occupancy rate) owing to
the high rate of prolonged pretrial detention. As at 15 May 2019, the prisons held
11,221 detainees, including 390 women, 215 boys and 11 girls. Of those detainees,
73 per cent are awaiting trial.
43. The draft legislation on the penitentiary system and the draft organic law
elevating the prison administration to the status of central directorate within the
national police, with autonomy over its own resources, were completed and validated
by the Director General of the national police. The submission of the drafts to the
Ministry of Justice and Public Security for further review b y the executive branch and
the onward submission to the Parliament are pending resolution of the political crisis
(see annex I, indicators 1.4 and 1.5).
44. With regard to the reinforcement of the administrative and managerial capacities
of the Directorate of Prison Administration, MINUJUSTH, through the joint rule of
law programme, supported a five-day technical skills training programme for 21
female administrative assistants on the administration of the penitentiary system. In
addition, 20 mid-level staff, including one woman, received managerial and
leadership skills training from the administration’s trainers. MINUJUSTH also
organized a crisis management workshop for 13 senior staff, including 1 woman, to

19-11594

9/32

S/2019/563

build the capacity of the administration to address gaps in prison security and plan
for crisis situations.
45. MINUJUSTH and the prison administration organized a five -day train-thetrainers programme on the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women
Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders for nine senior executive
staff, including three women, with the support of the Correctional Service of Canada.
The prison administration, with the support of MINUJUSTH and UN -Women,
organized a sensitization workshop on gender mainstreaming for 128 prison officers,
including 17 women. Furthermore, the prison administration, with MINUJUSTH,
organized mental health training sessions for 30 prison officers, including 13 women,
and 90 detainees, including 28 women, as peer educators, to sensitize th em on the
detection, prevention and proper management of mental health disorders.
46. Regarding the certification of prisons, at a workshop on 14 May, MINUJUSTH
reviewed, with the senior management of the prison administration, the results of the
second round of prison evaluations, conducted in April. The results indicated
noticeable improvement in prison management and detention conditions compared
with the results of the first evaluation, conducted in December 2018 (see annex I,
indicator 3.4). Participants also examined measures to promote national ownership
and accountability of the process, in order to further improve prison conditions before
the final certification of the earmarked prisons.
47. Concerning health standards, 19 deaths were recorded in prisons between
1 March and 15 May, representing a death rate of 8.56 per 1,000 detainees, down from
the rate of 12.9 indicated in my previous report. During the reporting period,
MINUJUSTH also supported the prison administration in coordinating with IOM and
the World Health Organization to ensure a holistic treatment of detainees affected by
an outbreak of scabies in March that affected about 2,520 detainees. By May, all
inmates affected by the disease in the Cap-Haïtien and the Fort Liberté prisons (491
and 122, respectively) had benefited from the treatment programme, which is
progressively being expanded to other prisons in which the outbreak occurred.
Moreover, MINUJUSTH continued to advocate with national authorities on the need
for the prison administration to be given an adequate budget to end the recurrent
problem of shortages of basic life-sustaining supplies, such as food and medication,
in the prisons.
48. MINUJUSTH, through its community violence reduction programme, initiated
a project for the reinsertion of prison detainees through poultry farming in the prison
of Hinche (Centre Department). The project is aimed at equipping 105 detainees,
including 14 women, and 15 penitentiary officers with basic poultry farming skills in
order to improve the quality of food for detainees in the wake of the ongoing food
crisis in the prison, and to provide them with a skill and a financial incentive to ensure
the sustainability of the farm.

E.

Human rights (benchmarks 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9)
49. MINUJUSTH has completed its investigation into the violence that occurred in
November 2018 in the Port-au-Prince neighbourhood of La Saline (see S/2019/198,
paras. 38 and 39). On 21 June, MINUJUSTH and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) jointly issued a public report on the
subject.
50. On the basis of the investigation, MINUJUSTH concluded that the La Saline
attack on 13 and 14 November 2018 was a well-planned operation, conducted by
members of five different gangs acting in concert against members and supposed
sympathizers of two rival gangs. MINUJUSTH verified 26 killings, including 3

10/32

19-11594

S/2019/563

women and 3 children, three injuries and two cases of gang rape during the attack,
which also involved significant theft and property destruction. In addition, 12
individuals were confirmed missing. Some perpetrators appear to have worn shirts
that either were or resembled the uniform shirts of a specialized regional response
unit of the national police, the Brigade d’opération et d’intervention départementale.
51. At no stage during the attack did the national police intervene, despite being
informed of the violence from the outset. The only action taken by the national police
was to mobilize a detachment of the specialized regional public order unit, the Unité
départementale de maintien d’ordre, to secure a police station in the area. Two
vehicles of the specialized regional response unit were also seen patrolling around the
perimeter of La Saline. Witnesses reported that three police officers were with the
gangs during the attack. Two of the officers have since been identified and were
dismissed from the police force in December 2018. One of the officers had previously
been implicated in the November 2017 police operation, which resulted in the killing
of eight civilians in the Port-au-Prince neighbourhood of Grande Ravine. A State
official, the delegate for the West Department, was also reportedly seen in the area in
the company of the police officers and gang members during the attack. The judiciary
police conducted an investigation into the events. However, there has been little
progress in establishing accountability for the violence to date. A total of 11 known
gang members have been arrested, but no criminal proceedings have been launched
regarding the alleged implication of police officers and public officials.
52. On 16 and 17 April, MINUJUSTH and OHCHR organized a workshop on the
implementation of recommendations accepted during the country’s 2016 universal
periodic review of the Human Rights Council (see annex I, indicator 9.1). The workshop
was aimed at ensuring that the accepted recommendations were included in the national
action plan for human rights, currently being developed by the Int er-Ministerial
Committee on Human Rights. Participants included representatives from the office of
the Prime Minister and eight ministries, the national police and other national
institutions. The expert consultant tasked with drafting the national action plan,
supported by MINUJUSTH through the joint rule of law programme, was also present.
53. The Office of the National Human Rights Ombudsperson, the national human
rights institution of Haiti, has retained its “A” status under the principles relating to
the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
the benchmarks for assessing national human rights institutions developed by the
Global Alliance of National Human Rights Institutions (see annex I, indicator 7.1).
On 26 April, the Office publicly presented its annual report for the period 2017–2018,
which provides an overview of the activities of the institution and an assessment of
the situation of human rights in Haiti (see annex I, indicator 7.2). The report includes
22 recommendations to State authorities on a broad range of human rights issues,
including prolonged pretrial detention. In the report, the first of its kind produced by
the Ombudsperson since 2013, the Office recognizes several operational challenges
faced by the institution.
54. As part of its mandate to build the capacity of civil society organizations,
MINUJUSTH delivered training sessions on human rights monitoring in five
locations: Cap-Haïtien, Gonaïves, Jacmel, Jérémie and Port-au-Prince. The training
sessions, which covered human rights monitoring principles, criteria for identifying
violations and report preparation, were attended by 105 people, including 35 women.
The Human Rights Service of MINUJUSTH also conducted activities through the
community violence reduction programme, including capacity-building activities for
civil society organizations representing people living with disabilities and lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons.

19-11594

11/32

S/2019/563

F.

Election preparations (benchmark 11)
55. In line with the recommendations of the electoral needs assessment mission of
December 2018, the UNDP-led integrated electoral support project to support the
Haitian electoral cycle of 2019/20 was finalized. The project, developed in
consultation with the Provisional Electoral Council, involved UNDP, for technical
support and institutional strengthening, UNOPS, for logistical support, and
UN-Women, for spearheading the participation of women and gender issues under
one umbrella, thereby advancing the “One United Nations” approach.
56. Following the recommendations of the needs assessment mission, a United
Nations coordination mechanism, the United Nations electoral task force, was
convened within the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti to advise mission leadership and support the good offices of the Special
Representative in the lead-up, during and after the next elections in Haiti. An ad hoc
mechanism to liaise with the diplomatic community on electoral issues will al so be
established.
57. No additional progress was made during the reporting period on the review and
adoption of the electoral law by the Parliament (see annex I, indicator 11.3). Similarly,
the draft budget proposed for elections has also not been adopte d, complicating the
capacity of stakeholders to adequately plan for electoral operations and increasing the
risk of further delays in the holding of elections. Nevertheless, the Provisional
Electoral Council has taken steps, albeit incipient, to prepare fo r elections.
58. A joint MINUJUSTH-national police electoral unit, established in February,
held its first working session on the development of the electoral security plan, on
24 April. The police have begun conducting security assessments of voting cent res in
some departments.

IV. Transition planning
59. The United Nations system is finalizing a report on the implementation of the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework for the period 2017–2018 and is
developing joint workplans for 2019–2020 in consultation with the technical experts
of the Government of Haiti, the private sector and civil society. The workplans will
be reviewed once a new Government is in place and the United Nations system has
identified all of its joint priorities for the next phase on the basis of the current
situation in the country, the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti,
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2476 (2019), and specific objectives flowing
from the Sustainable Development Goals.
60. In particular, the 2019–2020 workplan for outcome 5 of the Framework, on
governance and rule of law, is being developed jointly by the United Nations country
team and MINUJUSTH to transfer programmes that will continue to be carried out
by the United Nations system in the post-MINUJUSTH period, especially in the areas
of justice and community violence reduction. The risks and the necessary mitigation
actions, including enhancing resource mobilization efforts, are also identified in the
workplan. In that regard, the United Nations country team has worked on a financing
strategy and action plan to secure the resources necessary for its critical work after
the exit of MINUJUSTH; and joint programmes supported by the Joint Fund for the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Peacebuilding Fund are being
envisaged. The Spotlight Initiative, a joint partnership of the European Union and the
United Nations to eliminate all forms of violence against wo men and girls, has
granted approximately $13 million to address those challenges during mission
drawdown and transition.
12/32

19-11594

S/2019/563

V. Drawdown and closure
61. In accordance with the request of the Security Council for a gradual and phased
withdrawal, the Mission has started preparations towards its closure and liquidation
in coordination with relevant teams at Headquarters. Two field visits to the Mission
from Brindisi, Italy, and New York, in February and March, respectively, resulted in
an agreed methodology for the downsizing and liquidation process. A working group
on closure co-chaired by the Chief of the Mission Support Division and the Chief of
Staff has been established and has been meeting weekly, including holding regular
coordination videoconferences between MINUJUSTH, Headquarters and the Global
Service Centre in Brindisi. A Mission closure plan was submitted to Headquarters on
29 March, which highlights a workflow process along four streams: (a) site closures;
(b) asset disposal; (c) human resources; and (d) archiving. Concurrently, a working
group with the Government has been established to ensure a smooth and closely
coordinated drawdown. The group is co-chaired by a special adviser to the President
and the Chief of Staff of MINUJUSTH and meets every two week s.
62. MINUJUSTH committed its logistical capacity to support the repatriation of
formed police units by 15 October 2019 in accordance with the MINUJUSTH closure
plan. The Nepalese formed police unit was repatriated on 1 May 2019, and the vacated
camp in Quartier Morin (North Department) was closed on 30 June 2019. The Indian
formed police unit will be repatriated in July 2019, followed by the Jordanian and
Rwandan formed police units in August 2019. The Senegalese formed police unit will
be the last to depart the Mission and is scheduled to be repatriated at the end of
September 2019. As the national police continues to increase its operational capacity,
MINUJUSTH has pursued the implementation of the security transition plan through
the gradual drawdown of uniformed personnel. Three formed police units located in
the Artibonite, Nippes and West Departments remained operational as of 30 June,
leaving the sole responsibility for public order to the national police in 7 out of the
10 Departments. Information regarding the composition and strength of the police
component of MINUJUSTH and the deployment of police units in the country, as at
June 2019, can be found in annexes II and III to the present report.
63. Out of a total of 25 remaining sites and co-locations, the Mission closed and
handed over its camp in Jérémie (Grande-Anse Department) on 1 May 2019 and
closed its camp in Quartier Morin and the Delta camp in Port -au-Prince and ceased
operations in 14 police co-location and 3 corrections co-location sites on 30 June
2019. MINUJUSTH is thus ensuring that both privately owned and government
owned land occupied by the Mission is being returned to the rightful owners, in full
compliance with environmental and contractual obligations.
64. MINUJUSTH has finalized the asset disposal plan with the support of the
Department of Operational Support. Disposal decisions are within the Mission ’s
delegation of authority and necessary action is taken to align the processes of ongoing
disposal. MINUJUSTH will report all those transactions in the report on the final
disposition of assets, as part of the final MINUJUSTH financial statement, following
the completion of the liquidation process. Environmental clean-up efforts are
enabling the Mission to dispose of significant quantities of scrap, in accordance with
environmentally friendly solutions and using established disposal methods.
65. A phased personnel drawdown plan organized around three dates – 30 June,
31 August and Mission closure on 15 October – to ensure a smooth and staggered
reduction of personnel has been developed through an extensive consultative process
within the Mission. The proposed reduction of staff reflects the human resources
required to complete mandated tasks in accordance with resolution 2466 (2019) and
ensures continuity for those tasks envisaged for the special political mission, as

19-11594

13/32

S/2019/563

recommended in my previous report and in my letter dated 13 May ( S/2019/387).
Across MINUJUSTH, staff reductions affect a total of 23 per cent of staff ahead of
the closure of the Mission on 15 October.
66. With the adoption of Security Council resolution 2476 (2019) on 25 June,
preparations for the start-up of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti have
intensified to ensure continuity and a smooth handover in mid -October.

VI. Conduct and discipline
67. There have been no new allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse since my
previous report. MINUJUSTH continued to implement the three-pronged conduct and
discipline strategy for all categories of United Nations personnel, including training,
risk assessment and public information, to sensitize the Haitian population to the
United Nations standards of conduct, in particular the zero -tolerance policy towards
sexual exploitation and abuse. As part of the remedial action, the Mission maintained
continuous communication and referrals for assistance for the victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse.
68. A senior officer dedicated to victims’ rights joined MINUJUSTH on 22 March,
with a dual reporting line to my Special Representative and the Victims ’ Rights
Advocate of the United Nations. The officer is working closely with the MINUJUSTH
Conduct and Discipline Team and the United Nations country team to assist 26 past
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse, some of whom have one or more paternity
claims against former MINUSTAH uniformed personnel. Such assistance includes
psychosocial, medical and emergency financial assistance, as well as educational
support for 31 children. In addition, the officer is developing projects to support
victims and their children for submission to the trust fund in support of victims of
sexual exploitation and abuse.

VII. Observations
69. Since my report of 1 March, political instability, aggravated by a worsening
socioeconomic and security situation, has continued to grip Haiti. Protracted
negotiations on the composition of a new cabinet have paralysed the Government and
hindered the passage of crucial legislation. Concurrently, the economic outlook has
further deteriorated, creating a dangerous mix of factors that is potentially explosive.
I call upon all stakeholders to overcome differences to enable the formation of a
cabinet, ready to focus on structural reforms and provide services to the population
of Haiti, which bears the brunt of the instability. A return to a normally functioning
Parliament, able to pass critical laws, is also vital.
70. Regrettably, government efforts to undertake the necessary structural reforms
that would improve governance and develop the economy have not been taken to the
extent necessary to overcome the increasing despondency fel t among the country’s
population regarding the Haitian political class, the underperformance of State
institutions and the lack of anti-corruption initiatives. In fact, as a result of the
turbulence in the Parliament and its inability to pass the budget fo r the 2018/19 fiscal
year, Haiti has missed opportunities to receive significant funding from international
donors, which could have been applied to improve social protection and alleviate
hardships for some of the most vulnerable.
71. The lack of a unified opposition voice also lessened the capacity of the
opposition to engage with the Government and the parties supporting it to find
common ground in addressing the country’s challenges. None of the efforts at national
14/32

19-11594

S/2019/563

dialogue have borne fruit. It is of utmost importance that a meaningful,
comprehensive and inclusive national dialogue be held.
72. I note with concern that Haiti is due for elections in 2019, yet there is no budget
and the electoral law remains stalled in the Parliament. Immediate investmen ts in
preparing the electoral process will be critical to the timely holding of successful,
peaceful elections and will be essential in order to avert a constitutional vacuum.
73. I also note that the persistent climate of crisis has provided fertile grou nd for an
upsurge in criminal gang activity, in parts of Port-au-Prince and the Artibonite
Department. If Haiti is to successfully control armed gang violence and reverse the
negative trend, a political solution needs to be found and resources invested in novel,
multisectoral approaches that would address the socioeconomic issues that are at the
root of the violence. A successful effort to dismantle gangs would require reinsertion
opportunities, sustained engagement with community members and weapons and
ammunition management programmes. As outlined in my letter dated 13 May, the
new special political mission will be ready to support the authorities in those
endeavours.
74. While the national police has, on the whole, been successful in managing the
successive waves of anti-government protests that have swept the country since the
second half of 2018, the upsurge in gang activity has strained an already-stretched
security force. Providing adequate funding and equipment to the national police
should be prioritized, since it is essential to sustain its full functioning and to ensure
the security of the citizens of Haiti and the stability of the country. Credible, effective
and transparent oversight mechanisms are needed to ensure that police operations are
conducted in line with international standards. Without stronger support from the
Government and the international community, the police force risks losing the gains
in professionalization achieved thus far.
75. Support for justice and corrections reform will also remain critical for achieving
sustainable peace and security in Haiti. As noted in my previous report and my letter
dated 13 May, the launch of catalytic justice reform initiatives through a nationally
owned reform road map remains a central priority. The initiatives should build upon
recent positive trends, including the reduction of individuals held in pretrial detention
and the increase in cases processed in real time in some jurisdictions.
76. I am alarmed by the findings contained in the report on the allegations of human
rights violations and abuses that occurred in November 2018 in La Saline and by the
impunity that continues to prevail in serious cases of human rights violations. The
allegations of complicity by at least two police officers and a representative of
the State call for authorities to act swiftly to bring to justice those who are responsible
for the crimes. The cyclical consequences of impunity are illustrated with clarity by
the participation of one of the police officers in both ca ses of extreme violence in
La Saline and Grande Ravine, exactly one year apart, with no legal proceedings
initiated to date in relation to the Grande Ravine killings.
77. Almost a year after the first large-scale anti-corruption demonstrations, the
events of 9 and 10 June yet again showcased public demand for accountability. In
2018, I highlighted the vigorous debate on corruption and reform held among civil
society, the opposition and the Government. However, I regret that the debate has not
produced any specific outcome. In its reports, the Superior Court of Auditors and
Administrative Disputes has shed light on certain allegations; yet, little has been done
to bring perpetrators to justice and recover the embezzled money. As a means to
contribute to the stabilization of the country, I encourage the Superior Council of the
Judiciary to ensure that magistrates under its jurisdiction enjoy the necessary
independence to conduct the required judicial proceedings and call upon the President

19-11594

15/32

S/2019/563

to launch a dialogue that addresses the issue of accountability in a structural and
sustainable manner.
78. I regret to inform the Security Council that, despite the progress made in many
areas, it is unlikely that the majority of the 46 indicators from the benchmarked exit
strategy will be achieved by October 2019. While great strides have been made in
relation to the human rights benchmarks, the limited achievement of those related to
the oversight mechanisms of the judiciary and the police is of particular concern. In
addition, the recurring political crises of the past 18 months have represented an
important impediment to the adoption of legislative measures essential for
consolidating the rule of law, combating corruption and preparing elections. In spite
of the extensive support provided by the Mission in those areas, it is clear that
measurable progress will only occur in a calmer political environment, in which both
the executive and legislative branches of power function properly.
79. In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my Special
Representative for Haiti, Helen La Lime, and the women and men of MINUJUSTH
and the United Nations country team for their work and dedication in contributing to
the stabilization of Haiti and supporting the country o n its path to development. I
would also like to thank those Member States that have continued to provide police
and corrections personnel to the Mission.

16/32

19-11594

S/2019/563

Annex I
Benchmark indicators, targets and baselines
Symbol

Equivalent

Symbol

Equivalent

On track to achieve target by the timeline
(13 indicators, 28 per cent)

Challenges expected to achieve target by the
timeline but with a descending trend
(8 indicators, 17 per cent)

Challenges expected to achieve target by the
timeline but with a positive trend
(6 indicators, 13 per cent)

No progress/Not on track to achieve target
by timeline (13 indicators, 28 per cent)

Challenges expected to achieve target by the
timeline but with a stagnating trend
(6 indicators, 13 per cent)

No update on progress was expected during
the reporting period (0 indicators)

Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

1. The executive and
legislative branches
have promulgated
legislation that
improves access to
justice, enhances the
development of the
national police and
addresses prolonged
pretrial detention,
which is a cause of
prison overcrowding;
all branches have
initiated
implementation of
the new legislation,
including through
sustainable budget
allocations

1.1 Existence of
the new Criminal
Code (1 – draft law
initiated; 2 – draft
law voted by each
chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by the
President)

April
2019

3 – New Criminal
Code is
promulgated

1 – No session in the
Parliament dedicated to
discussions of the Code
owing to the current
political situation

1.2 Existence of
the Code of
Criminal Procedure
(1 – draft law
initiated; 2 – draft
law voted by each
chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by the
President)

April
2019

3 – Code of
Criminal Procedure
is promulgated

1 – No session in the
Parliament dedicated to
discussions of the Code
owing to the current
political situation

1.3 Existence of
the Legal Aid Law
(1 – draft law
initiated; 2 – draft
law voted by each
chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by the
President)

April
2019

3 – Legal Aid Law
is promulgated

3 – Target already
achieved

19-11594

Trend

17/32

S/2019/563
Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

1.4 Existence of
the organic law on
the Haitian national
police elevating the
Directorate of
Prison
Administration to a
central directorate
(1 – draft law
initiated; 2 – draft
law voted by each
chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by the
President)

April
2019

3 – Organic law on
national police is
promulgated

1 – Draft organic law
submitted to the
Ministry of Justice and
Public Security, but
current political
situation has not
allowed any progress
on its adoption

1.5 Existence of
the Prison Law
(1 – draft law
initiated; 2 – draft
law voted by each
chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by the
President)

April
2019

3 – Prison Law is
promulgated

1 – Draft prison law
submitted to the
Ministry of Justice and
Public Security, but
current political
situation has not
allowed any progress
on its adoption

1.6 Identification
of the
implementation
requirements by the
relevant
institutions,
including budgetary
allocations, for the
new legislation
(disaggregated by
law)

October
2019

Implementation
requirements,
including budgetary
allocations, are
determined for the
new legislation

Identification of
implementation
requirements for:

Trend

(a) Criminal Code: not
yet adopted
(b) Code of Criminal
Procedure: not yet
adopted
(c) Legal Aid Law: a
technical committee on
the implementation of
the Law has been set
up by the Ministry of
Justice and Public
Security
(d) Organic law on
national police: not yet
adopted
(e) Prison Law: not yet
adopted

18/32

19-11594

S/2019/563
Benchmark

2. The Haitian
authorities make
timely, genderbalanced and meritbased appointments
in the justice sector,
including in the
Superior Council of
the Judiciary, the
Court of Cassation
and the Superior
Court of Auditors
and Administrative
Disputes

19-11594

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

1.7 Number of
new case files
processed in real
time by the
prosecutors in the
jurisdiction of Portau-Prince

October
2019

800 new case files
processed in real
time by the
prosecutors in the
jurisdiction of Portau-Prince

October 2017–April
2019: 1,010 new cases
processed in real time
by the prosecutors in
the Port-au-Prince
jurisdiction

1.8 Proportion of
detainees in pretrial
detention in excess
of two years at the
civil prison of Portau-Prince

October
2019

50.4 per cent of
As at 9 July 2019: 63.3
detainees in pretrial per cent (2,087 out of
detention at the civil 3,295 detainees)
prison of Port-auPrince

1.9 Number of
cases closed by
investigative judges
in the jurisdiction
of Port-au-Prince

October
2019

750 orders issued

October 2017–April
2019: 575 orders
issued

1.10 Number of
penal cases
adjudicated by the
court of first
instance of Port-auPrince

October
2019

800 penal cases
adjudicated by the
court of first
instance of Port-auPrince

October 2017–April
2019: the court of first
instance of Port-auPrince adjudicated 531
penal cases.

2.1 Existence of
the annual report of
the Superior
Council of the
Judiciary, to
include: judiciary
staffing by gender;
judiciary inspection
results; number of
certified judges;
and implementation
of judge evaluation
process

April
2019

Annual report of the
Superior Council of
the Judiciary
available, including:
judiciary staffing by
gender; judiciary
inspection results;
number of certified
judges; and
implementation of
judge evaluation
process

The preliminary report
on the state of the
judiciary has been
finalized and submitted
to the Superior Council
of the Judiciary, but the
drafting of the body’s
annual reports has yet
to be initiated.

2.2 Number of
seats filled at the
Superior Council of
the Judiciary, the
Court of Cassation
and the Superior
Court of Auditors
and Administrative
Disputes,
disaggregated by
gender

April
2019

Superior Council of
the Judiciary: 9/9
(3 women)

All the appointments
have been made since
31 January, but the
gender quota
constitutionally
required has not been
respected.

Court of Cassation:
12/12 (4 women)
Superior Court of
Auditors and
Administrative
Disputes: 9/9
(3 women)

Trend

19/32

S/2019/563
Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

3. The Directorate
of Prison
Administration
performs key
management
functions providing
basic services to all
detainees and ensures
respect for their
rights

3.1 Number of
deaths per 1,000
inmates

October
2019

Ratio equal to or
below 10/1,000
inmates

1 January 2018–
15 May 2019: 12/1,000
inmates

3.2 Number of
prisons supported
by functioning
health services for
inmates,
disaggregated by
gender

October
2019

Nine out of 18
prisons and four
largest national
police holding
facilities supported
by adequate healthcare facilities for
inmates

Seven out of 18 prisons
are supported by
functioning health
services for inmates. In
assessing whether a
prison facility has
functioning health
services and adequate
health-care facilities,
the principal factors
taken into
consideration are the
presence of at least one
doctor and/or a nurse
and the availability of
basic medical
equipment and
infrastructure. It is not
expected that there will
be an upward
progression in that
number by October
2019 because of the
current constraints
faced by the
Directorate of Prison
Administration in
funding medical care
for inmates, which are
negatively affecting the
infrastructure, healthcare personnel, medical
equipment and regular
supply of medication.

3.3 Number of
Directorate of
Prison
Administration
officers recruited
through a dedicated
process,
disaggregated by
gender, out of the
941 new officers
required by 2021 to

October
2019

300 Directorate of
Prison
Administration
officers recruited, of
whom 30 per cent
are women, out of
the total 941 new
officers to meet the
Directorate’s needs
by 2021

1 January 2018–15
May 2019: a total of
148 cadets, including
22 women, have been
recruited, trained and
deployed to the
Directorate of Prison
Administration. The
difference with the
findings in the
previous report (from
151 to 148) occurred
because 3 aspirants

20/32

Trend

19-11594

S/2019/563
Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

meet the
Directorate’s needs

4. The national
police responds to
public disorder and
manages security
threats throughout
Haiti, demonstrating
elevated levels of
professionalism,
human rights
19-11594

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

Trend

who completed the
specialized training
course for prison
officers were later
transferred to the
national police.

3.4 Number of
prisons certified by
the Directorate of
Prison
Administration as
being able to
operate without
full-time support
from international
actors
(MINUJUSTH or
others)

October
2019

Nine prisons
certified out of 18

Eight prisons are
currently being
assessed for
certification. As part of
the certification
process, two rounds of
prison evaluations have
been conducted, before
the final certification,
in July. All factors
considered remaining
constant, the
Directorate of Prison
Administration expects
that three prisons will
be certified. From
15 April to 6 May, the
joint Directorate of
Prison Administration/
MINUJUSTH
monitoring and
evaluation committee
carried out the second
round of prison
evaluations on the
basis of the defined
certification criteria.
The report and
recommendations for
further improvement in
prison conditions of
the committee were
discussed with the
Directorate and
relevant stakeholders
on 14 May.

4.1 Implementation
rate of the strategic
development plan
of the national
police for 2017–
2021

October
2019

43 per cent
implemented (57 of
133 priorities in the
strategic
development plan)

The overall
implementation rate is
estimated at 30.07 per
cent. Out of the 133
priority actions
comprising the plan,
111 are expected to be
implemented during
2017–2019. Of those
21/32

S/2019/563
Benchmark

awareness and
gender sensitivity,
without requiring
international support,
as a result of the
implementation of
the relevant priorities
of the strategic
development plan of
the national police
for 2017–2021

Indicator

Target
timeline

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

Trend

111, 2 priority actions
are completed, 103 are
ongoing and 6 have not
begun.
4.2 Number of
police officers per
1,000 citizens

October
2019

1.45

1.31

4.3 Percentage of
women police
officers

October
2019

11 per cent

9.94 per cent (1,483
women out of 14,908
police officers)

4.4 Percentage of
national police
capacity statically
deployed outside
the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

October
2019

40 per cent

36.18 per cent

All 13 units are
capable of
responding to
security threats with
no MINUJUSTH
support

Eight of the 13 units
operate without
MINUJUSTH support

4.5 Number of
October
specialized public
2019
order units out of
the 13 existing
units of the national
police (12 Unites
départementales de
maintien d’ordre
and 1 Compagnie
d’intervention et de
maintien de l’ordre)
capable of
responding to
security threats
with no
MINUJUSTH
support

22/32

Target

19-11594

S/2019/563
Benchmark

5. Strengthened
internal oversight
and accountability
mechanisms in the
justice, corrections
and police sectors
address misconduct
and ensure increased
effectiveness and
compliance with
human rights

19-11594

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

4.6 Percentage of
public
order/security
operations planned
and executed by
national police
without
MINUJUSTH
support

October
2019

100 per cent of
operations without
MINUJUSTH
support

For the period from
1 March to 30 June,
281 operations (244
public order operations
and 37 operations
against criminal gangs)
were conducted, of
which 217 public order
operations and 27
operations against
criminal gangs (86.83
per cent) were
conducted without
MINUJUSTH support.

4.7 Percentage of
national budget
allocated to
national police

October
2019

8 per cent of
national budget
allocated to national
police

Currently, 6.6 per cent
of the national budget
is allocated to the
national police, which
is consistent with the
trend observed over the
past five years. The
current political
situation has not
allowed for the
adoption of a new
budget.

5.1 Number of
courts of first
instance inspected
(out of 18)

April
2019

All 18 courts of first
instance and 5
appeal courts
inspected by the
Ministry of Justice
and Public Security

An inspection tour was
launched in December
2018, starting with the
jurisdiction of Croixdes-Bouquets and
ending with the
jurisdiction of Port-auPrince in June 2019.

April
2019

80 per cent of all
allegations
investigated by the
General
Inspectorate of the
national police

1 January 2018–
30 June 2019: 77 per
cent of allegations
against national police
officers, including
agents of the
Directorate of Prison
Administration,
investigated (252 cases
investigated out of 327
cases reported)

Number of appeal
courts inspected
(out of 5)
5.2 Percentage of
allegations of
human rights
violations against
public officials
(national police
officers,
Directorate of
Prison
Administration
officials)
investigated by the
General
Inspectorate of the
national police

Trend

23/32

S/2019/563
Benchmark

24/32

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

5.3 Percentage of
confirmed
misconduct by
national police and
Directorate of
Prison
Administration
officers disciplined
by the national
police

April
2019

60 per cent of cases
investigated have
sanctions
implemented

1 January 2018–
30 June 2019: 31 per
cent (162 cases have
been sanctioned out of
516 cases of
allegations of
misconduct against
national police
officers, including
officials of the
Directorate of Prison
Administration)

5.4 Percentage of
confirmed crimes
or human rights
violations
committed by
national police and
Directorate of
Prison
Administration
officers prosecuted
by judicial
authorities

April
2019

100 per cent of
confirmed crimes or
human rights
violations
committed by
national police
officers prosecuted
by judicial
authorities

1 January 2018–
30 June 2019: police
officers were
prosecuted in 12 per
cent of cases of alleged
human rights violations
(39 officers out of 327
investigated cases)

5.5 Percentage of
staff of the General
Inspectorate of the
national police
deployed outside
the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area,
disaggregated by
gender

April
2019

30 per cent of
projected 340 staff
of the General
Inspectorate of the
national police
deployed outside
the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

As at 30 June 2019,
none of the 175
personnel (including
18 women) assigned to
the General
Inspectorate of the
national police were
deployed outside the
Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area. The
site for the first
regional office of the
General Inspectorate
has been identified in
the North Department.
The planning process
and preparatory
activities are
coordinated with the
United Nations
Development
Programme to launch
the procurement
process for the
construction of the
regional office.

Trend

19-11594

S/2019/563
Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

6. Haitian women
and men, in
particular those from
the most vulnerable
and marginalized
communities,
demonstrate
increased trust in the
capability and
willingness of the
justice system to
address crime and of
the national police to
provide security

6.1 Proportion of
the population
expressing
satisfaction on how
the national police
performs at
reducing crime

April
2019

88 per cent

A draft questionnaire
was developed to
assess public
satisfaction with regard
to the quality of the
services provided by
the police to the
population. The
document was shared
with the Chief
Inspector General,
whose reaction is still
pending.

6.2 Number of
youth at risk and
women benefiting
from community
violence reduction/
reinsertion
programmes
demonstrating
willingness to work
with national police
community
policing initiatives
and law
enforcement
authorities

April
2019

500 youth at risk
and women
cooperating with
national police
community policing
and law
enforcement
authorities
(per year)

2,180 youth at risk,
including 802 young
women, cooperating
with national police
community policing
and law enforcement
authorities (the
numbers were revised
downward by the
implementing partner;
new projects currently
in early stages of
implementation will
show an increase
during the next
reporting period)

6.3 Number of
victims of
intentional
homicide per
100,000 citizens,
disaggregated by
gender and age

April
2019

Rate of 9.3 or less
of intentional
homicide,
disaggregated by
gender and age

1 January–6 June 2019:
homicide ratio
estimated at 9.04 per
100,000 citizens
(523 intentional
homicide victims, of
whom 483 are men
(including 4 minors)
and 40 are women
(including 1 minor))

6.4 Number of
kidnappings
reported in the
Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area

April
2019

50 or fewer
kidnappings
reported in the Portau-Prince
metropolitan area

1 January–30 June
2019: 30 cases of
kidnapping concerning
43 people (30 men and
13 women). Of the 30
cases, 15 were reported
in the Port-au-Prince
metropolitan area.

19-11594

Trend

25/32

S/2019/563
Benchmark

7. The national
Office of the
Ombudsperson
functions
independently and
protects citizens
whose rights have
been violated

26/32

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

6.5 Number of
gang-related
incidents in the
hotspot zones of
Cité Soleil, Bel-Air
and Martissant

April
2019

18 or fewer gangrelated incidents in
the hotspot zones of
Cité Soleil, Bel-Air
and Martissant

1 January–30 June
2019: 33 incidents

6.6 Number of
sexual and genderbased violence
cases investigated
by national police,
reflecting enhanced
national police
capacity

April
2019

At least 275 cases
of sexual and
gender-based
violence are
investigated

1 January–30 June
2019: 136 cases have
been reported and
investigated, involving
a total of 140 victims
(16 men, including 8
minors, and 124
women, including 57
minors)

7.1 Level of
compliance of the
Office of the
Ombudsperson with
international
standards on the
work of national
human rights
institutions, and
structural capacity
to operate as an
independent and
effective institution
in accordance with
the Paris Principles

October
2019

“A” status
according to Paris
Principles

On 18 April, the
Subcommittee on
Accreditation of the
Global Alliance of
National Human Rights
Institutions made
public the
reaccreditation of the
Office of the
Ombudsperson,
retaining status “A”
under the Paris
Principles.

7.2 Number of
recommendations
of the Office of the
Ombudsperson
implemented by
national rule of law
institutions

April
2019

Three
recommendations of
the Ombudsperson
implemented by
national rule of law
institutions

On 26 April,
MINUJUSTH received
the 2017–2018 annual
report of the Office of
the Ombudsperson,
which contains 22
recommendations to
State authorities. In the
report, the
Ombudsperson notes
that, as at May 2019,
of those
recommendations, the
State has taken action
on one, regarding the
fight against prolonged
pretrial detention in the
jurisdiction of Port-auPrince.

Trend

19-11594

S/2019/563
Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

8. Civil society
organizations,
including those
representing women,
engage with the
Haitian authorities to
advocate the
promotion and
protection of human
rights, and are
empowered to bring
allegations of human
rights violations to
the competent
judicial or
administrative
authorities

8.1 Number of
alternative reports
prepared and
submitted by civil
society
organizations to
international human
rights mechanisms

April
2019

Two reports
prepared and
submitted by civil
society
organizations to
international human
rights mechanisms

Special procedures
mandate holders of the
Human Rights Council
have been seized of
two cases of
allegations of human
rights violations as a
result of reports
submitted by civil
society organizations.

8.2 Number of
cases reported by
local civil society
organizations
monitoring human
rights violations

April
2019

10 reports published
by local civil
society
organizations
monitoring human
rights violations

Since January 2019, a
total of 25 reports have
been published.

9. National
authorities comply
with international
human rights
obligations,
including holding
individuals
responsible for
current and past
human rights
violations and
fulfilling their
reporting obligations
to human rights
treaty bodies

9.1 Availability of
national plan of
action for human
rights

October
2019

National plan of
action for the
implementation of
the
recommendations
made by human
rights mechanisms,
in particular
through the
universal periodic
review of the
Human Rights
Council

A two-day workshop
was held on 16 and
17 April, with
participation from the
office of the Prime
Minister and eight
ministries, the national
police and other
national institutions
and the expert
consultant tasked with
drafting the national
action plan for human
rights. The workshop
was aimed at ensuring
that recommendations
accepted by Haiti
during the universal
periodic review of the
Human Rights Council
in 2016 were fully
incorporated into the
national action plan,
currently being
developed by the
Inter-Ministerial
Committee on Human
Rights.

19-11594

Trend

27/32

S/2019/563
Benchmark

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

9.2 Number of
recommendations
made by the human
rights mechanisms
accepted by the
Government of
Haiti

April
2019

Three
recommendations
made by human
rights mechanisms
accepted by the
Government of
Haiti

Target achieved during
the previous reporting
period

9.3 Number of
reports prepared
and submitted to
international human
rights mechanisms
by the Government
of Haiti

April
2019

Two reports
prepared and
submitted to
international human
rights mechanisms
by the Government
of Haiti

Target achieved during
the previous reporting
period

9.4 Appointment
by the Government
of Haiti of a highlevel human rights
focal point within
the executive
branch

April
2019

One high-level focal Target achieved during
point within the
the previous reporting
executive branch
period
appointed by the
Government of
Haiti

10. Rule of law and
anti-corruption
institutions
demonstrate
increased capacity to
fight corruption

10.1 Availability
of annual report on
public spending by
Superior Court of
Auditors and
Administrative
Disputes

April
2019

The annual report
on public spending
of Superior Court of
Auditors and
Administrative
Disputes is
available

Report was issued on
2 July

11. The Permanent
Electoral Council is
established through a
credible and
transparent process
and exercises its
electoral
responsibilities in an
independent and
transparent manner,
without requiring
international support

11.1 Nomination
by the three
branches of their
three members for
the Permanent
Electoral Council,
with a view to
establishing the
Council as an
operational and
independent body

October
2019

The nine members
are nominated, and
the Permanent
Electoral Council is
established, is
operational and
functions
independently

No progress registered
during the period
owing to the current
political situation

11.2 Update of the
electoral lists in
preparation of the
next electoral cycle

October
2019

The electoral lists
are updated

No progress registered
during the period
owing to the current
political situation

28/32

Trend

19-11594

S/2019/563
Benchmark

19-11594

Indicator

Target
timeline

Target

Update as at 15 May (or
otherwise specified)

11.3 Existence of
the electoral law in
preparation of the
next electoral cycle
(1 – draft law
initiated; 2 – draft
law voted by each
chamber; 3 – law
promulgated by the
President)

October
2019

3 – Electoral law is
promulgated

No progress registered
during the period
owing to the current
political situation

Trend

29/32

S/2019/563

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti as at
17 June 2019
United Nations police officers
Country

Argentina

Women

Men

1

4

Bangladesh

12

Cameroon

4

1

Canada

13

8

Chad

1

3

Chile

1

Colombia

1

1

Côte d’Ivoire

7

30

Djibouti

1
2

Guinea

2
2

India
Indonesia

140
5

Jordan

4

Madagascar

1

8

Mali

1

10

Mexico
2

4

Niger

6

18

Nigeria

1

3

Philippines

2

Republic of Korea

3

1

Romania

2

11

Russian Federation

7

4

Rwanda

30/32

139

1

Nepal

Senegal

Men

23
1

El Salvador

Women

3

Benin
Burkina Faso

Formed police units

18

6

14

125

4

18

120

Slovakia

2

Spain

2

Sweden

1

1

Togo

1

3

Tunisia

3

9

Turkey

7

United States of America

4

19-11594

S/2019/563
United Nations police officers
Country

Women

Uruguay
Subtotal
Total

Formed police units
Men

Women

Men

32

531

1
77

193
270

563
833

19-11594

31/32

S/2019/563

Annex III
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti: deployment map

32/32

19-11594
