A/55/PV.91

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

91st plenary meeting
Wednesday, 14 February 2001, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Recent floods in Bolivia and earthquake in
El Salvador
The President: Before turning to the items on
our agenda, may I, on behalf of the members of the
Assembly, extend to the Governments and the peoples
of Bolivia and El Salvador our deepest sympathy for
the tragic loss of life and the extensive material
damage resulting from the recent floods in Bolivia and
yet another earthquake in El Salvador. May I also
express the hope that the international community will
demonstrate its solidarity by responding promptly and
generously to any request from Bolivia and El Salvador
for assistance in their present plight.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/55/745/Add.1)
The President: I should like to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to document A/55/745/Add.1.
In the letter contained in that document, the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that, since the issuance of his communication contained
in document A/55/745, Burkina Faso, Djibouti,
Mongolia, Nicaragua and Turkmenistan have made the
necessary payments to reduce their arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.

May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in that
document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(b) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Draft resolution (A/55/L.74)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica to introduce draft
resolution A/55/L.74.
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, I have the honour to introduce the draft
resolution entitled “Assistance to Bolivia as a result of
the flooding experienced in recent months”, which has
been published under the symbol A/55/L.74. I am
pleased to announce that all the members of the Group
of Latin American and Caribbean States — Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, the Bahamas, Barbados,
Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Kitts and

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-25048 (E)

*0125048*

A/55/PV.91

Nevis, Saint Lucia, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uruguay, Venezuela and Costa Rica — have sponsored
the draft resolution.
Austria, Cyprus, Italy, Lithuania, Malta, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden and Turkey have also become sponsors
of the draft resolution.
The adoption of this draft resolution is a matter of
urgency. In recent weeks, Bolivia has been the victim
of a true humanitarian crisis. Torrential rain in the
northern part of the country has led to extensive
flooding and landslides. The loss of human life has
been enormous and the material destruction is
immeasurable. It has been estimated that more than
40,000 families have been made homeless and that
more than 200,000 people have been displaced. Not
only have these displaced persons lost all of their
possessions and their means of subsistence, but they
are now being threatened by various infectious diseases
and epidemics.
The international community has the moral duty
to provide assistance to this population in danger. It is
crucial to provide these displaced persons with basic
goods for their survival. Bolivia therefore urgently
requires food, emergency medicines, tents, water
purification units, basic tools, waterproof clothing,
water pumps, emergency electricity generators, basic
cooking equipment and educational material. The draft
resolution under consideration includes such a plea to
the international community and urges it to respond
generously to the needs of the Bolivian population.
In the preambular part of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly expresses its concern about the
humanitarian crisis that has occurred in Bolivia. It
highlights the efforts of the Government of Bolivia to
provide assistance to the victims of the crisis as well as
its achievements in the area of democracy and human
development. Finally, the preambular part emphasizes
the importance of international cooperation to remedy
the effects of humanitarian crises, given the enormous
financial and technical resources that such work
requires.
In the operative part of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly reiterates its support to the people
and the Government of Bolivia, and thanks the
international community for the support that it has
provided for rescue and relief efforts for the stricken
population. In paragraph 3, States Members of the
United Nations, specialized agencies and non-

2

governmental organizations are urged to respond
generously to Bolivia in its reconstruction and
rehabilitation efforts. Finally, the draft resolution
requests the Secretary-General to promote and
coordinate the assistance provided by the United
Nations system to Bolivia at this difficult time.
I should like to conclude by strongly urging all
delegations to support the draft resolution and asking
them for their utmost cooperation with the brotherly
people of Bolivia.
I should also like to make a plea for international
solidarity with regard to the disaster that has again
affected the brotherly country of El Salvador. As has
been said, yesterday the Republic of El Salvador was
again struck by a violent earthquake — the second time
that that has happened in several weeks — and
international support is urgently required.
I should like to take this opportunity to join you,
Mr. President, in expressing my most sincere
condolences to the brotherly people of El Salvador and
to call on the international community to provide the
necessary assistance.
Mr. Norström (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) on agenda
item 20 (b), on assistance to Bolivia as a result of the
flooding experienced in recent months.
The Central and Eastern European countries
associated with the European Union — Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and the
associated countries, Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well
as the European Free Trade Association country
member of the European Economic Area, Norway,
align themselves with this statement.
The European Union has been deeply moved by
the reports on the flood and mudslide disaster in
Bolivia. Thousands of people have been affected;
homes and crops have been destroyed and roads
damaged. The EU expresses its deepest sympathy for
the victims, their families and all the people affected by
the disaster in Bolivia over the past month.
An expert from the European Commission was
urgently dispatched to Bolivia some days ago in order
to assess the situation on the ground. Information
gathered by the expert is now being analysed in
Brussels, and concrete support will soon be announced.

A/55/PV.91

The European Union would like to emphasize the
importance of efficient coordination among donors and
international organizations in supporting the relief and
reconstruction efforts of the national authorities and
local organizations. In order to help the affected people
in the long term, reconstruction and development
activities are essential. This includes further
strengthening local response capacities.
The European Union will welcome the adoption
of the draft resolution on assistance to Bolivia, and is
proud to join the list of sponsors.
The President: I should like to announce that,
since its introduction, the following countries have
become sponsors of draft resolution A/55/L.74:
Bhutan, Egypt, Finland, Hungary, Ireland, Kuwait,
Luxembourg, Monaco, Norway, Portugal, Romania and
the United Kingdom.
The President: I call on the representative of the
United States of America.
Mrs. Shestack (United States of America): In
consultation with the delegation of Bolivia, agreement
has been reached on a minor grammatical amendment
to draft resolution A/55/L.74.
In the fourth preambular paragraph, we would
propose that the words “supplement national efforts
and undertake” be replaced by the words “supplement
national efforts to undertake”. That would clearly
indicate that it is national efforts at reconstruction and
redevelopment that the international community is
supposed to be supplementing, rather than implying, as
the existing text does, that the international community
is supposed to undertake reconstruction and
redevelopment. We believe that that would be a vast
improvement to the text and would give it more clarity.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/55/L.74, entitled
“Assistance to Bolivia as a result of the flooding
experienced in recent months”, as orally amended. I
wish to announce that the delegations of Germany and
the Netherlands have become sponsors of the draft
resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.74, as orally amended?
Draft resolution A/55/L.74, as orally amended,
was adopted (resolution 55/241).

The President: I call on the representative of
Bolivia.
Ms. López de Mitre (Bolivia) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the people and the Government
of Bolivia, I should like to express my deep gratitude
for the demonstration of solidarity and support
provided by the international community to my
country, which is currently experiencing great
difficulties. I should also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your comments, and for your
willingness to deal with this sensitive matter.
The President: I call on the representative of
El Salvador.
Mr. Andino Salazar (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish first of all, Mr. President, to thank you
for your expression of condolences in connection with
the second earthquake to shake my country in less than
a month, and for your plea to the international
community to furnish the needed emergency assistance.
I take this opportunity also to thank the representative
of Costa Rica for his expression of solidarity; we are
grateful too for the solidarity of all States Members of
the United Nations in connection with this second
natural disaster to strike my country recently.
We are convinced that, with our own national
efforts, with the determination of all the people of
El Salvador and with the support of the international
community, we will succeed in overcoming this
national tragedy.
I further take this opportunity to appeal to the
international community for assistance with the needs
that must now be met in El Salvador in the aftermath of
this second earthquake, and, if I may, I should like to
list a number of requests for assistance from the
international community, urgently communicated to me
last night by my Government.
We need to equip shelters for people seriously
affected by the second earthquake. The Government of
El Salvador has already taken steps to save people who
have been buried. Steps have been taken to evacuate
the injured, and temporary hospitals are being set up to
treat injuries. Temporary shelters are being constructed.
We would request of the international community
the following items as a matter of urgency: tents;
ambulances; water; food; water-purification equipment;
surgical assistance; catheters; health-care teams;
stretchers and gurneys for transporting patients;

3

A/55/PV.91

doctors, surgeons and orthopaedic specialists; handheld lamps; medical support staff; medicines; cooking
equipment; electricity generators; sutures and
bandages; tarpaulins; earth-moving equipment, earth
loaders and dump trucks; lighting towers; and
construction materials.
Those are the immediate needs that must be met
in connection with this second earthquake.

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft decision A/55/L.73, which was recommended for
adoption by the Preparatory Committee for the Special
Session of the General Assembly on Children.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
decision A/55/L.73, entitled “Arrangements for the
participation of non-governmental organizations in the
special session of the General Assembly on children”.

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 20.

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/55/L.73?

Agenda item 42 (continued)

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 42.

Special session of the General Assembly in 2001 for
follow-up to the World Summit for Children
Draft decision (A/55/L.73)

4

Draft decision A/55/L.73 was adopted.

The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.
