UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2541st

MEETING:

* $&\f-Jgj#y
jyJ+;‘,;
FE0 03 NJ3

25 MAY

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2541/Rev. 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Adoption of the agenda ...................................

..............

1

Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates addressed to the Presiden;
of the Security Council (S/16574) ......................................

1

WPV.2541

NOTE
:I’,
‘,‘;I ?;;
( .
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a.symbol indicates a reference to a United
i
I J
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ojjkial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2541st MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 25 May 1984, at 10 a.m.
2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 24 May 1984 from the
representatives of Kuwait [S/26.582], which reads as
follows:

President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

“I have the honour to request the Security Council
to invite Mr. Chedli Klibi, Secretary-General
of the
League of Arab States, to participate in the consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda in
accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure.”

agenda (S/Agenda/2541/Rev.l)

of the agenda
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
decides to grant the request made to it to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Chedli Klibi.

Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives
of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudia Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/16574)

It was so decided.
The meeting

was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The Council is meeting today in response to a request
contained in a letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to the President
of the Council [S/26.574].

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 21 May 1984 from the representatives of
Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16574)

4. The first speaker is the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Information
of
Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah AbAhmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah.
I welcome him and invite him to make his statement.

1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Panama, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

5. Mr. AL-SABAH
(Kuwait) [interpretation
from
Arabic]: Allow me;Mr. President, to convey my thanks
to you and to the members of the Council for inviting me
to speak before you on this important issue which is of
great concern to us and to the international community.
Given your well-known wisdom and high competence,
as well as your great and friendly nation’s support for
our Arab causes, your guidance of our meeting today
is a guarantee that we will achieve our objectives.
6. I should like to supply some details of Kuwait’s
complaint concerning Iran’s attack on the Kuwaiti and
Saudi tankers.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Al-Sabah
(Kuwait) and Mr. Shihabi (Saudi Arabia), took places
at the Council table; Mr. Al-Sabbagh
(Bahrain),
Mr. Ali (Oman), Mr. Kam (Panama), Mr. Al-Thani
(Qatar), Mr. Sarre (Senegal), Mr. Al-Musfir (United
Arab Emirates) and Mr. Salium (Yemen) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

7. On 13 May this month, Iranian Air Force warplanes
attacked the Kuwaiti tanker Urn Kassaba. One day
later another Kuwaiti tanker, the Bahra, was also subjected to attack. On 16 May, planes attacked the Saudi
tanker, Fakhr Yanbu.
1

8. The details of the attack on the Urn Kussaba are as
follows. First, on 13 May, at 8 a.m., an Iranian reconnaissance plane was seen flying at a low altitude over
the Kuwaiti tanker, which was moving at 27”43’, north
latitude and at 50”10’, east longitude. Secondly, at
9.02 a.m., a Phantom jet fired three American-made
missiles, two of which hit tank number three, while the
third missile fell 30 to 40 metres away from the ship. The
plane made another attack, tiring an additional missile,
which fell into the sea. Thirdly, a fire broke out as a
result of the explosion of the missiles.

make further efforts in the interest of world peace and
security; We called upon the United Nations to move
promptly and to’give this cause attention commensurate with the gravity of the situation. More than once
we appealed to the two parties to put an end to the
bleeding that has exhausted vast human and material
‘resources in the two countries.
12. It is no secret that our friendly and neighbourly
relations with the warring parties and our eagerness to
maintain those relations have always prompted us to
make painstaking efforts to stop the war. In spite of all
these’unfortunate
events, my country’s faith in world
peace and the pursuit’ thereof by all means at hand will
remain unshakeable until peace, stability and normalcy
return to that vital region ,of the world.

9. As for the details of the attack against the tanker
Bahru; they are as follows: On 14 May, at 12.20 p.m., a
reconnaissance ‘plane was seen flying at a low’altitude
southward. The same plane returned at 2 p.m. and flew
over the Kuwaiti tanker, which was moving at 27”42’,
north latitude, and at 509’, east longitude. At exactly 4
p.m. the tanker was attacked, resulting in the injury of
two crewmen. A crewman from the tanker was able to
see the plane during the attack and recognized it as
a Phantom F-4 jet. Several similarities between the
attack on the tanker Urn Kussubu and the attack on the
tanker Buhru have been ascertained by us. Those similarities are as follows: the location of each of the tankers
during the attack, the sighting of a reconnaissance plane
flying around the location of the two’tankers before the
attacks and the use of the same type of missiles in the
attacks. Furthermore, it was definitely confirmed that
the missiles used in the two,incidents were Americanmade missiles, four of which can be carried by an
American F-4 jet.
’

13. Unfortunately,
notonly have all those efforts met
with a lack of response ,on the part of Iran, but Iran also
has attacked our tankers on the high seas outside the
area of military operations’declared
by the two warring
parties. ‘My Government’ forthwith protested to the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran and held
consultations with the fraternal countries of the Gulf
Co-operation Council,.whose Board of Ministers held
an emergency meeting at which it was decided to present this case to the Council of the League of Arab
States and the Security Council
.,

14. When the case was taken up by the Council of the
League of Arab States on 19 May, the Council condemned the Iranian acts of aggression against the
Kuwaiti and Saudi tankers and called upon Iran, first,
to desist from attacking ships sailing to and from the
seaports of the countries of the Co-operation Council;
secondly, to respect the, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of those countries and their waterways,
ports and economic installations; and, thirdly, to comply -with the duties arising from good-neighbourliness
and the principles of international law and United Nations resolutions. The Council also adopted a resolution
calling upon the Security Council and the international
community to take’firm action to put an end to such
aggression in view of its potential in destabilizing
the security and stability of the Gulf region and endangering the legitimate interests of the countries of the
region and the world;

IO., Members of the Council have undoubtedly followed those acts of aggression and are aware of all the
casualties and material damage that resulted therefrom,
as well as of world reaction to those acts committed
against the interests of two countries which are not
parties to the Iran-Iraq war. Since that war broke out,
Kuwait has been‘involved
in concerted efforts to stop
the fighting between those two Muslim neighbours.
These acts of aggression constitute an extension of the
evils of that war and have grave and dangerous implications for the stability and security-of the region. They
also jeopardize the interests of a great number of nations. The continuation
of this war for the past four
years has undoubtedly had an adverse effect on the Gulf
region, in particular, and the Middle East in general.

15. The policy of Kuwait and the countries of the Gulf
Co-operation Council has been characterized by maintenance of the Gulf region as a zone of peace and
stability in view of the Gulfs particular strategic, economic and political importance, as a result of which any
disorder will have a crucial impact on international
relations and the world economic situation,;and,
particularly, active participation in bilateral, regional and
international development programmes.

11. From the beginning of war, Kuwait, together with
brothers and friends, and through regional .and international organizations, has sought to stop this grinding
war by all means. We have spared no effort with our
brothers in the Gulf Co-operation Council. Together
with my colleague the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the United Arab Emirates, last year I personally went
on a mission to Tehran, where we met with the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran and other top
offtcials. Then we pursued our mission at Baghdad. We
also worked within the framework of the Movement of
Non-Aligned
Countries and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. ‘We invited the great Powers to

16. In pursuance thereof, Kuwait and the countries
of the Co-operation Council have laid down basic principles in their policies and practices, the most important
of which are the following: the principles of self-re2

liance in order to maintain their independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and vital interests; the principle that the maintenance of peace and stability in the
region are the responsibility of its countries and not of
any party outside the region; the principle of adhering
to the policy of non-alignment based on rejection of the
policy of axes, polarization
and the race among the
great Powers for spheres of influence.

upon us to move quickly to stop the hostilities. My
Government would like to draw the attention of the
Council, in accordance with Article 35 of the Charter
of the ‘United Nations, to the volatile situation resulting from the unjustified attack by Iranian fighterplanes against our tankers in the Gulf region, a situation
which not only constitutes a grave expansion of the war
existing in the region, but also threatens the peace and
security of the entire world. We therefore call upon the
Council to exercise its legal jurisdiction as provided for
in Chapter VI of the Charter.

17. The attacks are in violation of existing intemational conventions according to which the high seas are
open to all countries, and no country is allowed to put
any part thereof under its sovereignty. This has been
international custom; it was codified by the Convention
on the High Seas of 1958,’ which puts freedom of navii
gation first among the freedoms that are, according to
that Convention, to be enjoyed by all countries. This
principle has also been confirmed by several other regional and international agreements, the.latest of which
is the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
of 1982.2 The Kuwait Regional Convention of 1978 and
its Protocol’ concluded by the countries of the Gulf’,
including Iran, also contain provisions that govern the
commitment
to protect the’maritime
area in the‘Gulf
from pollution and to protect the coasts and relevant
interests of member States‘.

21. The State of Kuwait, while exercising the maximum degree of self-restraint, hopes to see a halt to these
illegal attacks against our tankers, and a guarantee of
the freedom of navigation in the Gulf region, in the
interest of all countries of the region and the entire
world. At the same time, Kuwait reserves its right,.in
the event of a recurrence of such acts of aggression and
illegal practices, to call upon the Council to adopt the
appropriate resolutions and measures as provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter. We call upon the Council,
whose responsibility
it is to maintain international
peace and security, to assume its responsibilities.
22. One of the things that prompted’us to resort to
the Council was our desire to acquaint the international community, through the Council, of the dangers
involved in the continued Iranian acts of aggression
against world peace and security. When we repeatedly
state that these acts of aggression constitute a threat to
international peace and security, we say so because we
are completely convinced of it. The political and economic nature of the Gulf region, as well as its sensitive
situation, both strategically and in terms of security,
makes it imperative that the Gulf become an oasis of
peace and security. If the region is exposed to turbulence and chaos, its tranquillity disturbed by acts of
aggression, and its freedom of navigation to and from
countries not parties to the dispute impeded, then the
interests of the entire. world will be affected; the
movement and growth of the world economy will be
dealt a great set-back. Any change in the balance of
political power in the region will have adverse effects
on international
interests, which may lead to unpredictable consequences for the entire region.

18. The Iranian acts of aggression are in violation of
all those agreements. They also constitute a clear-cut
violation of the bona fide principle, considered one
of the main rules of international custom, that makes
it imperative that all countries fulfil their contractual
commitments
in good faith. In the Holy Koran, God
Almighty says, “0 ye who believe! Fulfil all obligations.“’ The Almighty
also says; “and fulfil every
engagement; for every engagement will be inquired
into”.s
1
19. These Iranian attacks that the Council is discussing come in fulfilment of provocative threats we
have often bypassed in the hope of containing the situa-.
tion and once and for all putting an end to the conflict threatening
the entire region with destruction
and devastation. Unfortunately,
however, it must be
observed that this step will undoubtedly be followed by
other steps that will escalate the existing volatile situation. This can be ascertained from what has repeatedly
been said by the leaders of Iran concerning their insistence and determination
in continuing to repeat the
aggression. This should be clear from Iran’s attack
yesterday on another tanker sailing the same navigational route, which is far away from the area of military
operations. The aggressive behaviour on the part of
Iran is aimed, infer aliu, at inducing certain Powers with
known objectives and interests to become parties to the
dispute. We are trying to avoid that in order to avert
more complicated dangers that might in turn lead to
a direct confrontation between several Powers at the
expense of the independence of our countries and the
interests of our peoples.

24. It was with that in mind that we came to the
Security Council, particularly
since the countries of
the Co-operation Council attach special importance to
compliance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

20. These apprehensions confirm the gravity of the
situation in which we find ourselves and which calls

25. In our international relations, we have complied
with those principles. Indeed, our international
con-

23. We in the Gulf Co-operation Council insist on, and
persist in, trying to keep our area free of foreign interference. We therefore demand a halt to Iranian attacks
against ships proceeding to and from our ports. Otherwise, our region will not be immune from foreign interference, which will bring disaster to all.

3

duct, particularly in the United Nations-whose role in
and importance to the cause of world peace and security we applaud-has been characterized by commitment to the Organization and its resolutions. There is
no doubt that this commitment has lent credibility to
our international conduct and our foreign relations. The
most eloquent evidence of our faith in diplomacy and
dialogue is our recourse to the Security Council to
apprise it of threats to our peace and security.
26. We come here not out of weakness or fear, but
rather out of faith in the need to settle international
disputes in accordance with the principles embodied in
the Charter-by methods that will obviate the resort to
force, with all its devastating effects on national construction, which we developing nations need so badly in
order to fulfil the aspirations of our peoples for a better
future.‘Our appearance here is in itself an assertion of
our.desire to keep conflicts away from our region and to
provide ways and means of preventing the devastating
war that will surely strike the region if it is not seriously
and responsibly prevented by the world at large.
27. While calling upon the Council to adopt a fair
resolution that will identify the aggressor, condemn the
aggression and warn against its recurrence, we assert
our eagerness to continue exercising self-restraint and
to exert every possible effort, together with all the other
parties, including Iran, to restore peace and stability to
the region and its peoples so that we can all contribute
to the establishment of a world where peace and security prevail.
28. The PRESIDENT [interpretation from Russian]:
The next speaker is the Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs of Qatar, Sheikh ,Ahmed bin Saif Al-Thani.
I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
29. Mr. AL-THAN1 (Qatar) [interpretufion
from
Mr. President, I wish, first of all, to thank you
for having responded so diligently to the requests of
States members of the Gulf Co-operation Council to
convene an urgent meeting of the Security Council in
order to consider Iranian acts of aggression against
tankers proceeding to and from the ports of those
States.
Arabic]:

30. The Council is aware of the Gulf region’s extreme
importance to the entire world economy and civilization. Qatar and fraternal countries members of the Gulf
Co-operation Council have always stressed the need to
transform the Gulf region into a zone of peace and
security, especially since this is an objective closely
related to the peace and security of the world at large.
31. Out of our concern to guarantee regional and international peace and security, the Arab States of
the Gulf have taken every possible opportunity to
strengthen the peace and stability of the region. We are
deeply convinced that the persistence of tension and its
repercussions can lead to the intervention of other parties in the conflict:

32. The Council is not unaware that, from 13 to
18 May, Iran attacked Kuwaiti and Saudi tankers outside the war zone. Just yesterday another Saudi ship
was attacked. This is something which can bring the
countries of the region unwillingly into a military situation and can seriously endanger international peace and
security.
33. States of the Gulf Co-operation Council denounce
this flagrant and unjustified aggression by the Islamic
Republic of Iran and call upon it to respect the principle
of good-neighbourliness and international conventions.
34. The widening of the theatre of war simply means a
loss in human and economic resources, a halt to the
development process and the intensification of human
suffering, while the Gulf region is pushed into an international conflict as a result of the geopolitical situation
of the countries there and the vital importance of that
region to the States of the world. This Iranian aggression not only affects the vital interests of the Gulf States
but also poses a very serious threat to international
peace and security because of the importance of the
region to the entire world.
35. The Council has a historic responsibility before it:
to prevent aggression against States not parties to the
conflict and to ensure the freedom of trade and navigation in international waters in accordance with the conventions and international agreements of the United
Nations. Respect for the territorial integrity of States is
an obligation guaranteed by the Charter. Therefore Iran
must be dissuaded from continuing its acts of aggression against our States and this task must be discharged
by the Council, My Government requests the Council
to adopt the draft resolution upon which consultations
have taken place.
36. The PRESIDENT [interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia.
I invite him to make his statement.
37. Mr. SHIHABI (Saudi Arabia) [interpretation
from Arabic]: Sir, it gives me pleasure at the outset to
extend my congratulations to you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. Your
fine qualities, wide experience, good judgement and
competence, which I know so well, will surely contribute to the success of our discussions and to our
arrival at a satisfactory conclusion. I also wish to take
this opportunity to express my appreciation to your
predecessor in the presidency of the Council, Mr. Kravets, the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, for,his competence and efficiency in conducting the proceedings of the Council last month.
38. The international role best played by the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia is its role in support of regional and
global peace and security; the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
dedicates all its efforts and capabilities towards a
just, peaceful and stable world where close and distant
neighbours alike would be a source of well-being and

security as well as of stability and peace. This has
always been and continues to be our premise in the
Kingdom. Adventurers in the past who misunderstood
this political and moral attitude as an indication of
softness have been made to regret their actions.

waterways remote from the area of military operations.
This was a calculated and intentional attack threatening
navigation to and from .the Kingdom and to the sister
Arab countries of the Gulf, as well as to the outside
world. Following this unwarranted attack, responsible
Iranian officials declared what is tantamount to their
determination
to take revenge for what they have suffered in their war with Iraq. They began with the Gulf
couritries in oI;der to intimidate countries that have
trade relations with the Gulf into suspending their international trade. They attempted to achieve their objective with the attack on Saudi and Kuwaiti ships in
territorial waters.

39. The last thing that we desired was to come here in
the role of a complainant asking to deter a neighbour or
to address an aggressor. The whole world knows that
our efforts in the international community have always
been aimed at saving others from harm and at applying
the principles of law and justice in bilateral and ‘international relations. This pertains especially to our relations with our neighbours, with which we have ties of
religion, history and close interests.

44. .Can the world permit Iran to carry its aggression
into third countries-countries
not in a state of war with
it? Should Iran not be firmly and decisively condemned
by the Council for such unjustified aggression? Indeed,
given the economic and :political stakes that, all countries, near or far,.have in theGulf, how can the world
ignore Iran’s commission of aggression against the Gulf
States in order to take revenge against Iraq? To accept
such logic is to open the door to international irresponsibility, to undermine the basic principles and values of
the United Nations and destroy all that civilizations
have achieved since mankind has progressed from the
law of ‘the jungle to >the present concept of the United
Nations.

40. Iran, in particular, is an Islamic State and a close
neighbour with which we have shared long periods of
common history. We have always endeavoured to cooperate with Iran on the basis of warm feeling for its
people, not fear of them.. Since the establishment of the
present regime in Iran, we have made every effort to
strengthen our relationship with it. We have also made
every effort, unilaterally
and collectively,
through
the Gulf Co-operation
Council, the Grganization
of
the Islamic Conference, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the United Nations, to put an end to the
Iran-Iraq war and to stop the shedding of blood by the
two neighbouring Islamic nations.
41. Following Iran’s complaint that civilian .&u-gets
there had been attacked by Iraq, the Gulf Co-operation
Council launched an initiative in which Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, who is
now present with us, played an effective role. That
initiative was designed to protect the Gulfs vital instal-,
lations and interests, to prevent attacks upon civilians
in both Iraq and Iran, to neutralize the Gulf, including
its waters, harbours and installations, and to put an end
to the Iran-Iraq war. Regrettably, however, Iran rejected these efforts and arrogated to itself the right to
attack ships of third parties and to infringe on the sovereignty of the Kingdom.

45. This unwarranted armed aggression, this surprise
attack by Iran against ships of the .Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the State of Kuwait .in our territorial waters
.and adjacent .navigational waterways constitutes a destructive threat not only to the interests of the Kingdom
and those of the State .of .Kuwait but also to world
jnterests, a threat endangering every one of us to a
greater or lesser extent ..We arepot at war with Iran, but
‘its military planes have attacked our ships inside our
territorial waters:The malicious intent is clear: it is to
disrupt the role of the ‘Gulf States as a constructive
regionaland world force. .We and the other responsible
countries of the world have no alternative but to declare
a clear and forthright position in the face of irresponsible adventures which cannot .be .allowed to continue.

42. We appreciate the difftcult circumstances that the
Iranian people have faced over the past few years; we
have patiently watched its lack of perception and appreciation of our efforts. But some of those responsible
in Iran have misunderstood the Kingdom’s stand .and
have failed to appreciate our determination
to curtail
and deter any aggression, while we are striving at the
same time for the establishment and maintenance of
peace. They have done a disservice to themselves, to
,their country, to the region and, in fact, to the whole
world.

46. The’importance
and the vital nature of the Gulf lie
in the fact that, in addition to being an extension of the
territorial waters of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the other
States members of the Gulf Co-operation Council, it is
one of the most sensitive regions in the world, where
the interaction between political and economic factors
affects the vital interests of a large number of countries
in the four comers of the globe as well as the full range
of international
economic and political activities. In
fact, any complications
there will in equal measure
affect the developing and industrialized countries alike.

43. sWe were surprised at the extent of Iran’s misconception of the situation recently when Iranian military
planes, whose identity was confirmed by Saudi detection equipment, attacked Saudi and Kuwaiti tankers
inside Saudi territorial waters and adjacent navigational

.47. We, the States members of the Gulf Co-operation
Council, will spare no effort in preserving the Gulf as a
region of stability no matter what that might cost. But
the other responsible countries of the world must support our position of deterring any party that entertains
5

the idea of disturbing this stability. All countries and
peoples, however much their political systems may
differi, have a clear interest in supporting our efforts to
curb u-responsibility in the Gulf. The aggression against
States outside the Iran-Iraq war zone is the most dangerous phenomenon we have seen in the development
of the present war, which, together with the members of
the Council, we are trying here to curtail and to end. It is’
unilateral aggression against countries which, are not at
war.

another to arrogate to itself the right to attack a third
party. In fact, this could be one of the most dangerous
principles affecting international
relations and peace
and security everywhere, unless it is condemned and
rejected by the international community.
52. I wish to conclude my statement by appealing to
all the members of the Council to take a clear and
categorical position in accordance with the Charter, to
which they are committed and for whose implementation they are responsible, and taking due’account of all
the considerations I have mentioned in respect of Iran’s
unwarranted aggression against countries that are not
parties to the armed conflict. This should be a clear
position consistent with the responsible roles played by
Council members in the international community.
“
53. I should like finally to reaffu-m here that our determination to protect our interests and our sovereignty is
unequivocal and is equal to our determination to ensure
that this irresponsible Iranian action will not impede
our efforts to establish lasting peace and stability in the
Gulf region.

48. Consultations have taken place on a draft resolution we are presenting after a balanced examination of
all the pertinent circumstances. We believe that the
most important and vital of those considerations’ concerns the need for, the Council to express firmly its
determination
not to permit any aggression. against
third parties in the GuK region that are not participating
in the war. The international community must not hesitate to declare its position. If the present attitude of Iran
is permitted to prevail, the international
community
will suffer much greater and much more dangerous’
consequences than would have been the’ case had it
taken a firm and ,clearly pronounced position here and
now.
/

54. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative
of Yemen.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
,

49. Such a firm stand would make the’ Iranians in,
positions of responsibility hear the voice that today.is
echoing in the corridors of world politics deploring the
Iranian aggression against its non-belligerent
neighbours, aggression which is threatening the stability of
the Gulf.‘Keeping
that voice restrained within those
corridors and unheard in- Iran will only further feed
Iran’s delusion that it can continue with its aggression
against whomsoever it desires. If that voice remains
subdued until’ the situation deteriorates further, the
world will pay an exhorbitant price for its failure to
express to the Iranian authorities its true stance at the
right time.

55. Mr. SALLAM
.(Yemen) [interpretation
from
Arabic]: Permit me, Sir, to tell you how pleased we are
to see you, an individual well known for his wisdom,
far-sightedness and ,broad political and diplomatic
experience, presiding over the work of the Security
Council. You represent a country ‘with which Yemen
has for more than 50 years maintained ties of solid
friendship based .on mutual esteem and respect, The
question before the Council is an important one, and
I am certain that its deliberations
will be successful,
thanks to the presidency of a man of your eminence.

50. The Security Council bears a fundamental responsibility for crystallizing that firm position. In fact, it
bears the primary responsibility
in that regard on behalf of the international community. The time when that
responsibility will have to be faced will inevitably come
if irresponsible behaviour continues. The Council ‘is
now called upon to take a firm stand with regard to the
Iranian aggression against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and the State of Kuwait. This is a matter that is independent of the Iraq-Iran war, which we are all endeavouring to end. The’Council must adopt measures that will
stop all acts of aggression against third States which are
not parties to the war.

56. I should like to express,‘through
you, Mr. President, the thanks and appreciation of the delegation of
the Yemen Arab Republic to the members of the Council for having allowed my delegation to participate in the
Council’s deliberations on the agenda item.
57. It is a pleasure for me as well to express my
delegation’s appreciation ‘for the very commendable
efforts made by your predecessor, Mr. Kravets, iepresentative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
who guided the Council’s work last month.
58. The Ministers and representatives of the States of
Kuwait, Qatar and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia have
preceded me in providing details on the issue now before the Council. Basing itself on the principles of inter-’
national law and of the Charter of the United Nations,
the most important of which is the commitment
of
Member States in international relations to refrain from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
and political independence of other States, the delega-

5 1. We and the whole world reject Iran’s contention
that it has the right to attack targets in a,country that
has relations with Iraq and to bomb ships that are
proceeding to and from the ports of the countries members of the Gulf Co-operation Council as retaliation for
any attack by Iraq on Iranian targets. It is well known to
all that Iran is the party that has destroyed Iraqi ports.
It is a dangerous principle for a country at war with
6

effects on the economic and political development of
the States of the world, especially for the countries
of the third world; thirdly, it is convinced that the
Security Council, as the guarantor of world peace and
security, can take decisive measures to foster peace,
understanding and harmony in this part of the world.

tion of Yemen considers that the acts of aggression
committed by Iranian aircraft against Saudi Arabian
and Kuwaiti tankers in territorial waters and intemational navigation channels, far from areas that have
been declared as zones of hostility, should be denounced and their persistence condemned, since they
are aimed against tankers belonging to two States that
are not party to the conflict-something which heightens tension in the region and constitutes a new threat to
the peace, security and stability of those States and of
the world at large.

65. The situation that has given rise to this‘new series
of meetings of the Council undoubtedly has serious
implications for international peace and security. The
remarkable statements made by the representatives of
Kuwait, QatarIand Saudi Arabia show to what extent
we are inexorably’moving towards a situation with
unpredictable consequences. Indeed, threats to free
navigation in the waters of the Gulf show that, if we are
not careful, overnight all the countries represented in
this chamber could be confronted with difficulties that
could lead to economic and even political instability.

59. We are deeply distressed at the tragedy being
experienced by the peoples of fraternal Iraq and the
friendly Islamic Republic of Iran because of this long
war that has devastated the economies of the two States
and taken a toll of tens of thousands of men, women and
children.

66. In’our opinion; the present situation should be
viewed in the wider context ‘of the conflict that has
raged in this region for almost four years. Indeed, for
four years now, the fratricidal conflict between Iran and
Iraq has been added to a situation which for a long time
has made the Middle East potentially one of the most
dangerous regions threatening international peace and
security. For four years this conflict has cost the lives of
thousands of innocent men, women and children and
inflicted terrible suffering upon a great many people on
both- sides. Aside from the squandering of precious
human and material resources of two fraternal countries, this conflict represents a threat to the stability of
the whole region and contains the seeds of an eventual
explosion of unpredictable scope.

60. The war between Iran and Iraq is now being
extended beyond the borders of the two belligerent
States, due to the failure of the Council to do its duty
and to assume its responsibilities towards impartially
restoring international peace and security in a serious
and sincere ‘manner, in accordance with the principles
of the Charter. The Council is today more than ever
duty-bound to work collectively to halt this pointless
war between two States with which my country has
religious and fraternal ties and shares a civilization and
traditions dating back to ancient times,
61. On behalf of the Government of Yemen, I appeal,
through you, Mr. President,to the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to put an end to the fighting’
to restore peace and to respond to the impartial and
neutral mediation efforts of the Secretary-General, as
well as accept mediation by the Security Council, the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference and neutral friendly countries, so that guns and cannon may be replaced by
dialogue at the negotiating table.

67. As far as we are concerned, our membership ‘of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference precludes our
remaining indifferent to this painful problem which is a
constant source of concern to my country.

63. Mr. SARRfi (Senegal). [interpretation
from
French]: Mr. President, I already had occasion last
week to tell you how highly my delegation valued the
talent with which you were guiding the work of the
Council. This talent will be greatly needed throughout
the month,of May, since this seemsto be a particularly
busy month for the Council.

68. Today, the scope of the damage already caused
and the-danger of other States of the region becoming
engulfed in the hostilities pose a challenge to the conscience of the international community, which can ill
afford to stand idly by in the face of this dangerous,
conflict. As stressed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Senegal during the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly:
./,,
““The international community has no choice today
’ but to’persevere in and strengthen the efforts already
undertaken under various auspices to persuade the
two parties to negotiate ,a comprehensive, just and
honourable settlement.“‘j

64. My country has asked to take part in this debate
for three reasons: it considers, first of all, that the
United Nations is the best forum for the settlement by
peaceful means of disputes breaking out between
States; secondly, it fears that the situation in the Gulf
region has worsened and this could have deleterious

Senegal, as a member of the Good Offices Committee of
the Islamic Countries, created at Taif in January 1981
by the Third Islamic Summit Conference, intends, together with other countries members of that Committee, to pursue its efforts in order to establish peace and
understanding between these two fraternal countries.

62. The PRESIDENT [interp~etationfvom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Senegal.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

7

69. Peace in the Gulf has already produced courageous and praiseworthy initiatives under various
auspices, such as those of the Movement of NonAligned Countries and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, as the Council was just reminded by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait. It is here in the
United Nations, however, that the main task must be
performed, and the present meeting of the Security
Council does, indeed, reflect the deep concern felt by
the overwhelming majority of the Member States over
the continuation of this conflict and the new threat it
poses to the security of the region.

in the international waters of the Gulf, pursuant to the
Convention on the High Seas of 1958’ and the agreements among the States of the region, the importance of
which hasjust been stressedby the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait; secondly, a renewed call for the cessation of hostilities and the continuation of mediation
efforts; thirdly, reaffirmation of the appeal addressed
to the belligerents that they respect the territorial integrity and economic infrastructures of the other coastal
States,with stress upon the need for all Statesto refrain
from any action likely to worsen or widen the conflict.
75. The restoration of peace and stability in one of the
most sensitive areas of the world remains a noble, albeit
difficult, objective to achieve. To succeed, we must
have the political will, as well as patience and determination, to induce both parties to move towards real
peace. For four years the use of force has not succeeded
in solving this fratricidal conflict. We must therefore
conclude that no strategy based on force will bring
about peace in that troubled part of the world. In
this connection, my delegation would like to take this
occasion to pay a tribute to the declared intention of
the parties directly Concerned-Kuwait and Saudi Arabia-to refrain from the use of force and do their best to
ensure freedom of navigation in the region. We are
happy to note that the previous speakers have solemnly
proclaimed that they will refrain from any reprisals for
the destruction of their countries’ economic and political infrastructures.

70. Since the beginning of this.conflict the Council has
adopted four resolutions and approved five presidential
statements, all aimed at requesting both partiesto abide
by the cease-fire and settle their disputes by peaceful
means. None of these resolutions, unfortunately, has
produced any tangible results so far. Indeed, the magnitude of the difficulties is such that it rendered virtually
nugatory the efforts of the Council. This is particularly
regrettable, since, in our opinion, there is no fundamental clash of interests between those two third-world
Islamic countries. Moreover, because of this war inestimable human and material resources ,have been diverted from other burning problems which the region
has been confronting for over 40 years.
71. Therefore, this ongoing conflict in no way serves
the true interests of the Iranian and Iraqi peoples, nor is
it consonant with the legitimate aspirations of the other
States of the region which suffer unjustly from the
consequences of this war through the repeated and
wilful destruction of their infrastructure or their economic logistics. There is no need to repeat what was
most aptly said by the other speakers this momi.ng.

76. We express the hope that both parties, in the light
of all the statements heard this morning, will understand that there is no choice but dialogue and negotiation in order to promote ajust and lasting peace in their
part of the world.

72. Furthermore. neither time nor lack of nroeress
should allow us to slacken in our efforts to fosier i just
and equitable settlement of this fratricidal conflict. The
Council will have to persevere in its efforts to ensure
the negotiation of the concrete and positive aspectsof a
settlement on the basesof the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, of international law
and the mutual interests of the parties to the conflict.

77. The PRESIDENT [interpretationfrom Russian]:
The Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Chedli Klibi,
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
78. Mr. KLIBI
[interpretation
from
Arabic]:
Mr. President, it is a pleasure for me, first of all, to
congratulate you most warmly and to say how pleased
we are to seeyou presiding over the Council, given your
recognized experience and competence, the role the
Soviet Union, the country you so ably represent, plays
in the world, and the responsibilities assumed by your
country in the cause of international peace and security.

73. Over and above the substance of the conflict, the
fact is that Iran and Iraq are located in a particularly
sensitive area of the world. One need not be an alarmist
to warn that the risks of an explosion that could entail a
wider conflict increase from day to day. Indeed, with
the dangers confronting the freedom of navigation in
the waters of the Gulf, the intemationalization of
the conflict seems more than probable, Indeed, in the
interests of their independence and very survival, the
States of the region-in particular Iran and Iraq themselves-should not lose sight of the gravity of the situation.

79. The League of Arab Stateshas given considerable
support to the cause of co-operation with the United
Nations. It regards as one of its basic tasksthe strengthening of the organs of the United Nations system at all
levels and it wishes to ensure that the international
community respect and heed its decisions. Therefore
our participation in the deliberations of the Council
should be regarded as an expression of our dedication

74. This is why my country expects the following
from these meetings of the Council: first, a.call for the
elimination of all obstacles to the freedom of navigation
8

its international
responsibilities
and pursuant to the
articles of its charter, always hastened to support the
resolutions of the Security Council. It has also at all
times given its support to steps taken by the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. Iraq, a founding member of the
League, has declared its compliance with the resolutions of the Council, especially resolution 540 (1983),
just as it has welcomed the various initiatives taken to
put an end to the war, guaranteeing the legitimate rights
of both parties and the relations of co-operation, friendship and harmony that should exist on a basis of goodneighbourliness and other ties between the two countries. These steps have not so far achieved the desired
results, because the Iranian Government has rejected
them and this has led to an escalation of the danger and
a widening of the conflict.

to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and our resolve to contribute to the implementation
of
the decisions of the international
Organization and to
their effectiveness.
80. The auestion that has been brought before the
Council today involves a situation threatening international security. It is a question which must be dealt
with expeditiously
and firmly, in order to prevent a
heightening of the danger in an extremely troubled region of the world. Navigation
in the international
waters of the Gulf has in fact been the object of acts of
aggression by the Iranian Air Force, which has attacked
tankers belonging to two Arab States on the Gulf, Members of the United Nations, that is, Kuwait and the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. It cannot be denied that
those ships were in no way military; they were not
participating in the war; they were outside the combat
zone; they were not armed; and they did not carry any
war mate’riel. They were commercial
vessels with
the right of innocent passage in territorial waters, in
accordance with international law. Iran was well aware
of all that when it decided to attack those tankers one
after another. Therefore those acts, for which Iran is
responsible, are acts of aggression against the sovereignty, security and integrity of the territorial waters of
Saudi Arabia and Kuwait in violation of the norms of
good-neighbourliness,
the Charter and the Convention
on the Law of the Sea.

84. For all these reasons, the Gulf Co-operation
Council decided to bring the question to the Security
Council, armed with a resolution adopted by the Council of the League of Arab States at the conclusion of a
special session held on 19 May last at Tunis. In that
resolution, the Council of the League, after having
condemned that serious aggression as one which could
have the widest repercussions on the stability and
security of the region, first of all, called upon Iran to
refrain from any further aggression against navigation
in the region and against the ports of the States of the
Gulf Council of Co-operation and to respect the territorial integrity, sea lanes, ports and infrastructures
used for the economic activities of those States and to
pledge also to respect the norms of good-neighbourliness, the principles of international law and the resolutions of the United Nations, especially Security Council resolution 540 (1983); secondly, it appealed to the
Security Council and the international
community to
adopt a firm and clear position in order to stem the
dangers inherent in the recurrence of such acts of
aggression, which could disturb the security and stability of the Gulf region and threaten the legitimate
interests of the countries of the region and the world at
large.

81. While the Gulf States have throughout the course
of that war-which has now lasted almost four yearspreserved bonds of good-neighbourliness
with Iran, the
aggression perpetrated
by that country endangers
peace and brings about a dangerous turn to the armed
conflict by introducing a new factor of tension in addition to those already existing in the region. Thus Iran
has attempted
to thwart the persevering fraternal
efforts made by the Gulf States and the other Arab
States to put an end to the war and restore peace and
harmony to the region.
82. Perhaps the greatest threat posed by this new
development, which may continue and widen, resides
in the halting of navigation in the Strait of Hormuz,
something which not only would make it difficult to
meet the world’s oil needs but might also curb the
economic activities of certain countries, paralyse the
economies of others and lead to a considerable increase
in the price of oil, thereby dealing a severe blow to the
world economy that could not be withstood by many
countries. Members of the Council are certainly aware
that such a development,
inter ah, could intemationalize the conflict. They are also aware of what a direct threat to international peace and security that behaviour and its effects would represent.

85. The fact that the Arab States are turning to the
Security Council means that in this case, just as in all
others, they are complying with international
law as
laid down in the United Nations itself and its organs,
whose task it is to ensure the security and peace of all
the regions of the world.
86. In this regard, I should like to place a few thoughts
before the Council: first of all, our assessment of the
crisis that is worsening in the Gulf region is predicated
upon our fervent wish to put an end to the war and to
prevent the widening of present confrontations, a widening that would be fraught with dangers to international peace and security; secondly, the recent escalation tends to add a new dimension to the conflict
through a blockading of the ports of States that are not
parties to the conflict. Under international
law this is
considered a cusus belli; thirdly, if acts of aggression

83. The recent Iranian acts of aggression against international navigation in the Gulf which are now under
consideration in the Council constitute one of the consequences of the continuation of the war between Iraq
and Iran. The League of Arab States has, on the basis of
9

against navigation were to increase, maritime traffic in
the Gulf would be disturbed to such an extent that the
situation could lead to foreign intervention-above
all,
by the big Powers; fourthly and lastly, a widening of the
area of conflict would be tantamount to inviting the big
Powers to intervene in the region, and this would certainly not be in the interest of any State of the region.

tect navigation in the region and to ensure the safety of
the international sea lanes and channels, until the Council can put an end to the war and bring about a solution
to the conflict between Iran and Iraq.
92. This is imperative, in the interests of all nations. It
is a desire shared by all States, large and small, in view
of the interdependence
of States and their common
interest in the world economy, production, economic
exchanges and security and stability in that region,
which’ is strategically so important.

87. The Gulf region has a highly important strategic
location, and this should prompt the international community to preserve it from danger and guarantee its
security and stability by assuming the collective responsibility to contain the conflict as much as possible,
until such time as it can be resolved in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. In
that way the danger of a possible internationalization
of the conflict, which would precipitate the region into
the torments of a deadly, generalized war, would be
eliminated. Hence, the responsibility for restoring the
stability and security of that troubled region is an international one, which must be assumed by the international community, and in particular the Security Council, which the Charter has entrusted with the task of
preserving world peace and security.

93. The Security Council should in clear terms inform
Iran that it cannot continue to benefit from the advantages of the international
economic order while persisting in violating law and defying the will of the international community. At the same time, we remind Iran
of the spiritual and religious links between the Arab
nation and the Iranian nation, the glorious accomplishments of those two nations in the course of centuries to
build Islamic civilization,
as well as the co-operation
that should be developed by Iran, in view of its membership of the Muslim world and the Movement of NonAligned Countries, together with the Arab States, in
particular Iraq. We also remind Iran that a just and
honourable peace settlement is within its reach, that if it
commits itself to that solution, as Iraq has, it will in an
atmosphere of fraternity and co-operation find a way to
save human lives, to restore legitimate rights and rebuild what war has destroyed.

88. The Arab States, aware that the dangers of war in
the Gulf would not be confined to Iraq and Iran but,
rather, if the conflict widened, would lead to repercussions for many States of the world, appeal for a peace
settlement, and are making every effort and devoting all
their energy to that purpose.

94. The United Nations was established to protect
present and future generations from the scourge of war,
from which mankind has long suffered. My presence
before the Council as the representative of an international and regional organization is confirmation
of
the fact that the League of Arab States is committed to
the defence of international peace and security, in cooperation with the United Nations, and will bring all
conflicts to its bodies, and in the first instance, to the
.Security Council.

89. Since Iraq has welcomed the steps taken at the
regional and international levels and has complied with
international
legality, while Iran has persisted in
its continuation
of war, all efforts should be made
to prompt Iran to heed the will of the international
community, represented by the Security Council and
expressed in its resolutions, and to heed appeals for
peace and accept that an immediate end should be put
to the war. That would stop the shedding of blood and
lead to a negotiated settlement based on justice, so that
normal relations between the two neighbouring States
could be resumed with a view to establishing harmony
and co-operation for development and progress.

95. We are convinced that the Council will act within
its powers, so that international law may prevail, for the
benefit of peace and security, based on justice.

90. The fact that a ministerial delegation representing
the Council of the League of Arab States has addressed
itself to the Security Council on the question of free
navigation in the Gulf demonstrates the sincere will of
our States to spare the world in general and the region in
particular the risks of an aggravation of the crisis. It is
also a demonstration of our persevering work to contain
the crisis and lead the way to a settlement through
political and peaceful means.

The meeting

NOTES
’ See United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 450, No. 6465.
2 Official
Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the
-**
Law of the Sea, vol. hII,
document A/CONF.62/li2.
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1140, No. 17898.
‘See V, 1.
5 See XVII, 34.
6 Ofjkial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 22nd meeting, para. 222.

91. The League of Arab States hopes that the Security
Council will not confine itself to expressing its concern
over the freedom and security of navigation in the Gulf,
but will take the measures it deems appropriate to proLitho in United Nations,

New York

rose at 12.10 p.m.

00300

90-61313~January

1993-2,050
