S/2021/805

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 September 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 17 September 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
The Security Council, in its resolution 2575 (2021), requested that I conduct and
provide the Council, no later than 30 September 2021, a strategic review of the United
Nations Interim Security Force in Abyei (UNISFA) assessing recent political
developments between and within the Sudan and South Sudan and providing detailed
recommendations for further reconfiguration of the mission and establishing a viable
exit strategy, which should prioritize the safety and security of civilians living in
Abyei, account for stability of the region and include an option for an exit strategy
for UNISFA that is not limited by the 2011 agreements.
In response to that request, the strategic review was conducted by an int egrated
team from the Department of Peace Operations, the Department of Operational
Support, the Department of Safety and Security, the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and the Office of the Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa.
Representatives from the United Nations country teams in the Sudan and South Sudan
were also consulted. The team travelled to the Sudan, South Sudan and Ethiopia from
18 to 30 June. They met with high-level government officials in Khartoum, Juba and
Addis Ababa, including representatives from the African Union, and engaged with the
Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities in the Abyei area.
The strategic review was conducted at a critical juncture for the Sudan and South
Sudan, as both countries have been undergoing political transitions. It also followed
regional consultations held by my Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa in February
and March 2021 on the drawdown and exit strategy of UNISFA, as mandated by the
Security Council in its resolution 2550 (2020). The environment in which the strategic
review took place was influenced by three main developments. First, the noticeably
improved relations between the Sudan and South Sudan since 2019, particularly in
view of the central role they have been playing in each other’s peace processes. This
has created an enabling environment to address outstanding issues, including the final
status of Abyei. The second development is the lack of tangible progress in the
implementation of the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of the
Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for
the administration and security of the Abyei Area and in the implementation of
resolutions in which the Security Council has been calling for progress in the political
process and the establishment of rule of law institutions. As a result, a number of
pending issues have been left for UNISFA to address over the past decade, including
humanitarian, law and order, security and administrative concerns. Last, the current
dynamics in the relations between Ethiopia and the Sudan are having a direct impact
on UNISFA and its perception by the parties. As I indicated in my letter to the Council

21-13157 (E)

290921

*2113157*

S/2021/805

on 1 April 2021 (S/2021/322), the regional consultations conducted by my Special
Envoy in February and March 2021 were inconclusive.
Previous strategic reviews had proposed changes in the Security Council
mandate and reconfigurations of the mission, with limited success. Most notably, in
August 2018, I recommended moving away from the strictly military nature of the
mission towards a civilian approach, noting that the threat within Abyei was mostly
criminal in nature (see S/2018/778). In that regard, the proposal was to transfer troops
from the Abyei area to fully operationalize the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism and to deploy additional police personnel in the Abyei area
to address law and order issues. In the proposal I also noted the need to support the
African Union, particularly the African Union High -level Implementation Panel, on
day-to-day implementation of the agreements through an enhanced civilian
component, including a deputy civilian head of mission. On 14 May 2019, in its
resolution 2469 (2019), the Council renewed the mandate of UNISFA with some
modifications in the troop levels, including a reduction of the authorized troop ceiling
to 3,550 and a further reduction of 585 troops unless it decided to extend the mandate
of the Mechanism (resolution 2465 (2019)). The mission was to increase the police
deployment to 640, including 148 individual police officers and 3 formed police units.
In addition, the Council called for the appointment of a civilian deputy head of
mission to further facilitate liaison between and engagement with the parties. The
deployment of the formed police units, the increase in the number of individual police
officers from 50 to 148 and the placement of the civilian deputy head of mission have
not been implemented to date owing to objections from the Sudanese authorities on
the grounds that the modifications were not in line with the 2011 agreements.

Framing the issues
The review drew from the strategic guidance of the Security Council and some
of the findings and recommendations of previous reviews.
With that in mind, the strategic review team formulated the following questions
in order to frame the issues:
(a)

What are the alternatives to the current peacekeeping approach in Abyei?

(b) In the absence of a political solution, are there any practical solutions by
the Sudan and South Sudan to the outstanding issues of administration and rule of law
of the Abyei area?
(c) What can the Sudan and South Sudan do to assume the current role of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism?
(d) How can UNISFA be reconfigured to adjust to current political
developments in the region and crime-related security threats, considering the
stability of the region and the safety and security of civilians living in Abyei,
including measures to protect against gender-based violence?
(e) What is the required operational support for the proposed reconfiguration?
Options need to include consideration of the related time frames and financial
implications required to logistically support significant changes to posture, size
and/or composition of the Force and the unique operational circumstances;
(f)

What steps can the parties take to move the political process forward?

(g) What would an exit of UNISFA imply in terms of practical steps and in
terms of timelines?

2/14

21-13157

S/2021/805

Improved relations: communities far apart
National authorities in the Sudan and South Sudan expressed strong
commitment to leveraging their improved relations for the solution of outstanding
political issues, including residual matters from the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
between the Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Sudan People’s Liberation Army. Both countries are
undergoing political transitions and there is an appreciation by the respective
Governments of the challenges that transition processes pose for tackling issues of
national interest. Progress was recently made on the establishment of an engagement
framework towards reaching a solution on the status of Abyei. On 25 May 2021, the
President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, established a 10-member high-level committee,
chaired by the Presidential Adviser on National Security, Tut Gatluak. A similar
committee was established in Khartoum, composed of 19 members and chaired by the
Vice-President of the Sovereign Council of the Sudan, General Mohamed Hamdan
Dagalo. Both Governments have also expressed an interest in possibly exploring an
option for a Sudan-South Sudan joint security force for the area, with differences on
the timing of its deployment.
In Khartoum and Juba, all parties have acknowledged the need to preserve
UNISFA until a political solution is found, and the Sudan is requesting the
establishment of a United Nations multinational force.
The Sudan supports the establishment of the joint institutions foreseen in the
Agreement of 20 June 2011 and views the proposed joint security forces with South
Sudan as a solution to the provision of security in Abyei in the medium to long terms.
South Sudan, while being appreciative of the role of UNISFA and sat isfied with the
current troop contributing country, considers that more clarity is required on the larger
political framework before the establishment of a joint security force. Both countries
support an increased role of the United Nations in consolidatin g peace, particularly
through the scaling up of humanitarian activities, peacebuilding activities and
development assistance at the community level.
Inside Abyei, the space for engagement between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
communities is shrinking. The Amiet common market and the transhumance season
constitute two enduring loci of interaction in an otherwise divided space. However,
the conference on migration routes was held outside the Abyei area, in Aweil, South
Sudan, from 22 to 25 February 2021.
The views of the communities on the present situation and their expectations of
UNISFA and the United Nations country team are quite divergent. Interlocutors of the
Ngok Dinka community, including women representatives, told the strategic review
team that the resolution of the final status of the Abyei area, as agreed in the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement was of primary importance. They praised UNISFA
for maintaining security, believed that the Misseriya did not belong in the area and
opposed the United Nations country team’s programme in support of the Misseriya,
perceiving this as supporting the efforts of the Misseriya to resettle the latter in an
area belonging to the Ngok Dinka. The Misseriya representatives expressed
frustration with the lack of services in the health and education sectors and access in
the area, and questioned the impartiality of UNISFA as they believed the mission was
siding with the Ngok Dinka. The youth groups in both communities tended to be more
vocal. The positions of the communities also reflected in the absence of joint
governance structures in the area, with both parties having separately appointed chief
administrators without any visible coordination.

21-13157

3/14

S/2021/805

Changed context
The political and security context has significantly improved and evolved since
the initial deployment of the interim force in the area a decade ago. The trends
identified since the independent review of UNISFA in 2018 continue to prevail in an
encouraging political environment at the national level. The political transitions in
the Sudan and South Sudan have improved political dynamics between the two
countries and have created conditions for them to contribute to each other’s peace
processes. The parties are unanimous in acknowledging the stabilizing role of
UNISFA in Abyei and along the border between the Sudan and South Sudan. In the
present environment, despite the lack of a political settlement, it is highly unlikely
that the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan will try to address their
differences through military confrontation in Abyei.
The recurring incidents in the area continued to be of a criminal nature. Some
were intercommunal clashes over grazing, water points and cattle rustling, and others
were related to the presence of armed elements. For example, in the period between
January and June 2020, cases of assault and theft constituted 751 out of a total of 810
incidents, and in the period between January and May 2021, the same categories
constituted 946 cases out of a total of 989 incidents. Between May 2020 and June
2021, there were 27 cases involving the presence of armed elements that were
suspected of having participated in cattle rustling and armed robbery. The majority of
incidents have tended to be seasonal, as they have occurred between January and May
or June, coinciding with the dry season and the transhumance movement.
Murder cases have been on the rise since May 2019, escalated in particular by
the intercommunal clashes in Kolom on 22 January 2020, the attack in Mabuk on
13 April 2020 and the incident in Dungop on 16 May 2021. Cases of cattle rustling
tend to increase during the reverse migration at the start of the rainy season, in line
with existing trends, and most cases are along the migration corridors, particularly in
the centre and south of the area. As for cases of sexual violence, on the basis of
statistics provided by the community protection committees, as well as those reported
directly to UNISFA, the incidents of rape and/or attempted rape have increased from
3 to 7, and domestic violence has increased from 72 to 102 in the period between
January and June 2021, compared with the same period in 2020. In my regular reports
to the Security Council on the situation in Abyei, I have provided details on these and
other incidents.

4/14

21-13157

S/2021/805

Figure I
Map of migration corridors and main flash points during the 2020/21 season

It was also revealing that, in terms of geographical context, most incidents took
place around two areas, namely areas of intense economic exchange between the
communities such as the Amiet common market and areas that the communities
perceive as inherently theirs and where they fear encroachment by others. As such,
the strategic review found that flash points were located along a north -south axis at
the centre of the Abyei area, more specifically, in the Amiet common market and its
environs owing to their commercial attraction, and in settlements like Kolom and
Dungop, as shown in the map below.

21-13157

5/14

S/2021/805

Figure II
Map of main flash points as of June 2021

Source: United Nations Interim Security Force in Abyei.

Rule of law challenges
In the absence of rule of law authorities (police, prosecution, courts or prisons)
in Abyei, management of law and order is undertaken by the area community
protection committees assisted by UNISFA, and justice is administered primarily
through traditional mechanisms. Monitoring of traditional mechanisms has indicated
violations of the rights of accused persons, particularly of female victims. UNISFA is
supporting the traditional justice mechanisms, notably the Joint Community Peace
Committee, a community-led peace mechanism that comprises representatives of
Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities and performs both legislative and judicial
functions aimed at ensuring peaceful coexistence. The Committee also settles
grievances regarding land disputes, cattle rustling, migration and other conflict
drivers. The Amiet Joint Peace Committee, which is similar to the community
protection committees and monitors activities and violations for the Amiet common
market area, and the Abyei traditional court perform similar functions. In the absence
of functioning and recognized joint law enforcement institutions, UNISFA is called
upon to deliver on matters related to police work, that are beyond its current
capabilities. In addition, the communities have expressed serious concern about the
administration of justice and the lack of accountability for law offenders. The three
community-operated detention facilities in Abyei town, Amiet common market and
Agok town operate in challenging conditions and with minimal resources.

6/14

21-13157

S/2021/805

Signs of joint mechanisms
As detailed in my most recent report to the Security Council on the situation in
Abyei (S/2021/383) of 15 April 2021, there is measured progress on the functioning
of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, which met twice during 2020, in Juba
and Khartoum. The Mechanism took several important decisions, including the
deployment of joint military observer teams throughout the Abyei area, and the
introduction of border-related benchmarks. In February 2020, the Mechanism agreed
to explore possibilities to establish a joint investigation team to investigate the
intercommunal clashes in Kolom on 19 and 22 January 2020; and review and endorse
the memorandum of understanding, originally submitted in 2015, for the handover of
suspects of serious crimes from the mission to the relevant Government. The
implementation of the decisions will have a positive impa ct on the UNISFA mandate
and will facilitate its reconfiguration in support of the parties. In the meantime, there
is no progress on the establishment of the joint Abyei Area Administration, the joint
Abyei Council and the Abyei Police Service, agreed upon on 20 June 2011. Instead,
the parties have appointed separate chief administrators for the area, effectively
covering respective parts of the territory; there is no indication, however, of joint
work or coordination between them.

Impact of regional developments
Regional developments have had a significant impact on UNISFA since its
establishment, and the current dynamics within the region are critical for its
configuration and its future. Since its establishment, UNISFA has been a unique
operation, having a single troop-contributing country from a neighbouring country
and therefore increased exposure to the trilateral relations between the Sudan, South
Sudan and Ethiopia.
When the Security Council called for the strategic review in its re solution 2575
(2021) in May 2021, the regional factor of reference consisted of the positive relations
between the Sudan and South Sudan. However, the ongoing armed confrontation in
Ethiopia, the dispute between the Sudan and Ethiopia over the Fashaqah triangle and
the dispute related to the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam have added a dimension
of uncertainty to the operation, with the Sudan publicly calling for the replacement
of the Ethiopian contingent in UNISFA.

Proposal for a reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Security Force in Abyei
In view of the findings of the strategic review, I would like to propose to the
Security Council a reconfiguration of UNISFA in three main areas with a specific
time horizon. First, the transformative political developments since 2019 in the Sudan
and the political transition in South Sudan, and their strong commitment to solve the
outstanding issues through dialogue, have created a realistic opening for joint
approaches and a political solution.
Therefore, the role of UNISFA as a deterrent to military confrontation at the
national level has changed. The operation should be geared towards fostering the
conditions for the final stage of the negotiatio ns on the political settlement, and the
role of the United Nations entities would need to be revised accordingly. Second, the
trends in the security situation and the nature of threats in Abyei require that UNISFA
have a new posture, one that is lighter, more responsive and consolidated around the
areas of the security challenges. Third, peacekeeping tools may no longer be enough;
the nature of issues in Abyei requires an enhanced focus on peacebuilding with a view
21-13157

7/14

S/2021/805

to facilitating a rapprochement between the communities. To this end, a significant
effort is required to scale up the development intervention.
In the meantime, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
component should build on its achievements and continue to support the parties
towards addressing issues along their common border. As the parties reach a political
agreement, UNISFA would exit gradually while security functions were taken over
by national and local mechanisms.
Military component
Considering the recommendations of the study on military capabilities
conducted in 2019, and the evolution of the political and operational environment of
the mission, UNISFA should be reconfigured in order to improve its capacity to
deliver the mandated tasks in a new regional reality. I recommend the following two
options for reconfiguration of the operation for the Security Council’s consideration:
(a) Option one: reconfiguration with a slightly reduced ceiling and similar
deployment. Under this option, the recommendation is for the total troop ceiling to be
decreased slightly from the current 3,550 to 3,250, including 2,700 for Abyei area and
550 for the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. While the UNISFA
will maintain the current deployment in three sectors, with thr ee infantry units (570
troops each), tanks and artillery heavy units will be repatriated. Force enablers,
including the military helicopters unit, the engineering unit, the uncrewed aircraft
system unit at the force level and uncrewed aerial vehicles capability within the
infantry units, will be enhanced to provide a lighter, more reactive and better informed force, more able to cope with the terrain during the wet season. The
intention is for the military component as proposed to continue to fulfil all required
tasks, in accordance with the mission’s mandate. The number of troops dedicated to
mandate delivery will be similar to the current number, and the changes will not affect
the ability of UNISFA to implement its protection of civilians mandate. A detai led
assessment of existing enabling capabilities may identify opportunities for more
effective and efficient solutions, including the potential replacement of existing force
capacities with civilian or contractual capabilities for the provision of logistic al
support. The advantage of this option is that it does not introduce significant changes
to the current force deployment and posture, making it simpler to implement from a
logistical and operational standpoint while replacing the entire force;
(b) Option two: reconfiguration of capabilities and footprint, with reduced
ceiling. Under this option, the recommendation is for the total troop ceiling of
UNISFA to be decreased from the current 3,550 to 2,900, including 2,350 within the
Abyei area and 550 as part of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism. In this option, a different structure for the mission is proposed, one that
has a smaller footprint while retaining enhanced capabilities. The military component
will have no heavy tanks or artillery units, nor a multi-role logistic unit. It will also
consist of one less infantry battalion. UNISFA will include two infantry battalions
(750 troops each) instead of the current three, as well as upgraded enabling units,
particularly the air mobility and engineering capabilities. The deployment of the
uncrewed aircraft system unit and uncrewed aerial vehicles capability within the
infantry units will provide UNISFA with the adequate tools for gathering information,
which are a pre-requisite for an efficient operational concept based on mobility and
intelligence-led responsiveness. The number of troops dedicated to mandate delivery
will be similar to the existing number, but with fewer troops for support functions,
and the enabling units will provide for a more deployable and supported structure to
fulfil the mandated tasks, including its protection of civilians mandate. This option
will help to facilitate easier command and control of the operation, but will require
higher-level coordination. The change of footprint and the focus on incident areas
8/14

21-13157

S/2021/805

will result in better coverage of and stronger linkages with the civilian component
and the United Nations country team. While this option provides for a smaller number
of troops overall, it will still provide a similar number of troops to conduct the
protection of civilians mandate when required and will not affect the capability of the
Force to rapidly deploy troops throughout the entire Abyei region. For this reason,
the military helicopters unit will be split between the areas of operation of the two
main infantry units. The advantage of this option is that it serves to set the initial
conditions for the mission’s exit while providing encouragement for the two countries
to improve their joint or coordinated engagements for the security and well-being of
the Abyei local communities.
Common aspects of both options
Under both options, consideration is given to the replacement of the current
contingents, in the light of the political dynamics mentioned earlier in the present
letter, with a United Nations multinational force with enhanced enabling units and a
revised concept of operations, necessitating a clear articulation of statement of unit
requirements and contingent-owned equipment requirements, supplemented by
additional civilian capacity, as necessary. A more mobile, responsive and agile, United
Nations multinational force is also dependent on enhanced command and control
functions, necessitating an increased communications capability wit hin and between
different force units and locations.
It will be necessary to reduce the headquarters of the Force in a proportionate
way. It is proposed that the helicopters capability be increased from two to four
military helicopters to ensure high mobility during operations. In the light of the
reduction of the mission’s footprint, it is recommended that its situational awareness
capabilities be enhanced. It is proposed that a basic uncrewed aircraft system unit of
approximately 100 troops be included to provide information relevant for the selfprotection of the Force and enhance its protection of civilians capabilities. The
intelligence collection cell at the headquarters of the Force will need to be adjusted
accordingly.
Operational implications
The orderly deployment of a United Nations multinational force requires careful
planning and sequencing, and the continued cooperation and involvement of the host
countries and the troop-contributing countries. The logistical and operational
constraints imposed by factors unique to UNISFA, such as the wet season, the limited
and lengthy supply routes, existing airlift capacity and air access authorizations, will
have an impact on the timelines for the departure of the uniformed personnel as well
as their equipment. It is estimated that the replacement of personnel could commence
in October 2021 and could take between 100 days and six months. In addition, it is
estimated to take between 13 and 24 weeks to deploy replacement units once selected
troop-contributing countries have confirmed their readiness and the approved
contingent-owned equipment is ready for deployment. Full deployment of the
replacement force’s equipment within one dry cycle will be particularly challenging,
particularly given the need to maintain the continuity of operations throughout the
transition. For certain critical enabling functions, such as medical and engineering,
which must continue during the entire replacement process, arrangements will need
to be made to ensure continuity of basic capacities throughout. In addition, the
quarantine requirements arising from the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic
may also have an impact on repatriation and deployment timelines.

21-13157

9/14

S/2021/805

Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
In both options, it is proposed that the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism be retained at the same level, with its Force Protection Unit slightly
decreased from the current strength of 584 to 550 troops. The Mechanism remains at
initial operating capability with two out of four sectors open, with two team sites
each. It is also proposed that its uncrewed aerial vehicle capacity be increased to
provide information collection at the basic unit level and to deliver efficient force
protection for the unit and the military observers.
Police component
The disagreement of the parties over the numbers and purpose of the Council mandated international police capacity has resulted in no progress on the issue. To
date, there has been no increase of the police component since Security Council
resolution 2469 (2019). No formed police units have been granted entry out of the
mandated three and the number of individual police officers remains at 48 instead of
the mandated 148, with 5 headquarters staff member s instead of 12.
Civilian component
Increasing the mission’s civilian component capacities would contribute to
closing the gap between the Abyei communities and enhancing the protection of
women against gender-based violence. With this in mind, the expansion of the
existing community liaison office takes priority, not only for its work at the forefront
of peacebuilding activities, but also for scaling up support to community livelihood
and resilience efforts in conjunction with other United Nations actors.
In view of the limited rule of law and corrections capacity of UNISFA, I would
recommend that the United Nations develop a rule of law support strategy in close
consultation with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, and the
communities of Abyei. The mission should explore new appr oaches, in cooperation
with Sudanese and South Sudanese authorities, to reach consensus on the
investigation and prosecution procedures for serious crimes, particularly those that
have the potential to destabilize the area, such as the intercommunal clashe s in Kolom
in 2020. Finally, effective protection of civilians requires close coordination with the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, and the local communities, to identify
effective ways to prevent attacks against local communities in the area, an d to support
mechanisms at the national and local levels. At the mission-level such efforts will
require an integrated approach across the thematic components, including civil
affairs, gender, human rights and rule of law through capacity-building, technical
assistance and monitoring in support of the host authorities.
As the parties have agreed to an engagement framework for the political
settlement of Abyei and are in the process of finalizing their respective mechanisms,
the international community should take on a support function.
In line with the principles of my management reform, and streamlined
approaches to the provision of operational support, the proposed mission
reconfiguration offers an opportunity to consider alternate arrangements for the
provision of certain capacities, such as medical, logistics, engineering, and air and
ground support, which could be provided by United Nations commercial contractors
or a mix of military and civilian capacities. A cost/benefit analysis needs to be
completed as soon as possible to this end. In addition, the enhancement of the existing
level 2 medical capability is recommended in order to meet the Organization’s
standard medical evacuation requirements as well as additional airframe capacity

10/14

21-13157

S/2021/805

which, with the flexibility to transport both personnel and cargo, would serve as a
genuine multiplier for the operating capacity of UNISFA.
Recommendations relating to the civilian components will require revisions to
the existing civilian staffing structure, adequate programmatic funding and
adjustments to the mission support staffing and operational resource requirements.

Scaling up support for livelihood activities and resilience efforts
To deconflict tensions at the community level and to lay the ground for a smooth
implementation of a future political agreement on Abyei, the strategic review team
foresees the need for scaling up humanitarian assistance and support to livelihoods
and resilience at the community level and a more prominent role for the United
Nations country teams of Sudan and South Sudan. The proposed approach consists of
joint work by the United Nations country teams in line with sustainable development
and the needs of the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya, on peacebuilding and conflict
resolution, and supported through programmatic funding from UNISFA.
The local communities have similar needs but different and high expectations
of UNISFA and the United Nations country teams. Humanitarian and recovery needs
in Abyei persist as a result of very limited basic services and infrastructures. The
situation is further exacerbated by extreme poverty, high prevalence of malnutrition
and an adverse economic landscape. The agencies, funds and programmes of the
United Nations system provide critical services that would otherwise not be available
to the population in Abyei. There is, however, a perception among the communities
that employment opportunities are not being evenly shared. In addition, there is
reported opposition to the work of the agencies, funds and p rogrammes in support of
the Misseriya community in the northern part of Abyei area on activities beyond
humanitarian assistance.
The agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system face major
challenges in the area, including a limited presence with most operations focused on
projects with a limited scope, logistical challenges, security concerns and sensitivities
to cover the entire area. There are gaps in programme interventions in almost all
sectors or clusters, particularly in rule of law and protection areas. Given the different
viewpoints of the stakeholders, there is a need to have a strategy and to have clarity
on providing principled and needs-based humanitarian and recovery assistance
throughout the area in conflict-sensitive ways and to address political sensitivities
and perceived bias around service delivery.
Data from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development for
the period from 2004 to 2019 illustrate the clear need for dedicated funding to Abyei
in support of community services and livelihood activities. Out of a total of
$62.9 million in international funding designated for Abyei during that period, 55 per
cent of the funds were dedicated to the conflict, peace and security sector; 17 per cent
to the emergency response sector; and 10 per cent to the government and civil society
sector (see figure III).

21-13157

11/14

S/2021/805

Figure III
Total designated international funding to Abyei from 2004 to 2019, by sector and year

The way forward
I recommend that, through the joint strategic direction and guidance of the
Resident Coordinators in the Sudan and South Sudan, a dedicated programme be
established to promote the areas of shared interest for the Ngok Dinka and the
Misseriya, built on joint priorities and supported through programmatic funding from
UNISFA. The framework of engagement may follow the model of the State liaison
functions, successfully tested in Darfur and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (2018–2020), in which a peacekeeping mission shared with the
United Nations country team the benefits of joint work, mobility and security in a
non-integrated mission setting.
I intend to request that the two United Nations country teams develop, in
consultation with the host authorities, a proposal that is needs-based and conflictsensitive, in line with the following principles:
(a) The Resident Coordinators in the Sudan and South Sudan jointly govern
the programme through appropriate mechanisms to ensure strateg ic guidance,
implementation, monitoring and accountability;

12/14

21-13157

S/2021/805

(b) The programme should provide equitable programmatic support to
women, children and vulnerable people in the whole area of Abyei;
(c) All agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nation s system and
their partners should participate in this approach and provide unhindered access to
the people in need;
(d) The use of existing mechanisms, including the communities liaison office
and community protection committees, as vehicles to implemen t the programme;
(e) The scope of the programme could include immediate service delivery and
support to key areas of transhumance, border management and local protection
mechanisms for women, children and vulnerable groups. The proposal should be
completed by March 2022.

Defining an exit strategy
In response to the Security Council’s request in its resolution 2575 (2021) for
an exit strategy for UNISFA that is not limited by the 2011 agreement s, the review
team was not able to propose a clear exit strategy stage but identified several emerging
elements that could contribute to the formulation of such a strategy in the future. I
consider that the political transformation in the Sudan and the str ong commitment
between the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve their outstanding
issues constitute the basis for defining a viable exit for the mission. This is in line
with the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeepi ng
Operations, namely the primacy of politics in the resolution of conflict. I, therefore,
recommend that a time horizon be set for the successful departure of UNISFA.
While the parties are in the process of reaching a decision on the political
settlement, several important building blocks are already taking shape. The
appointment of the high-level committee in South Sudan, and the expected formation
of a similar committee by the Sudan to engage on the Abyei matter, will establish the
necessary framework for the political negotiations. Furthermore, the decision of the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism to deploy joint military observer teams
throughout the Abyei area is a welcome development. Its implementation will lay the
ground for the establishment of joint security forces for deployment in Abyei, to take
up the security functions currently performed by UNISFA. The modus operandi of the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, whereby the parties play a
determining role through their national monitors, could be replicated as a start-up
model for the joint military observer teams and the joint security force. A similar
approach could also be explored for the establishment of the joint police service.
Political process led by the parties
The decisive building block for the exit strategy is a political settlement
concerning the Abyei area, where the leading role of the Sudan and South Sudan is
crucial. The international community stands ready to support the parties as they
prepare for this step. The role of the African Union remains critical in the discussions
and in facilitating the process, building on the contribution to date of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel. I am encouraged by the positive dynamics
between the Sudan and South Sudan and call on the parties to find a durable solution
for the status of Abyei.

21-13157

13/14

S/2021/805

Finally, as part of defining a strategic vision for the operation, I recommend
establishing, in close coordination with the Sudan and South Sudan, a set of
benchmarks – including specific requirements for the inclusion of women – built
around the joint mechanisms that the parties put in place and steps they need to
undertake towards the settlement of the Abyei issue. The accomplishment of these
benchmarks would constitute milestones for the gradual drawdown of the operation
and establish a time horizon for the successful departure of UNISFA, which could
start in two to three years.
I would be grateful if you could have the present letter brought to the at tention
of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

14/14

21-13157
