UNITED NATIONS

I NA TlONS UNIES

SECURITY

COUNCIl.

OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTEENTH

833

YEAR

nd MEETING: 18 JULY 1958

cme SEANCE: 18 JU ILLET 1958
TREIZIEME

ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (SjAgendaj833),. . . . . .. ,........
Adoptioll of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Pagt:

........

1

... . . .. .. ... ...

1

Letter dated 22 May 1958 from the representative of Lebanon to Lhe President
of the Security Council concerning "Complaint by Lebanon in respect
of a situation arising from the intervention of the United Arab Repuhlic
in the internal aJ1airs of Lebanon, the continuance of which is likely Lo
endanger the maintenance of intcmational peace fmd security" (S/4007,
S/4047/Hev.1, S/4050/Hev.1, S/4054)
Letter dated 17 July 1958 from the representf!tive DJ.' Jordan to the President
of the Security Council concerning" Complaint by the Hashcmite Kingdom
of Jordan of interference in ils domestic aO'air,') by the United Arab Republic" (S/4053, S/4047/Rev.1)
.

T ABLE DES

MA TIE RES

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/833) . . . .. .. . . . .. . . . . ... .. . .
Adoption de j'ordre du jour

" . , .. ,

1

. . . ..

, .. ,. '

1

LeUre, en date du 22 mai 1958, adressee au President uu Conseil de securite
par le representant du Liban, concernant la question suivante : Cl Plainte
du Liban touchant une situation Creel'. par l'intervention de la Repllblique
arabe unie dans les afTaires interieures du Liban, et dont la prolongation
est susceptible de menater le maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales' (S/4007, S/4047/Hev. 1, S/4050/Hev. 1, S(4054)
Lcttre, en date du 17 juillet 1958, auressee au President du Conseil de securitc
par le representant de la Jordanie. concernant la question suiva'nte :
(( Plaillte du Royaume hacMmite de Jordanie pour ingerence de la Rcpu
blique arabe unie dans scs afTaires illtcrieures J) (5/4053, S/4047/Rev. 1), , .

l'

w

( 16 p. )

S/PV.833

[.

,

>

I ,

!

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings

of the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.

Symbols 0/ United Nations documents are composed of capital leiters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations

document.

.' .

Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
compies rendns des seances du Conseil de securire sont publies dans des supplements trimestriels aux Documents officiels.
Les coies des documents de i'Organisation des Nations Unies se composenl de
[citres majuscules et de chinres. La simple mention d'une cole duns un [exie signifie

qu'il s'agil d'un document de l'Organisation.

'.
\

\.

f

r
f

I
f
[

,I

tr

•

EIGHT HUNDRED AND THIRTY-THIRD MEETING
Held in New YOJ'k~ on Friday, 18 July 1958. al 10.30 n.m.

HUIT CENT TRENTE-TROISIEME SEANCE
Tenue it New-York. le vendl'em 18 juillel 1958, ii. 10 h. 30
Pre.~idenl:

President: M. A. AHAUJO (Colombie).

Mr. A. AHAU,JO (Colombia).

Present: The rp,presentatives of the following countrics: Canada. China, Colombia, Fnmce, Iraq, Japan,
Panama, Sweden. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great BriLain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

Presents : Les representants des pays suivants :
Canada, Chine, Colombie, France, Irak, Japan, Panama.
Suede, Unio~ des Republiques sacialistcs sovietiques,
Royaume-Um de Grande~Br('.taglle et d'Irlande du
Not"d, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Provisional agemla (SjAgendaj833)

Ordre du joUl' l,rovisoire (S/Agendal833)

1.

Adoption of the agenda.

1.

Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2.

Letter dated 22 May HI58 from the representative
of Lebanon to the President of the Security Council
concerning "Complaint by Lebanon in respect
of a situation arising from the intervention of the
United Arab RepUblic in the internal affairs of
Lebanon, the cuntinuflnce of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace
and geclIrity" (5/4007).

2.

Lettre, en dllte du 22 mai 1958, adrcssee ~u Pro.sident du Canst.'il de sccuritc, par le representant
du Liban, COllcernant la question suivante :
~ Plainte du Liban tOllchant une Rituation creel'.
pal' l'interv~ntio[J de la RtiplI hliql1(: arabc unic
dans les ufTaires interieures d\l Liban, et dant la
prolongation ~st susceptible de menacer le lOainticn
de la paix et de III secllrih it1ternationalcs n
(S/400?).

:~.

Letter dated 17 July 1958 from the representative
of Jordan to the President of the Security Council
concerning" CDmpJaint by tlle Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan of interference in it.s domestic affairs
by the United Arab Republic" (8/4053).

3.

Lcttre, en date UU 17 juiIlet ] 958, adressee au
President du Conseil de securitci lJaT le representant
de la Jordanie, eoncernant la question suivantc :
(( Plainte du Royaume hachCmite de Jordauie pour
iugcre1lce
f\ffaire~

d~

la Hepubliquc arabc unic

dnn.~

S6.'l

interieures (5/4053).
Adoption de l'ordrll !lu jour

Adoption of the agenda

L'ordre du jour est adople.

The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 22 May 1958 from the repltientative ()f
Leuanon t(l the President of the Security Council
concerning "Complaint by Lebanon in reEpect f)f
a situation arising from the intervention of the
United Arab Republic in the internal ttffairs of
Lebanon, the continuance of which is likely to
end8Jlger the muinwnunce of internationm peace
and security" (S/4,007, Sf4047/Rev.l, 5/4.050jRev.
1, S/(054)

Uttre, en date du 22 mai 1958, adressee an Prisid.enl
du Consei! de seeuritc pill' le representant du Lman,
conooruant la question sui"·lInte : c( Plainte du Liho
loncLanl UDC situation erece Plir' l'inteM"eution de la
Repuhlique arllbe unie dtulB les nffaires inteneurel'l
du Lihan, et dont la prolongation est 8uBeeptible de
me.Daeer le ma..intien d~ In pili et de la seeurite
iuternlltionales)) (8/4007, S/4047/Rev. I, 5/40501
Rev. 1, 8/4054)

Letter dated 11 July 1958 from the reprcsentative of
Jordan Iu tbe President of the Security Council
concerning .. Complaint by the Hashemite King~
dorn of Jordan of interfel'enee in its domestic afi'aire
by the United Arab Republic" (S/,W53, S/4.,047/
Rev,I)

Lettre, en date tlu 17 juillet 1958, adreBs€e nu Pdllident dll COlIseiI .le sccUl'ite par le representant de la
J ordanie, conceruant la question mivllnte ~ <c Plainte
du ROYllume hachemite de JordBllie pour ingerence
de la RellUblicJUe arnbe uwe dlUlS 8CS ad'airel3 inrerieures) (5/4053, S/404mRev. 1)

I

AI the ilwitalioll 01 lile Presidenl, ,'Vir. ~l. Gha{eu
'J'ou/wn, represenlalive 0/ Jordan, }.1r. J(arim fbkoul,
representl1tim of Lebanon, and .Mr. Dmar LOllt/i, representative of the United Arab Republic:, took places allhe
Council table.

Sur ['invitation dll President. M, A, Gha/eh Toukan,
re.presentant de la Jordanie, M. f{arim Azkoul, representant du Liban, et M. Omar LO!ltfi. representant de
la Republique arabe unie, prennent place It la table du
Conseil.

1. Mr. AZKOUL (Lebanon) (translated from French):
Before making the st[ltement I had in mind when I
asked for the floor. I SllOuld like to inform members
briefly of the preliminary ob:servations I have just
received from my Government on the second interim
report of the United Nations Observation Group in
Lebanon [S/4062I, now before th.e Council.

1. M. AZKOUL (Libon) : Avant de commencer la
declaration pour laquelle j'avais demande la p"role,
je voudrais exposer brievement aux membres du Conseil
les observutions preliminaires que je viens de reeevoir
de mOll gouvemement sur le deuxieme rapport il1t~~
rima ire du Groupe d'observation des Nations Unies all
Liban ISj40J2J, dont le Conseil est saisi.

2. First: ~he report does not make it clear whether
permanent observation posts have been established on
the frontier. Secondly: the fact that the ubservers
have been able to reach the frontier does not mean
that observation has become really effeeLive. Thirdly:
the limited observation which the observers are at present capable of carrying out is, as in the past, confined
to the daylight hours; all our official information, however, slJows that the in nItration of armcd men <lnd
the supply of arms on a large scale take place during
the night. Fourthly: in many cases the observers enter
rebel territory jn company with the rebels, and at
specified times, at which the rebels have nothing to
hide from thcm. Fifthly: we have quite recent and
very reliable information that the observers have been
turned back ia the Baalbek area and have occasionally
been fired at, 10 intimidate them, and that, in view
of the dangtrs lo which they might be exposed, they
avoid carrying out cbservation during the night bnt
conduct their investigations in daytime only, when
they can be sure that they are safe from any danger.
Sixtltly: the Lebanese Governmen l has t1JiR morning
published an important communique concerning recent
instances of infiltration and the supply of arms to
Lebanon,

2. Premiere observation : le rapport n'indique p:\~
de fayon evidente que des postes d'observation fixe!;
ont ete etablis sur la frontlere. Deuxieme observa Lion:
l'acces des observateurs a la frontiere ne signifie pas
que I'observation est devenue rcellemclIt effICace, Troisieme observation: l'observntion Jimitce :i laquelle les
observateurs sont a meme de se livrer actuellement
continue d'avoir lieu pendant le jour, comme par le
passe; or, tontes nos informationC'i oflicielles assureilt
que I'infiltration d'hommes armes et l'envoi d'armes
sur line grande echelle ant lien all cours de la mllt.
Quatrieme observation: I'entrce des observateurs dans
le territoire des rebelles a lieu souvent en compagnie
des rrbelk.s ellx-memes et a des moments determines,
alors que les rebelles n'ont rien a leur cacher. Cing\li~m~
observation : nous possedons des information.~ tOl1te.~
recentes et Lres stires selon lesquelles les observatcms
ont ete repollsscs dans la region de Banlbek et ont de
quelquefois l'objet de fusillades d'intimidation, et,
premut tOl1jours en consideration les dangers auxquels
Us peuvcnL s'exposer, evitent d'cffectuer l'observatioll
pendant la nult et ne menent leur cnquete que pendant
le jour, lorsqu'ils sOnt stirs d'etre a l'abri de tout danger.
Sixieme observation le gouvernement libanais vient
de publier ce matin meme un important communique
au sujet des actes recents d'infiltration et d'envoi
d'armes au Liban.

3. These remarks are not intended as criticisms of the
Observation Group, with which my Government is as
always anxious to cc-operate to the full, and to which
it wishes to give all the assistance necessary to enablc
it to discharge its dIIties successfully. They Hre intended
rather as a clariflcation to supplement the second
interim report which the Observation Group yesterdny
submitted to the Council.

3. Ces remarqlles ne SOllt pas de:,; critiques adressees
au Groupe d'observalion, avec lcquel mOll gouvernement
est tuujours desireLlx de coopcrcr pleinemcnt et auqucl
il veut fournir toute l'assistance necessail'e pour lui
permeLtl'e de mener sa tache a bien. Mais elles COllS~
IHllent UJlC sorte de mise au point dcstince a completel'
le dCl:xieme rapport interimaire, que le Groupe d'ohservation [\ soumis bier nu Conseil.

4.

I turn now to the statement of substance I wish
to make this morning to the members of the Council.

4.

5. During the last two days the Soviet Union repre~
sentative has spoken a great deal about tlle events
now taking place ill Lebanon ami their possible international repercussions. It seems to me that we ought
to make a serious and objective examination of the
real situation created by the intervention of the United
Arab Republic in the domestic arTairs of Lebanon, so
that we may see it as a whole.

5. Au cours dcs deux derniers jours, le represeutant

.Te passe maintenant a la declaration de fond que je
voulais faire ce matin devant les membres du COl1seil.

de l'Ullion sovietiqne a beau coup pal'lc des ev~nements
qui se deroule-nt actuellcment au Liban et des repu_
cussions intern<ltionnles qu'ils pourraient avoir. lime
semble qu'il convient de nOlls livrer a un examen serieux
et objectif qui nOllS permctte de voir dans son ensemble
la veritable sitllalion crece par l'intervenlion de la
Republique mabe unie dans les affaires interieures du
Liban,

6. The argument ptlt forward by the Soviet Union
delegation. 50 far as I have been able to lmderstand it,
can be summarized as follows: since there is no foreign
intervention in lAlbanon, and the Lebanese crisis is

6. La these avancee par la delegation sovietique,
telIe que je l'ai pu comprendre, peut se resumer comme
suit: du fait qu'il n'y a pas d'intervention exterieure all
Liban et que la crise libanaise est pllrement interieure.

2

f

r

f
•

r
1,
r

t
[

J

~

I

(
•

purely domestic, the dispatch of United States troops
to l.ebanon is unhlstified and constitntes illegal inter~
vtntion only LO bc cxplairlC([ by United States impcriali~t aims.

l'envoi de Lroupes (]es gtuts-Cllj,~ ,m Liban est injusLiJict:
eL eonstitue une intel'vention iIlcgale qui ne peut
s'e."pliquel' que rar les visees iIll;)et'iali~tcs americaincs.

7. I have 110 intention of dealing with that part of the
argument which concerns ~he United States. The
United Stat~.s representative can do so if he wishes and,
iJldee~, has already done so witIl success, But since
the entire Soviet argumcnt is based on a denial of the
Lebanese complaint tlwL there has beel! and :still is
massive int~.rVfm :jon i:l Lebanon's intel'nal alTairs 1.Jy
\".he enited Arab Hepllblk, it is important that my
delegation should deal with this fumlnmenbl aspecL
of tile SOVL~,t thesis,

7. 11 n'est pas duns man intention de traiter de ce
qui, dans celle the,e, COllcenle les Etats-Unis. Le
rcprC<lentllllt des C;l<lb~Ulll'<; peut le faire s'il le desire,
et l'u dejil (nit uvee meces, ;VI.'l.is comme tattle la these
sovietique est bnsee, sur la negation cb la plainte libannise selon l<H[uelle il y a eu, et il y a encore, intervention
massive dans les affaires intcrieurcs du Lillun de la
part de In RepubJiqu~ urabe unje, il L1evicnt i11lportllllt
ponr ma diHcgatioll de truiter de ecl aSi)ect fondamcIllal
de la these sovietiquc,

8.

Jr. order to judge correctly Uw valnc ane:. validity
of Lhis tbesis, we musL seck an al\~l\"cr LO lile following
[our basic questions:

8. Pour juger corredelllent (le la va/et(r et de ta
validit6 de ceLle these, it fundI'ail se poser les qlwtre
questions fondamentales suivantcs :

0) Ig thl' prescnt Lcbamse GovcrnuellL the legilinwtc GovernmclIt of the country which alone is ollidally responsiblc for protecting Le!J,\llon's independcnce
ngllillst any onts'de interwdion?
(2) If such intervention is in fact taking place, has
this legitimate Government the right to ask lite United
Nations for help in odel' to avert the dangel" threatening Lebanon's independence'l

1) Le gonvernemellt libanais aetue[ est-il le gOllvernement lcgitime du pays qui, senl, a la responsabilite
olIiciellc dl' prol:i~gP.l' l'independnnce dLl Lib,m de tontc
inlerventiou exterieure?
2) Si ee-tie intervention existe l'eellemCllt, ce gOllvel'ncmeJJL legitime a-t~il le droit de demander a
l'Organisation des Natiol\s Unies son assistance en vue
cl'ecal'ter le (hugcr qui mCllnCC l'independance du
Libun?
3) Ce gouvcrnement legHimc a-t-il le drOit, si la
menace a l'independancc du pays devient jmminellh
et s'iI n'est pas possible d'attendre que l'Organisatiorl
decide, recrute et orJ;allise ['assistance adequate voulu.e,
de dcmar.c]cl' ccttc ussistnnee a des pays a:nis, eonrorl11crncnt :1 1,'1 Cllurt<o de:; i\atiol1:i Ullk!;?

(J) Has lllis legitimate Govcrnment Hie right, if th~
threat to the coulltry's independence becomes immediate, and if it is not possible to wait for the United
Nations to reach a decision and to recruit and organize
the assistanCe asked for, to <leek assistance from frie~clly
countries in conformity with ~he United Nations
r.h,utcr'l
(4) Finally, has there 01' has there 1Iot been intcrventi')n by the United Arab Republic ill th~ intErnal
alIain o[ Lcb:mon'l

f1,

I believe that no one either here or elsewhere '",ould
hesitate to answer thE first two questiolls in the amI'
mative; the Lebanese Government is the legitimate
l"owrnmenL of the country ._- even tbe rebels whq are
opposing it have never disputed this ~ and it has
the right and even the duty to seek assistance :rom
the United Nations if Lebanon's imlepfllQel1te b really
Llm:ntened by foreign intcrvention,

/1) Enfln, y a-I:"il n:rIIeIIlent. Dui Oll non, one
intervention de la part de la Rcpubliqlle arabe unie
dans Ies aJIaircs illtericlll'('.S <iu Liball'?
9.

Je crois qll'il n'est Fcrsonl1c, iei Oll aille1lrs, qui

IH~sitc it rp,poIJ(lrc pm l'ailirmative aux dellx premieres

questions, it savoir que le gOl1vernement libauais est
le gOLfvel'llcment legitime dlt pay:; - d'ailleurs, meme
les l'ebeUcs qLfi luttellt c:ontre lui 1iC'. l'ont jamai;;.
conteste - et qu'i! a le (lroit ~t me-me le devoir dedcmundcl' ussistance a I'Org!1l1isntion des Nations
Unies si 1'inMpendaace dll Liban est vraiment menacee
par line intervention etrangere.

a

10. As to the third question, concerning the right
to aIJpeal to friendly countries, there :Il\ve been somc
here WI10 hnve seemed to question tllis right, On the
ground that il can only be invoked Lnder Article 51
o[ the Urjtcd Nations Charter if there has been a
direct armed attack. In reply I would call t.'lck attention to the fact that Article 51 Jf the Charter speaks
not of direct armed attack but of arned attack pure
nnd simple. Article 51 is thus intended Lt:! cover all
ca~es o[ attack, whether direct or indirect,provided it
is flr~m:rl nttack In any case, what dJIercnce is there
[ram the point of view of their efIeds between direct
and indirect attflck if both are armed and boLlt are
directed towards the destruction of a eoun:ry's independence and could, in inct, threaten it~} Wllaf real
difference is there bfll,wl'.l'.ll armed soldiers in uniform
making a frontal attack on a certain part of a certain

10, Quant
la troisieme question, relative au droit
de recourir a des pays amis. certains ici ant semble
mettre cc droit etl doule, :;ons pn!Jexte qu'il ne peut
eLre invoque, .selon I'Article 51 de la Charte des Nations
Unics, que dans le eas cl'une agression 3nnee directc.
Pour leur rcpondre, je vOlldrais attirer leur attention
sur le fait que I'Artiele 51 dc la ChartR. ne parle point
de l'agression arn:ee dll'ccte, mais simplement de
l'agression Hrmee lout court. eet article a done voulu
embra<lser tous les cas d'agression directe ou indirecte,
pourvll qll'clJe soit une ilgression armee. D'aiJIeurs,
quelIe diiIerenee y a-i-il, par rapport a leurs, prre.t~,
entre l'agression directc et 1'agression indirecte si
toutes les deux sont nrmecs et si toutes le~ deux visent
a dctrlli:e l'independancc du pays et peuvent, en fait,
mcnacer cette independanee? QueUe difference reelle
y a-t-il entre des solclat.::> <ll"mes et t)l uniformc nttnqu.ant.

3

- - -_ _...-1

COUlllrv 1ll\(1 lhese ~amc soldiers, armed lml not in
unifonn, secretly infiltrating into the area la regroup
there and engage in the same sort of armed attack
as soldiers in uniform? It would seem obvious that
this distinction between direct and indirect attack is
purely verbal and wholly factitious in this instance.

de front unc region d'uil pays et ees metnes soldab,
toUjOUfS armes. mitis Runs uniforme, s'infiltI'ant clan~
destinernent dans cette region pour .~'y regrf)llp~r plus
tarc! et y engager la rneme luttc armee que des scldat.<;
en unjforme? Il apparait done clairement que eette
distinction el1LH,- agI'e.!'~ion armee dirccte et agrcssioll
annee indirecte l'st pmcment verbale et faclicc, dalls
le Cas qui nous prcoceupe aetuellemeut.

1L
It only remains for me to i;onsider the f91.\rlh
question, which is the crucial onl'.: has UlCl'e or has
there nut been o'.ltside intervention in Lebanon, including the inliltralioll of armed m~1l and the supply
of arms and equipment? To this question the Snviet
Union representative replies in the l~egative; he maintains that the illtervention we are talIdng about is
not Laking l)lace. This denial can only be ex:plained
in one of two wavs. The first is that the Soviet Union
representative knows that the in~erventioll is going
on but wishes it to continue and would like to prever.t
till)' 'lgsislance being provided which would bring it; to
an cnd. Should that be lhe case 1 am sure that no
other member of tile Council would want to follow him
in that course. There is, however, another possibility.
It is lllut the Soviet Union rcprcs~ntative :mows, by
Home special and perhap.~ magical :11eanS, Lllot aU the
[uels we have related to the Council and aL those we
have rliscovered subsequently, as ,veil as all the facts
l~onected independently by other States and reported by
Lhe wurld JJI'ess, whidl prove the fact of tllis illLerVel1!,iou, are completely false and unfounded. If that is
lhe c~sc, wc should be very grateful to him if he would
~hare his omniscience with us so that we may be able
to accept his argument.

11. 11 me reste maintenant a examiner la qllatrieme
question, qui est en l'oCCllrrence la quel>!;iol) fom\~\­
mentale, a savoiI' : y a-t-i!, oui ou non, au Liban, unc
intervention exh\rieurc comprcnant
l'inn.ltratioll
d'hommes arm6s et l'cnvoi d'urme3 et de lllllLeriel?
A cette question. le represenbnt de l'Union sovicti.q\\e
repond par la negative; il affirme que l'inlervention
dont nous parlons n'cxiste pas. Cettc nmrmation ne
pc-ut s'expliqller que par l'une des deux hypotMse!l
suivant.f'..~. La prf'mi(\re hypothesc est qu'il 3l:lit qu'B
y a intervention, mais il aurait interet a ce que cette
intervention continue et desirerait cmpecher toutc
a5si~tanee desLinee il la faire cesser. Duns ce ca", je
suis .'iur qu'aucun antre membre dll Conseil nc v(mdrait,
le suivre dans eette direction. .M~is il y R line llutrll
llypothese. r.'est que le representant de l'Union sovictiqnc sail, par des rnuyens particuliers, et peut-etre
magiqucs, que tOilS les faits que HallS avans exposes au
Conseil et taus ceux que nous possedons depuis, ainsi
que Lous les faits rccudllis ind6pendamment par
d'autres Etats et tOllS les faits que [<1 presse mondialc
a rap?orlcs, et qui prouvent l'existellfCC de cette kwrvention, sont eornpletement faux et sans fondement.
Si te! cst le cas, nous lui sedons reconnai3sants debien
vouloir flOUS communiqueI' cettc omniscience afin dll
nons permettre de nous rallicr a sa tiles\;;.

12. Defcre J can decide which of tLese two hypotheses
is the ecrreet one I must pause a mom(',nt to recall
that the Lebanese delegation, in submitting its complaint to the Council [823rd meelinal. set. forth ::l. great
number of facts which had, with others, served to
convince the Lebanese nuthoritiel> of the existence of
massive intervention in Lebanon's domestic affairs.
These were not all the fach known to us b:lt simply
examples and illustrations of tbe varions forms whiell
this massive intervention was taking. But it was these
lads, plneed before the Council, as well as the facts
known directly to certain Governments, which convinced the Security Council of the gravity of the situation in Lebanon and persuaded it, on 11 Junc 1958,
to send an Observation Group with the task of preventing any illegal infiltration of personnel or supply
(]f arms or other materiel across the Lebanese borders.

12. Avant de pouvoir decider laqLlelle de ces deux.
hypotheses devrait etre retenue, il me faudrait m'aIT~ter
un mament pour rappcler que la delegation liballatse
a expose id, dcvnnt le Conscil, 101'5 de la pn~selltatioll
de notre plainte [823° seance], un grand nombre de
faits qui avaient, entre autres, convaincu les autorit6s
libanaises de l'existence rl'UlHl intervention massive
dans les affaires interieures du Li!Jan. ees faits n'etaien~
pAS 1mls les faits eonnus par nOllS, mnis simplcrnent
des exemples et des nb~trationS des diverscs formes
suus Irsquelles cette inlervention massive s'etait manifestee. Mais ce sont ces faits presentes au Conseil,
ainsi que les faits connus directement par certains
gouvcrnements, qui ont eonvaincu 1('. Conseil de securile
de la gravite de In situntion 3U Liban et qui I'ont M;ermine,;o 11 juin H.l58, a envoyer le Groupe d'observation,
avee la mission de fnire en sorte qu'il n'y ait pas d'ir.filtratiol~ illegale de per,<;o:mel ni d'envoi ille.gal d'armes
ou d'autre maleriel a travel's la [rolltiere libanaise.

13. Since that date the volume of evidence of infil- 13. Depuis eette date, le nornbre de ees faits prouvant
tration and foreign intervention has greatly increased. l'infiltration et I'intervention etrangere a augmente
My delegation has not yet had an opportunity of sub- eonsid~ablem('nL. Ma delegation n'a pas eu encore
mitting examples of these further facts to the Council, l'occasion de presenter des exemples de ces nouveallx
but the Lebanese Government has given m03t of them faits au CUIIseil, mais le Gouvernement Jibanais en a
to the Un:ted Nations Observation Group in Lebanon. soumis la plupart au Grcupe d'observation des Nations
I~ may be usked here and, it wonld scem, with Unies au Liban. On peut se demander ici, apparemment
reason - why, if the Observation Group was cognizant avec raison, pourquoi, si le Groupe d'observation a eu
of these facts, and if they were valid, it did not mention connaissance de ees faits et si ees faits etaient valab:es,
them in its fIrst report to the Counr.il as proof of infll- il ne \cs a pas soumis dans SOil premier rapport au
I ConseiJ comrM ~reuve d'lnfiltration.
tration.

!

i'

I
,I

l

r
i
II
"

s
H.

In order to reply adequately La this question we

must first of all recall tltal the rlfst report of the Observntioll Group [8/4040 and Add.7] only coven a period
(If about ten days during which the Group was still in
thr. process of installation, and had not heen able to
penetrate the rebel-controlled nreas or Lo approach
the Lebane~e-Syrian frontier, across which infiltration
was taking place. But the followiuf{ three considerations, nlso, should be borne in mind'

(1) The natun' of Ihe Ohservation Gl'illlP'S fUllcLion,

a

J'L Pour repondrc comll1c il se doit ectte que:;lioIl.
il faut d'abord se rflppeler que le premier rapport du
Grollfle d'observation [Sf404() et Add. lJ ne couvre
qU'une pcriode d'enviroll 10 jom's, pendant lesquels,
d'aiHeurs, le Groupe etait encore en voie de constitution
et Oll it ne lui etait pM possible de pemllrer dans le~
territoi.res controles par les rebelles, ni de s'approcher
de la frontiere libano-syrienne, iJ. travel'S laquelle, precisement, l'innItration s'efl'eduait. Mais it faudrait
egalement avoir prescntes n l'csprit les trois considerations suivantcs

(3) The nutme of the Ohservation GrouP'1j fundioll
as understood by tIte Security Council ill adopting its
resolution of 11 June last, the fact, that is to say, that
the Council scnt to Lebanon, not an investigatioll group
with the principal or even sole task of reporting to the
Council on the results of its investigations, but an Observation Group ,,,,hose mission was to ensure that there
was no infiltration or supply of arms to Lebanlln. This
means that the Group's duty is not to tell the Council
whether infiltration into Lehanoll is ()J' is not taking
place but to put n stop lo such infiltration and to
report on the results of its action. {n other words,
what wc should expect from lhc Observation Group
is not a report indicating whet.her or not infiHratioll
has taken place 01' listing instances uf infiltration, bnt
a repott stating simply whether or not it has been
able to eflrry out the task of observation assigned to
it, and whetller, in consequence, infiltration 11I.ls stopped
or is still going on - for, at least according to the
interpretation given to the Council's resolution, it was
expected that observation alone would enable the
Group to put a stOll to the infiltration of alllled men
and the supply of arms to Lebanon. However, the
Group stated in its first report that it had not yel
been able to carry out its task of observation and,
accordingly, thal it was not able to judge wln'.ther or
not it would be able to stop the inllltration.

1) La nature de l'observation, tellc qu'cllc esL
comprise par le GrOllpe c1'observation, c'esl:-a-dire le
fait qu'i! ne peut rapporter au Conseil que les incidents
d'infiltration qu'il aurait observes lui-meme et directcment.
2) La nnture des rap ports que le GouverncmenL
libanais soumet nll Groupe d'observalion, e'cst-a-din~
le fait que ces rapports contiennent, pour la plupart,
des faits qui ant ete (lbserves par lcs agents de l'autoritlS
libanai:;e et qui ne parviennent SOlIvent all Groupe
d'observation que IOl'SqllC ccs faits ont deja en lieu et
ont cesse d'/!tre un objeL direct d'observation pour les
obscrvateul'S, Exemple
un rapport parvient aux
nutOl'ites superieures, n Deyrollth, de l'un des agents
de l'al'rnee OLl dll service de renseigl~ements Hbanuis.
sur l'observation <I'Ull convoi de mules charge de
munitions et rl'armement, qui aurait traverse la fronticrc
Jibanaise t'l tel endroit et a lcllc date, Lorsquc cc
mpp0l'l, qui constltlle pour Ics autorites libanaises une
preuve indisclltable de l'infiltration OLl de la persistunce
de I'infill:ration, parvicnt tlllX ol.Jservateurs, il devient
negligcable parce qu'ils n'ont pas pll observer dircctement et par eux-memes les faits qui y sontlllentionncs,
Ils ne peuvent donc pas en tenir compte.
3) La nature de l'observation te1lc qlle l'a comprise
le COllseil de seeurite lorsqu'il a adoptc sa resolution
du 11 juin derniel', e'est~a-clirr. le fait que le Conscil
a ellvoye atl Liban, non pas un gl'Oupe d'inve.stigation
dont la t£lcllC principale et meme unique semit de
fail'e rapport all Conseil sur les resnltats de ses investigations, mais un grtlllpe <I'observation clont In missioll
est de fain'. en sorte qu'illl'y ait ni inliltration ni envoi
d'armes all Libull. Celn sigllilie que le devoir dll Groupe
n'est pas de dire au Consdl s'il y a ou s'il n')' a pas
d'inllltration au LibarL, mais cle fairc cesser' cettc
innltration et de faire rapport sur les re.mltats de cettc
8ction, En d'antrcs tcrmes, ee qu'on devrait attendrr:
du Groupe d'observatioll, ee ne sont pas des rapports
incHquant s'il y a ou s'il n'y D pas d'infiltration nu
enumerRnt les dHIcrents ineidellls d'infiltration, mais
simpJemcnt s'il a pu ou non exereer la fonction d'observation qui llli a etlS assigllee et si, en consequence,
l'infiltl"ation a cesse ou si ellc continue, car, clu moins
selon l'interpretation qui a cte donnce a la resolution
du ConseU, e'est par l'observation seulement qu'on
esperait que le Groupe devrait ponvoir faire cesser
J'infiltration d'hommes urmes et l'em'oL d'armes all
Liban, Or, le Grot:pe declare, dans son premier rap]JOrt,
qu'il n'a pas encore ete en mesure d'observer et que,
par consequent, il ne pouvait juger s'il avait ou non la
possibilitc £le faire cesser l'inm~raLion,

15, It i~ this conclusion in tlte Observation Group's
report which should hold our attention :l.lld arouse

15', C'est eette conclusion du rapport du Groupc
d'observation qlli doil retenir notre nllentioll et

as understood by the Group itscIr. namely, that it
wn only report lo the CoulIcil cases or illlilLrution it
Itn:; itsel[ nellll\lly observed.
(2) The lluLmc of the Lebanese Goverlllllent's fl!ports
to the Observation Group --- ill other words, the fHct
that for the 1110st parl these reports relate incideuLs
observed by agents or Llw Lcl:l:J.llese allthorities and
rc,lCh lIle Observation Group only after the iucidents
lmve lalwn place and call 110 longer be witnessed pcr~onally by the Observers.
For instullcc: u report
reaches the higher [Jllthorilie~ at Beirut from one of
tllr agents of the army or of the Lebanese intelligence
S(,Tvice that a convoy of mules with arms and ammunition has crossed the Lebanese frontier at such and such
a place on such and such a date. Wlwn this report
which, for the Lebanese authorities, is illdisputuble
proof o[ infiltration or of the persistence of infIltration,
reaches Llll' Observcrs, it hecolllcs vflllleless because
they have noL been able themselves to observe directly
Lhe facts reported. They cannot, lllcref(Jre, take
account of them.

•
our iutcrc~l, and IlOt the fact that lhe. (;t'oop reachclJ
no clear conclusion as to whether or !loL inliltl'ution
was taking place,

sllsciter noLre interet, et non pas le fait que le Groupl'
n'a pas J-lOrte un. jugement direct i';lIr l'existencc ou la
non-exisLence de l'infHtration.

16. The inference I would draw is that the ob~elvcrs'
preliminary conclusions in their ilrst report do not
justify the USSR repre.senlaLive's alfIrmation that
there Jms been no infilLralioll of armed men or supply
of arms to Lebanon. The representative of t]lC Soviet
Union ('.annat claim la be basing hjlll~eJf on the Obser~
valiou Group's report in declrrring that there has
been no iniillrntiorl into Lebanon. On whnt, then, is
he basing 11is stntemenl?

J'en dcduis que les conclusions preliminaires
par les observateurs dans leur prcmier rapporl.
ne justiliellt pas I'Clffirmation dll representant d(~
J'URSS lJu'il n'y tI pas d'infiltration d'hommes nrml's
et d'envoi d'arrnes :-tu Liban. Le r~lln~senLant <It,
l'Union sovietique ne pent dire qu'il ~e Illndc slIr le
rapport du Groupe d'observatioll pour aJnI'JlJ(Jr ([u'il
n'y a pus d'infiltration <IU Liban. Sur quoi clonc S~
ionde-t-iI?

17. If, despite the considerflble and impressive array
of facts we have been able to marshal to prove that
there is a massive inLervention in our afTnirs, the
Soviet Union reprtstntative claims to know that this
intervention is llOt taldllg place, this can only be
explained by his possession of a unique and extraordinary omniscience. If that is so, he should be able
to reply to the following questions, which those who,
like myself, do not lOlOw everything, are unable to
answer. The questions I am going to put to the Soviet
Union representative are quile unconnected with the
facts we lwve ci'ted or of whicl! we have knowledge,
facts which we can, if necessary, place before the
Council aL any time.

17. Si le representant de l'Union .'lQvietiqut', malgrc
le nombre consi(j(~rahle et imprcssionnanl de faits
que no us connaissons el qui prollvent l'cxisl:ence d'une
intervention massive dans nos ;jm~ires, affirme savoir
que cettc intervention ll'exislt pa.~, cela ne pent
s'expliquer que par le fait qu'il possede LIne omniscience
extraordinaire tlUL lui cst particuliere. S'il en est ainsi,
il devraH ponvoir repondre aux questions sLlivuntes,
auxquelleil cellC'( qui, comme moi, ne snvcnt pas tout,
sont incapaLlts de nlpondre. Ces questions. IjUC je vais
poser au representant de l'Unloll sovictiqllc, sonl.
complCtement independantes des faits que IlOllS avons
soumis Oll que nous connaissons, faits qne nows ponnons,
fJ touL moment, soumcttre au Conseil, le cns echeanL

18, They are in the first place qutsuons raised by the
reports and commllniques published by the United
Nations Observation. Group in Lebanon and from which
Mr. Sobolev draws the conclusion tllal the Lebanese
aiTair is purely domestic. I hope that the representative of the Soviet Union will be able to reply to these
questions, and I shlllJ be very grateful to him for
doing so.

18. Cl'. sont, d'abord, des questions quc posent Jes
rapports et communiques publies par le Grollpe d'ob~cr­
vation eles Nntions Unies nu Liban et dont 11. Sal.lolcv
tire In conclusion que l'afTaire libanaise est d'ordre
purement Lnteriellr. J'espere que le representant de
l'Union sovictique pourra repondre aces questiollll,
Cl'. dont jc lui serais fort reconnaissant.

19. First, what was the company of uniformed Syrian
soldiers doing, on 25 June 1958, on both sides of the
road leading from Deir el Aaeheyer - the headquarters
oi onc of the rebel leaders - into Syria? That was
a fact observed by the Obstrvation Group and mentioned in its first report [8/4040 and Add.I, annc;r Dl.

ID. Premierement, que faisait, le 25 ]UIll 1958, la
compagnie de soldats syriens en lllliforme, des deux
cotes de la route qui, de D(;lr el AaeltJ.yer, siege dt~
l'uIl des chefs de L1 rebellion, menc en Syrie? Il s'agit
la d'un fait observe par le Groupe d'ob"erv<ition et
mentionnc dtlns SOll premier rapport l S/404{) cl Add. 1,

16.

tin~es

Qnne:l;C

BJ.

20. Secondly, who were those responsible ior the considerable mortar IIring noted by the observers as coming
from the vicinity of Halta, 2.4 km inside Lebanese
territory near the Syrian border r8/4040 and Add.1,
para. 22]?

20. Deuxiemement, quels ctaient les rC'sponsables dc!>
nombrellx tit's de morLicr que les observatcurs aflirmcllL
(woir constntes comme provenant dll voisinuge de
Haltll, a 2,4 km it I'interieur du tenitoire libanais.
pres de la frontiere syrienne [S/4040 et Add. 1, par. 221',1

21. Thirdly, even accepting the statement in tile
report that there was little doubt that the vust majority
of the armed men seen by the observers were Lebanese
[ibid., para. 21], what was the nationality of the minority of lhese armed men?

21. Troisiemement, etant donne que le rapport men~
tionne qll'il y a peu de doute que la grande majorit6
des homrnes <lImes vus par les observatcllrs ctait
constituce par des Libanais [ibid., par. 21], quelle
6tait done la nationalite de la minorite de ees hommes
armes?

Fourthly, what explanation is there, if not thc
from whicl) tlle rebels can easily
receive the requisite assistance, of the very indicative
fact that, with certain minor exccptions, the rebels
are occupying only the frontitr areas of Lebanor:. and
the frontier regions between Syria and Lebanon, and
no other part of the count!'y?

22. Quatriememcnt, comment expliqllcr, sinon pur la
proximite de la frontierc syricnne de laquelle le.s
rebelles peuvent facilement recevoir l'assistance voulue
le fait trcs significatif que les rebelles n'OCCllpent, A
part certaines petites exceptions. que les bandes iron~
talieres du Liban et les bandes frontalieres de la Syrie
et dll Lib::m, et seulement cette parlie du pays?

23. Fifthly, what reasons would the rebtls have for
preventing the observers from penetrating into their

23. Cinqlliemement, queUes raisons auraient les rebtlle8
d'empecher les observateurs de penetrer dans lenr

22.

pro~imity of Syria,

6

,

r
f
r

1
I.
I

r.

i,
r

'f,
(

I·

I-

,-r
,I
(
<

I

{

territory, lor destroying the bridges leading there, for
mining the roads and firing on the observers as they
.approachBd, if they had nothing to hide from them?

territoirc. de detruir2 les ponts qui y mEment, de pla.cer
des mines surlC5 chemins et de tirer sur les obscrvateurs
qui s'en apprllchent, ~'i1s n'avaient rien It dissirntller
a ccux-ci?

24. My sixth and la3t question of this kind is drawn
from the later interim report which the Observation
Group submitted to the Council yesterday [5/40521The Grollp describes its various needs in men, equipment, alrcraft and helicopters to enable it to perform
the task assigned to it by tbe Council. This prompts
the following question: if t]Je Observation Grouf was
convinced thaL, as the Soviet Union representative
claims, there is no infiltration taking place. Why would
it ask for all tllese facilities which, as it says LtseIf. it
needs in order effectively ~o carry out its observation
nf the Lebanese frontier?

24.. Sixiememcnt - et ~'e5t la derniere question de
ce genre, tift~e du rapport intCrimaire soumis hier
au COJlseil p<lr le Groupe d'observation [Sj40S2} le Gronpc de~rit ses divers besoins en hommes, en
eq L.ipemcnt, en avions, en h6licoptCres, niln d'etr~ en
mesure d'accomplir:8 t:\che que lui n .1ssignee le ConsetL
On est donc conduit n poser la question suiyante : si
le Groupe d'ohservabon eta it convaincu, comme le
representant de 1'Union sovictique le pretend, de la
non-existence de I'inflltration, jlourqJoi demanderait-iJ
toutes ces facilites, qni, seIon ses propres termei>, lui
sor.t mkessaiJ'es pour m~ner it bien et etTcctivement
I'observation de la [rontiere Jibanaise1

25. That is the fIrst series of questions, based solely
on the information in the reports of the Observation
Group.

25. Telle est la premiere sene de questions, uni.q~emellt
fondees sur les informations contenucs dans ks rapports
du Groupe d'obserntion.

26.

I should now Jik~ t.o lmt three other QllestifHls
prompted by sheer common sen,e.

26. Je VOUd:alS rnailltcnant poser lrOls aulres questions, inspirees du slTnple bon sens.

27. In the 11rst placc, as is well known, the Lebanese
Government has recently been compelled to seek
further quantities of arms ~lnrl munitions from the
United States of America in order to resist the armed
attacks of the rebels. Could the representative of the
Soviet Union tell us, since he claims to know that
there is no illegal supply of arms to Lehanon. wllere
the rebels have obtained the large quantities of arms
and munitions which have enabled them to llOld their
own against the regular forces of the Lebanl3se Govern~
ment for more than two months? This question is all
the more perti:lCnt in that the arms possessed by the
rebels include heavy nrms which o:tly Governments
can supply and which the rebe},'" themselves have never
claimed to have captured fron the Lebanese armed
forces. Where do these heavy and light arms come
from?

27. En premier lieu, il est h:n eonnu qL:e le GouveJ'nement Jibanais a du, dernierement, demander de
nouvelles quanlites d'armes et de munitions .<lUX
Etats-UnLs d'Amerique pour pOUVOir resister :lUX
attaques armees des rebelles. Le representant de
l'Union sovietiqlle pourrait-il nollS dire, puisqu'i!
affirme savoir qu'il n'ya pas d'envoi illegal d'arOles
uu Liban, cl'au provit'nnent les grandes quantites
d'a.rmes et de munitions gr:ic~ ill1xql.lelles les rebelles
tienneni t.ete, dep:Iis plus de deux mois, aux forces
regulieres du Gouvernement libanaLs? C~tte question
se pose d'une fallon d'autant plus insistante que les
armes pos~~dees par 1es rcbelles comprennent des armes
lourdes que seuls des gouvel'llements penvent fournir
et que les rebelles eux-:nemes n'or.t jama.i.'l pretcndn
avoir capturees aux forces armee~ libanaises. D'oiI
proviennent donc ees armes, lourdes et l~geres?

28. In the second place, as is also well knaW.l, the
Lebanese Government has recently been compelled to
ask for financial assistance from the United States in
order to cover the rlericit in :its budget resulting from
its efforts to combat the rebellion. Could the Soviet
revescntative tell Its where the rebels have been able
to obtuin the enormous - and apparently inexhaustible
_ sums of money neces~ary to conduct a large-scale
rebellion which has lasted for more than two lTIOTlth~
without any sign of financial strain? How is it that
the Government, which has all the country's resources
at Us disposal, ilnc1s itself in need of money to cover a
detlcit caused by a rebellion, whereas the rebels, who
are not imagined to have SUell a budget at Ultoir disposal, have succeeded in conducting this rebellion
without, up to now, showing ~lllY signs of financial
strain?
.

28. En dCLlxieme lieu, il es': bien connu cgalement
que le Gouvernement :ibanais s'est \rU dans J'obligabon, rtcernmen1. de demander une a:de 1hwnciere
aL:X Etnts-Unis d'Amerique pour eombler le delicit
que la lutte contre la fljbellion u cause a son budget.
Le representant sovictirjue pourrait-iI nous illdiquer
d'OLI proviennent [es enormes sommes d'argcnt - apparernment incpuisables -~ necessaiIcs pour entretenir
llne fp_bellion de grande envergure, qui dure depuis
plus de deux mois. sans qu'il y ait pour autant de
signes de difficultes financiere,? Comment le gouvernement, qui dispOSE de ':outes les reSSOLrces du
pays, en arrive-t-iJ a avoir besoin cl'argent pour cOllvrir
le deficit cause par une r~bellion. :llors que les rcbelles.
qui ne sont ICllS censes dispvser d'Lm budget tel que celui
du gouvernement libanais, parvienaent a mener cette
rebellion sans donner, jusqu'a present, de s:gnes de
djfficultes fi:mncieres?

29. In the third place - and it is my last question how, if the Lebanese crisis is purely internal, are we
to explain the following statement made recently by
one of the leaders of the Leballese opposition, tIle
former Prime Minister, Mr. Hossein Oueini, to Mr. Jahia

29. En troisieme lieu - et c'est ma derniere question-comment eXpli([ller. dans l'Jtypothese que la crise
libanaise cst exclusivement interif.ure, la declaration
snivante, faite dernierernent par l'un des leaders de
l'oppu~jLion libanaisc. \f. HOBs~in Ol1ehi, ex-premier

7

ministre, it M. .fahia Mohammed Abdel Kadel', co\'respondant du journal soudanais Anba Alsolldun :
l( Nous
ne nious point que nous recevons une
assistance de la part de la Republique an.l.be unie
et que les armes nous arriyent constamment de
Syrie, On 11 diL que pillS de 25.000 Arabes lutl;eut
dans nos rangs. La veritc est que le nombre des
pcrsonucs qui se sont jointes a nom. de Syrie 1II,:
depasflC: pas quelques millic:rs d'hommes armes. JI
est normal qlle le Syriell vielllllO ou secours de sou
frere libanais c:ontre les despo!;es. "

Mohammed AM!'J Karler, corl'cspondent of the Sudanese
newspaper Anba fHsol.ldan:
.. Wc do not deny that we llrc receiving assistance
from the United Arab Hepublic and that arms reaell
liS constantly from Syria.
It has been said that
more than 25,000 Arabs have joined our ranlcs in
the struggle. In fact, Ollly some few tho usand armed
men have joined us from Syria. H is only to be
expected that Syrians should come to the Hid 01' their
Lebanese brothers in tllc figllt against the despots." ?
It' the Soviel Union representative cnnnot give
a convincing reply to these questions he must, as
we do, conclude that the rcal nnswer is thal there is n
massive intervention in Lebanon. This being so, il
is clear beyond any doubl that the Lebanese Government, the legitimate Government of the country, has
every right, in order to defend ilself against a massive
intervention in Lebanon's internal affairs, to ask the
United Nations to come to ils assistance to safeguard
iLs independence find, si.milarly, that it ha~ the right,
while awaiting such assistance, to seek the desired help
from friendly couutries.

30.

30.

Si le represcuLanL de I'URSS ne peu!; pas repolI~\'e

a ecg questions d'unc fa~on convaincante, il devr:l

liS

condnre avec nous que seule l'existence d'une inter~
vcntion lIJ<lss[ve au Liban permet d'y repondre adcquo_
tement. Dan" c~.s conditions, il app<lra[tra clairement
et suns UllCUlh~ equivoque que le Gouvernement du
Liban, gouvernement legitime du pays, pour se detcndre
conLre lInc intervention massive dans les aiJail'es
intcl'ieures du Libnn, a pleillement le droit de demundel'
11. I'Organisatioll des Nations Units de venir a son aide
pflur protcgcr l'independuncc du pays. cOlllrne 11 R
pleincment It' droit, dans l'attente de cette aid~., de
demander it des pays ami!; de lui fournir l'assistnnce
vOlllllC.

31. III these circumstances the only thing nol j\lslified
is tlle attempt o[ those who are trying to deprive Leba
nor. of its inhere.nt right of legitimate self-dcfente and
of the assistance necessary to safeguard its tlIreatened
indepeEdence. I should lil{~ to declare ~olemnly, at
the close of this debate, that the entire historical responsibility for the consequences this assistance may have
rests with those who, by their massive intervention in
Lebanon, have made it necessary and with those who,
by their obstructive methods, :l1'e trying to make it
impossible.

31. DollS ccs conditions, nOlls pCllsons que senlc est
injustifice la lenwtive de ceux qui cherchcnl a privCl'
le Liban dc son droit inherent de legitime dMensc et a
I'empecher de re~evoir l'assisLance requise paUl' s"uvegarder son independance mcnacce. .le tiens it le dcclal'er
solenneJleme.nt, it la {in du debat : toure r{'sponsabilit~
historique decoulant de ccUe assisLfll1ce doil etrc portee
et par ceux qui, par !ell!" intervention massive an LilJan,
ront rendue nece~saireJ cl por c~ux qui, pur kurs
moyclls d'ob$tructioll, chcl'chellt ilia rcndre impossihle.

Mr. LOUTFI (United Arab Republic) (lraJ1.~lalr.rl

sag<'. I received today from Cairo:
.. On 18 July, at 1.30 a.m., Lhe United States
Ambassodor in Cairo asked to see Mr, Ali Sobry,
the Acting Minister of Foreign Afioirs, who received
him ut 3 a.m. The Ambassador delivered a flote
oerbale, the contents of which were as follows:
" , The landing of United States forces is intended
to preserve the independence of Lebanon and Lo
protect American citizens.'
.. He also expressed the United States Government's intention to wilhdraw its forces AS soon as
circumstances permit:
" 'The troops have no lwstile inlentions. It was
necessary to come to the assistance of Lebanon
becHt.lse of the change of government in Iraq.
The United Amb Republic shoLlld realize that if
United States forces arc atlackcd by milil:f1ry units
of the United Arab Republic or by elemenLs Wllich
tlle United Slates knows to he under control of the
United Arab nepublic or ready to cnTry out ils
instructions, there will be a danger that the problem lllay be enlarged and assume major proportions.' "

::12. }I. l.OUTFI (Republique arnbc lI11ie) Je vais
[aire parl a'.l COllseil (['ulIe communic"tioil qne j'ni
re~ue <Ill Caire aujourd'hui :
!< Le 18 juillet, a 1 h. 30 du mnLin, I'Ambassadeul·
des Etats-Unis IIU eaire a deItlunde it voir M. Ali
Sabry, ministre des affaires Ctrangcres par interim,
qui l'a rc~n a. 3 heures du matin. I1 11Ii a communiqut
Line note vel'balc dout le contenn est le suivant :
If Le d6harquement de troupes des Etats-Unis
1l POlll" but de preserver l'indepenr:lallcc dll LibaJI
et dc proteger les ressortissants amcricains.»
a Il a fait part llltssi du desir du Gouvcrl1cment
d!'.'; Etats-Ul1is de rctirer ses troupes des que les
circonstances le permettront :
([ Les tronpes n'ont pas d'intentiolls hostiles. La
necessilk de procurer l'assistnnce [Ill l.iban elil
motivec pal' le changement de gO\lvcrnemcl1l en
Iral<. La Republiqnc ara.be llllie doH cmnprenJre
que si les forces des Etats-Uni~ sont atlaqm~e,
pnr dcs forces de la RcipubliqUl' arabe unie Oll de,
eh~ments que les Etuls-Ullis savcnt etre sous le
contn)le dc lfl Hcpubliqllc arabe unie ou que les
EtaL~-Ul1is savenL etre enclins a ex.ecllter ses
directives, il y aura danger que le probleme DC'
s'clargisse et nc prenne de gnmdes P~,?poltion~

33. This last part of the nole verbale is very serious.
It refers to elements known to be! under our control or

33. Cette derniCre parlie de la nole verbale est tres
grave. RUe parle d'cilements qui seraient sous nolre

R

32.

from Frenclt): I wish to inform the Council at a mes-

,

r

r
(

,

r
I

,
(

r
\

1

'I

Ir

r
[

1
{,

8

!

ready 'to carry out our instructions. We can understand
that the United States Government is not prepared to
sit back <~Jl(j allow its troops to bc attacked by the armed
forces of the United Arab Republic. What is imp ort.ant and ~criom; is 'that tIle United States wishes to be
the j ltdge of wLlich elements arc under our conLrol or
accept om instructions. In making such a decision,
the Ullit::d Slates will rely Oil the l.lllilatcral Lnfol'.nation
01 tltdr inLclHgencl' l':l'l'Vice. It did so when it. rlp.cidfd
to intervene ill Lebnnon, disc-ounting the mport of the
Ob"'r\-'Mion (Jnllljl.

('ontrOle ou qui seraient endins a ex~cllter nos directives.
Nous pouvons comprendre que le Gouvernement dC3
Etats·Unis n'est pas pret a accepter que ses troupes
~oient atttHJUeeS pflr Les forces armees de la Republique
<:-rabe unit. Mais ce qui est imporlant e~ grave, c'esl
que les Etats-Unis vculent etre I'arbitre pour trancher
qucls elements sont sous notre contrdle ou acceptcn~
nos directives, Us s'appuieror.t, pour prendre cett!"
<lecfsion, mr les informations IInilaterales de leurs
bureaux de l'cn~mignements. Ils l'ont deja fait pour
intervenir au Libatl, contrairement au rapport clu
Grol1pe (]'observatiol:.

~H,

As I IUlve 011 several uccasions explained to the
Council, thi" nutc gives us some idea of the real irrtetlUo;"!:; of the United Stntef; Gownuncnt ill regnrd to its
general policy in the Middle East, of which J spoke
at length yesterdny [831sf meelinrrJ. TrlC position taken
by the 'Jnited States, wiLh the backing 01 the United
Kingdom, is fraught with Illlllg~ro\lS conscql1entes. It
is a sinister augury of tlle dangers to rea cr. in this area.

34. Comme je l'ai expliquc au Conseil dija :) p]usi~lI!':;
"epl'i"es, cette note nous donne une idee des intentions
vl\ritahles du (;onvernr,lnent des Etats-Unb; en cc qui
coneerne sa politique dans]e ,Moyen-Orienl en gCIH~ral,
sur laquel1e je Ine suis ctendu hier [831 e seancel. Le
danger de ce'tte position des Etats-Unis, nppuyes par
le BoymHlH.'.. Uni, est tOllrd de. eOllseqlt~nces. Tl eonstituc
un sillistre presage des dangers que court la paix dans
cette partic du mondt'..

In tile rncanliull", according to pre5s report:! froUl
Boghdad, the situation in Iraq is completely st3bilized.
In The New York Times o~ todny, for cXJmple, there
arc the following headlines: .. CapiLal of Iraq back to
normal. Rebel regime is seen in fnll control. Banl(s
and shops resume business." 1 need not quote any
furUter. The arlicle contains a full explanation.
However. a radio brondcast lIlis morning reported tIlat
the King of Jordan is ~till talking about liiJerating lraq.
I need not point out that this attitude i~ a very dangerous one and jeopardize: pe!l,~e ill the ~ljddle East,
particularly in view or the fact that, as I said yesterday,
the Arab Union has ceased 1..0 exis~. When I drew
at~elltion to that fnd yesterday, I referred to a statement of the present Government of Iraq wltieh, as
you sec, is in control of the counlry and IHls flIready
been recognized by a number of StaLes.

3.5. Cependant, la situation en Iruk, confonnemel1t
aux informations de presse emanant de BLlgdad, s'es~
compJetcl1lent ~tabilisee. On lit par exemple, dans lc
New York Times d'alljoltrd'hui: j, La capitale de ]'Irak
est revenue a la vie normale. Le regime l'ebelle [larait
twoir la ~ituation plcinement en main. Lee; banques
et magas:ns rcpl'ennent Ienr activite )). Je n'ai pas
besoin de dOllner une plus longue citation. L'articlc
contient toutes \cs I.\xplieations vouLtes. Pourtant, rlans
les emissions de la radio, cc »latin, il a ete rapporte
que le roi de Jordanie parle loujours d~ la liberation
de I'Iral.. n esL superflu de sot:ligner que ceUe position
est tres dangereuse, qU'eUe r;orte attcintc d la pnix
au Moyen~Orient, d'autant plus que, comme je 1'8i
deja dit, J'Ullion urabe a cesse d'exister. En rapportn.nt
ee filit, IJier, j'ai n:entionne \llle declaratiOTi du gonvernemenl: nctue! de l'Irak, qui, comme VOll!; ll: vuycz,
dirige le ?ays et a :lej:i e'te m'onn:J par de nombreux

,''It}.

Etats,
Le representant UU LibUl! <l f<lit etat, flujourd'hui,
d'informaliolls que nOlls ne possedons pD.:;. Ou bien
il a pose des qnestions f111xque:Jes il " deja etc repOndll,
n n tire des conclusions qui, vraiment, n'avlliellt pa~
de premisses qui IT.e perml,~lent de repondre.

3£:. The representative of Lebanon spoke today of
information which we do not have, and put questions
which :le has already a.nswered, He drew eor.dusions
w:lich were not baHctl on rtny premisp.s whir.h would
enahle me to l'l~?ly.

36,

37, Wc at'e a small i>talc, we do not have an atomic
bomb, flnd nohorly h3S proved that we IIRve any
aggressive designs. fhe world bears wltness to our
peaceful intentions. Our policy is one of non~alignment.
Tt may not plca:-;e cv('.xyone, but we will continue to
pursue it in co-operation with the Cniterl NAtions and
in accorchlnee with the United Nations Charter, by
whtch wc abide. We have proved on sevClral occasions
tb.at we are always prepared to co-operate with the
United Nations ill settliug il!ternatbual problems and
preserving: world peace.

NOlls sommes un pctil: Etat, [pi n'f) l}«s de bombc
atomique et coni;re lequeJ L n'a He etabli Ullcunc
intentioll agressive. NOIlS prenons le monde. a tcmoin
de DOS intentjelns pacUiques. Nous aVOllS Hne poliliqUl~
de ~ non-ulignement.» Elle peut ne pas plaire fl tout
le monde. Mais nOllS continHerom a poursuivre crtic
politique, en cooperatlOll flvec I'Organi;;ation des Nations
Unies et conformement a la Charte des Nations Unics,
que nons respector.s, Nous flVDl1S a plLlsieurs reprise:>
pro live que nous cHons toujo,lrs prets it cooperer avec
l'Organisation pour resoudre les problemes illleI'ltationnux et preserver la paix mondiale.

38. Mr. LODGE (United States of 1\ mr.dea): At the
Council meeting held last night fS32nd meellny], the
represeJltative of Iraq raised a que~tion concerning the
withdrawal of United States forces fron:. Lebanon, in
the event that this was desired by the Government of

38. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) /lraduil de
l'anglais] : A la se:mce que le Gonscil a t!'.llue !licr suil"
[832e seance], le representant de l'rrak a pose une

37.

question touchant le retrait d~s troupes des Etats-Unis
dn Liban, au cas oft le Gotlvernement ]ibanais sOllhaj-

9

-

Lebanon. I wish to respond to this question now.
Our assurances on the question raised by the repre·
sentative of Ira.q have been categorically clear in my
previous statements on this point. The answer to
Mr. Abbas is definitely in the affirmative. Forces of
tIle United States now in Lebanon at the specific
requ~t of the lawfully constituted Government of
Lebanon would not remain if their withdrawal were
requested by that Government.

terait ce retrl:lit. Je tiens a repondre maintenant a cette
question. Dans mes precedentes declarations, j'ai donne
a cet egard des assurances formelles. Ma reponse a
M, Abbas est absolument affirmative. Les troupe:; des
Etats~Unis qui ont etl! envoyees au Liban, a la demande
expresse du gouvernement Iegalement constitue de cc
pays, n'y demeureraient pas si leur retrait Hait demancte
par ce gouvernement.

39. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): In his statement
yesterday, Mr. Abbas, who is occupying the place of
the Iraqi representative in the Council - and I should
say from the outset that he is occupying this place illegally, because the Iraqi Government has already recalled him and appointed another representative
instead of him - said the following;
"Both the representatives of the Soviet Union
and the United Arab Republic have made the contention that the Arab Union no longer exhts [...]
I maintain that no change has taken place and that
the Arab Union as a constitutional entity still
exists." 1 [832nd meeting, para. 21.1

39. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiqucs socialistet;.
sovietiques) [tmdl/if du russeJ Dans son intervention,
!It Abbas, qui occupe all Conseil la place du representant de l'lrak -- je dirai POtU commencer qll'i!
occupe cette place illegalemenl, car le Gouvernemenl
dc l'Irak l'a deja rappele et ~ designe n S<l place Ull
nouveau representant - a declare hier cc qui 511it :

'10. Thus, Mr. Abbas tells us, allegedly on behalf of
Iraq, that no change has taken place and that the federation of Iraq and Jordan still exists. But what is the
real state of aITairs?

40. Ainsi, M. Abbas, qui pretend parler all 110111 de
l'lralc, soutient qu'aucun changemenl ne s'est produil
et que la Federation imko-jordanienne continuC' d'exister. Qu'en ~t-il dans la realite?

41. The Government of Iraq has declared, and this
is known throughout the world, that it is leaving the
federation, or leaving the Arab Union. This declaration
has been published. In order that there should be no
doubts, I shall read it again. Tllis declaration reads
as follows:
"[The Union] under the old regime was not a
true federation with an aim of benefitting the people
of the two countries but had been proclaimed to
strengthen a corrupt monarchy and to destroy the
. unity of the Arabs.
.. Therefore the Iraqi republic announces its immediate withdrawal from the federation and considerloi
all decisions concluded under the federation null
and void, The republic considers itself not responsible for the fmancial and military obligations which
were incurred by Iraq as a rcsull of this federation."

41. Le Gouverncment irakien a declnrc
cL le
monde entier le sait -- qu'il se retirait de [a Federation,
qu'il se rctirait de l'Union arabe. Le texte de eettC'
declaration a ete publie, Pour qll'auculI dcute ne
subsiste a cet cgard, j'en donnerai lecture a nouveau.
Cette declaration est ainsi conl/ue ;
"Sou:,; I'ancien regime, I'Unioll Il'elalt pas une
federation veritable ayant pour objet de servir les
peuples des deux pay:;; elle fut proc1amcc en vue de
rafTermir la monarchie venale et de clctruire l'nniM
des Arabes.
" C'est pourqnoi la Republique irakienne annOl1ce
qu'elle se retire immediatement de la Federation et
qu'elle cOllsidere toutes le>; decisions prises par la
Federation comme nulles et non avenues. La Republique decline toule responsabilitc quant aux engagemenls d'ordre financier et militaire qui onl ete
assumes par l'lrak dans le cadre de celte federation. 11

42. 1 read this text in Rllssian, but it is a translation
of the English version of the declaration which is known
to the v,'ho!c world and was, in particular, published
yesterday in The New York Times.

42. J'ai donne lecture de ce texte en rnsse, mais il
s'agit d'une traduction, a partir de I'anglais, de cette
declaration, connue dans le monde entier, et qui a
llotamment ete publiee hier dans le New York Times.

43. Accordingly, Mr. Abbas' assertion that the Arab
Union still exists is not in conformity with the facts.
The Iraqi Government has announced Iraq's withdrawal and the federation therefore no longer exists.

43. Ainsi, l'affirmation de M. Abbas selon laquelle
I'Union arabe existe toujours ne correspond pas a la
realite des faits. Le Gouvernement irakien a annoncc
que 1'Irak se retirait de la Federation, et cette federation
n'existe donc plus,

44.. Why was it considered necessary to assert that
the Arab Union still exists? Wc should give some attention to the question, for in this Mr. Abbas is not alone.
His statement would not have had much significance
if it did not correspond to the position taken by the

4.1. Pourquoi donc a+on juge bOll d'alIirmer que
I'Union arabe continuait d'exister? C'est ce point qu'i!
convient d'elucider, et a cet egard M. Abbas n'agit
pas isolement. Son intervention n'aurait pas grande
importance si elle ne correspondait pas a la these des

l

The speaker read the text in English.

~ Les representants de l'Union

sovietiquc el de ]a
Republique arabe unie ant taus deux pl-etendn flue
l'Union arabe n'cxiste plus. [... j. J'alfJrme que rien
n'est change et que l'Union arabe existe tOlljOUl'S Cll
tant qu'cntite constitntiollnelle 1_" [832e grrmtc,
pal'. 27.1

1

10

Texl.e cite en anglais par ,'orateur.

(

J,

+
(

I,
f.

[

r.

l-f
r.

'I .
I
I

I~

~r

!,

,

f

'r
f

f'

I

>

,f
!

f

I'

t",
r

'r
!

force~ whicl1 are behind him. These forces are the United Slates - and the United Kingdom, which has sent
troops to Jordan. They also contend tha.t the Union
5bH exists. What is the need for this political fiction?
It is necesSflry lor a very simple reason. They wish
to bring order to the new Iraq, to restore the situation
which prevailed there before 14 July. In order to
restore thnt situation, it is of course necessary to have
a plausible pretext. The pretext is very simple. According to the reasoning of the Foreign Office and the
State Department, if the federation. exists, one part of
it can take :'\f'.tion Ag:;linst the other on the strength, so
to speak, of its domestic legislation. 11r. Ahbns, for
l'.xample, specifically stat~d that "no question of
aggression could arise between Jordan and Iraq" 2
1,832nd meeting, para. 28]. But if Iraq is not pint of
the fcdcrotion, if Iraq and Jordan fire ~ep~rat.f'. StJtes
and if Jordan attacks Iraq, how can the factor of
aggre5sion be evaded? It exists and it cannot be evaded.
Accordingly, the cootinuntkll of the fiction thal the
Arab Union still exists is required to justify the aggression that i:; being prepared against Irnq. The- Security
COlllleil should pay the most seriolls attention to this.

forces qui le soutiennent. ees forces, ce sont les £ta18Unis d'Amerique -- et le Royaume-Uni, qui a envoye
des troupes ell Jonlauie. Ces gou\·crnements afllrment
aussi que l'Union cxiste toUjOUIS. Pourquoi 3-'1-on
besoin de cette fiction politique? Pour une raison
tres simple. On veut mettre de l'ordre duns le nouvel
lrak, on veut y retablir l'ordre qui existait avant le
14 j l1illet. Pour ccla, il faut naturellement rccourir a
un bon pret.exte. Ce pretexte est fort simple. Si la
fe.deration existe, un clement de la federation peut agir
contre un autre elCrTJ~nt de la federation _ c'est ainsi
que )'on raisonne au Foreign Office et an Depart.ement
d'Etnl - en V?rtu de 10is internes, en quclque sorte.
M. Ahbas, pIU exemplc, a declare sans ambages qu' « il
ne peut etre qt~estion d'ngression entre la Jordanie et
l'Irak~. I> [832 e seance, par. 28.1 Mais si l'lrak ne fait
pas p<.\rtie de :a federation, si l'lrak et la Jordanie
constituent des Etats distinets et si la Jordanie attaque
l'Irnk, co:nment eJimincr la question de l'agression?
Cette question est n et elle ne peut ctre eseamot6e.
Donc:, si I'on continue d'admettre la fiction scion
laquc:lle l'Unjon nrabe cx.iste toujottrs, c'est pour
justiller l'agression qui se prepare contre l'lrak. Et le
Conseil de securit6 doit se preoccuper tres serieusement
de cette situation.

<15. The fact that such aggrpssion is heing prepared
is being openly proclaimed on the radio and in the
Press. I should like to ask the representative of Jordan
whether a message attributed to the Jordanian mdio
is true, This message reads as follows:
.. The Jordan raUlI> heard in JeruMlem :;aid todny
thaL the Jordanian Govemment will take action at
whatevcr cost necessary to liberate Iraq. It stressed
that King Hussein, as acting head of the JordanIraq Arab Uni,)n, is the only person with authority
t.o restore order in Iraq." t

45. Ni la radio ni la presse ne se genmt pour annoncer

The Iraqi people never gave King Hussein the authority La restore order in Iraq Hnd we kuow what the
restorntion of order in a COUlltry after a revolution
meam. The mcssage goes on to say:

"IInssein might have the Brilish troops cover
Jordanian bases while tIte Jordanian army moved
agdnst Lhe rebel fo;·ccs." 2

qu'une t.clle agression se prepare, Je vOlldrais demander
au reprcs:;ntant de la Jordanie si la communication
suivante, que l'on attribue a la radio jordanienne, est
exacte. Voici le texte de cettc declaration;
"D'apres une MclarAtinn faite aujourd'hui a la
radio jordanienne et entendue a Jerusalem, le Gouvernement jordanien prendra a tout prix des mesures
pout' liberer l'Irak. La radio jordanienne a souligne
que le roi Hussein. en tant que chef par interim de
l'Union arabc irnko-jorclanienne, eslla sellle pel'Snnne
habilitee a rdablir l'ordre en Iral{ 2. I)
Le peuple irakien n'a jamais donne au roi I-Iussein le
mandat de rcLablir J'ordre ell Irnk, et nous savClns ce
que signiJ1e le retablissement de l'anire clans un pays
apres une revolution. La communicaliuu poursuiL en
ees I:crlnfS :
« I-Iussein pourrait f[[:rc en sorte que les toupes
briLanniqucs protegent les bases de la Jordanie
penclflnt que l'armcc ,jQl'danienne attaCiuerait
les forces rebellef! ~. II

46. 1 draw tile Security Council's attention to these
racLs, in order to w:nll all persons interl:sLed in the
maintenance of peHep. t.hat Hggression is being prepared
againHt Iraq. If it is not being prepared, we should
be informed accordingly. If it is not. being prepared,
the dispatch o[ troops to t.he Iraqi frontier should cease.
If the aggression is not being planned, why are there
United IGIlgdolIl troops in Jordan? Why hav~ they
not Jleen sent back to t.heir bascs?

4.6.

47. The Soviet Union knows fro:n it<; own experience
.:Jnd its own history what pretexts arc used for mili
tary intcrfr.rence in the affairs of countries with a view
to restoring the status quo an/e. Within a year of the
Russian poplllar revolution of 1917, about a dozen dif-

47. L'Union sovietiquc sait par t'experience dc sa
propre Itistoire quels sont les prctextes utilises en vue
d'une ingerence armee dans les afIaires d'un pay& lors
des tent::.tives qui sont faHes pour y relablir L'ordrc
ancien. Quand, en 1917, le peuple russe a acwmpli

de la paix qu'une agression se prepare contre l'Jrak.
Et si cIle ne se prepare pas, qll'on nous le cJbe. Si dle
ne se pr~pare pas, qn'aD arrcte les envois de troll pes
vcrs les fronti~res de I' lrak. Si aueune agress:on ne
se prep8re, pourquoi les troupes britanniques se
trouvent-eIles en JOl'danie. Ponrquoi n'clIl-elles pas
He renvoyecs a leurs bases?

w

~

J'appelle l'attcntioll du Conseil de securite sur

ce~ fuits pour aviser tou~ cenx qui ont a cccur le maintien

~

The speaker rcad the text in English.

11

Texte cil~ en ur.glElis pHr j'OI'UL...,L]".

ferent governments purporting ~o reprcsenl th~ H.uss~an
people must have appeared in various place.s, Illcludlllg
the territory of Russia itself. At thal time, nearly
every great Power set up a government to its own
liking in some corner of Soviet Russi::l.
gove~nment
corresponding to the interests of the Unrted Klllgdo~
and the United States WrlS set up at Arcllallgel, III
northern Russia; a govcTl1lnent which met tile interes-t;s
of the United States and Japan was set up at Vladlvostok; there were govcrnments in other pIHc~s, too their name was legion - and they all enjoyed the
recognition of the Stalcs which had helped to seL thcm
up and to "restore order ", just as it is now ]JroposeJ
to restore order in Iraq. But history has also shown
how all thig ended. The intervention ag3jnst the
Soviet Union ended ill the complete defeat, nOL only
of atl these governments, but also of the armies of
fonrteen Powers which were sent to the Soviet Union
and which had to withdraw ignominiously, having been
routed by the workers and peasants of the Soviet
Union.

J:

lInc revolution, une ann cc s'etait a peille ceouIec qU'IIIlC
dizf\ine de gOllvernements pretendaient representcr le
peuple I1lsse en divers endroits, ainsi que sur le terl'itoire meme de la Rnssie, Il fant dire que prcsqU(l
toutes les grandes puissances ont cree a cettc CpOqLtc
des gouvernements a leur gout dans telle ou lellc
partie de la Hussic sovietique. Dans le nord de la
Hussie, a Arkhangelsk, on a institue un gonvernement
qui rcpondait aux intercls du Royaume-Uni et des
EtaLs-Ullis; on a forme a Vladivo:-;tok un gonvernemeut
qui rcpondait aux intef(~ts d\:s Etatfi-Unis et du Japon;
it y a \:u aussi des gOLLvernements dans d'anues regions
- Us s'appelaient legion ... _. et tOUli ant ete reCOllllUS
par les Etats qui avaient contribue tl. les instituer cL
qui aidaient a [{ retaiJlir l'ordre 1', de lti far;OIl dont 011
envit\ngc nctuellcment de mettre de l'ol'dre en Il'ak.
Mais I'histoirc a cgalement montrc comment loul celrt
s'est termine. J.':intervention contrc l'Union sovietiqlll'
a abouti f'.l l'echcc loUd de tous ees gouverncments rl
aussi a l'effondrement complet des armces que 14 pnissances avaicnt envoyees eu Unioll sovietiqne et gIll
ant dCl se retire1' honteusement, apres aveir essuye
une defflite de la part des onvricrs et cles paysans de
l'Uniol1 sovietique.

48. The Secnrity COlmei! should not allow hisLory lo
repeat itself in the case of tile countries of the Amb
East. ]f Iraq is lwxt in turn, the aggression which is
being prepared must be halted in time and tlJosr.
intending to commit it must be severely admonishell.

48. Le Con:-;eil de scclIrite ne doit pas toIerer que des.
exemples historiques de cette serte se reprocluisent
d.lTIs le cas des pays de l'Oricnt rtrabe. Si le tOllr de
l'Iralc est venu, il faut arreter a temps l'agressioll qui
se prepare, et reprimander scverement CClIX qui onl
I'intention de declencher cette agression.

49. Mr. Loutli has just informed the Council of a
lIew and very alarming fact. The note whiclL was sent
to tlle Government of the United Arab Repuhlic by the
United States concerning the landing of troops in
Lebanon should also serve as a warning Lo lite Seenrity
Council i1nd to all peaee~loving peoples, for it contains
1\ direct thrent of action agninst the United Arah
Republic. The pretext for such action would be determined by the United Statcs itself, which would also
find gronndil to jllSUfy sHch :tctiOll.

49. M. Loutfi vient de porter a la eonnfliss<llleC du
Conseil un nouveslI fait tres inquietanL. La nnLe que
les Etats~Ullb onl envoyee an Gouverncment de la
Hepublique arabe unie :tll snjet de l'envoi de troupe.,
au Liban doit, elle aL1ssi, mettre en garde le Conseil
de securite comme tOllS les penples paciOques, car
cctte note contient la menace non dcguisce cl'une
action contre la Rcpuolique nrabe unie. Le prctexte
devallt ~tre invoque pour cetle aetiol! st'rait fixe par
les Etats-Unis eux-memes, et cc seraicnL egalcll1enl
Dnx qui rechercheraient les motifs nccessflircs ]lom
j\Tstifier line teile action.

50. The Security Couucil canuot ignore such threats.
The correct course would be for the Council to take
decisive steps to avert the threat of a new war whieh
now exists in the Near and Middle Easl. The only
way of doing so is to secure the immcdjale withdrawal
of United States and United Kingdom troops from
Lebanon and Jordan. The Security Council hns before
it ;] dmft resolution which pursues that very objeclive.
In my view, the time has come for the Council to take
action along those lines and to request the Goverllmcnts of the United Stales and the United Kingdom
immediately to withdraw their troops, which are creat~
ing a serions threat to peace, not only in the Near and
Middle East, but throughout the world.

50. Le Conseil de sccurite ne 5aurait rester indifferenL
iJ. de semblables menaces. Le micllx serait que 1('
Conseil prenne dcs mesures cnergiqueil pour eCflrtCI"
la menace d'une 1I0uvelk guerre qui pese actllellemeul
sur le PJ'oche·Orien~ et le Moycn-Oricnt. Pour ccla,
In senle chose ~ faire est de retircr imlllcdintemenl.
les forces amel'iwines et britanniques du Liban et ilt'
Jordanie. Le Conseil de 56curite est snisi d'lIn projel
de resolution qui tend precisement iJ. cettc fin, et je
pense que le' temps est venn pOlir le Conscil d'agir
dalls ce sellS ct d'exiger des GouveTllcmenb des Etnl.<;Unis et du Royaume-Uni qu'ils retirent immcdiatcment
leurs troltpes, dont la prcsence cree UllC menace grave
pour In prtix, non sculement dans le Prochc-Ol'ienl
et le Moyen-Orient, mais allssi d[lns lp Illonde cntier.

] should now like lo say a few words aboul procedure. Mr. Lodge, the United States rcpresentntive,
said ycsterday [832nd meeting] that he wOllld request
prioriLy for the United States draft resolution. He did
not explain to us why that draft resolll bOil should be
given priority; no reasons were given for this. Rule 32
51.

51; Je vOlldrais dire mninlcnant queIques mats ::1\1
sUlet de la procedure. Hier [8320 ,w!rlflceJ, le rcpn!sent~nt des Etats-Unis, M. Lodge, a dit qu'il dcmallderalt la priorite pour le III'ojet de resolution dr.'i
Etats·Unis. 11 ne no us a pas expliqllc pOlU'quoi il
convenait d'accorder hi priorite a ce projet de resolution

12

r

I,

I

r
\
,

I,

r(

II,
1
I,,
I

l'

\.
I

I·
,

I,

I-

(
(

•

of the rules of procedure of tile Security Council lays
down a deilnitc procedure in thi~ connexion. T quote
the first part of that rule:
.. Principal molions and draft resolutions shall
have precedence in the order of their submission,"
The rules make no provision whatsoever for giving
prirwity to any resDlutiDlls. Accordingly, thcre i.~ !l0
gronnd for giving priority to the United Stat8s draft
(·esolu~i(}ll.

11 n'a invoque aucune raJ son a eel efJet, L'article 32.
du reglement interieur du Conseil de s~curite fixe ltn
ordro parfaitement clair dum des cas ne ce genre. ,le
cite le premier alinea :lc eel article;
If Les propositions principales et les
projets de
resolution Ollt priorite clans l'ardrc all Us sOnt
rresentes. »
11 n'existe, dans le reglemcnt interieur, ancune disposition pre.voyant que la priorite d)it etre dOllnee a
telle on ~e1le n:s,olnt:on, Pal' ~OlneqllCnt, il n'y ,~
a\lCUlle r,lisoll de dom~er la pl'ioritc au projet de reso-

ltltion r]PH EL!IJ:s-Unis.

52, J beLieve that the Security COl.:.neil, in votillg on
the draft resolutions, should adhl.'.re closely to the procedure established in the Council, a procedure, moreover,
Wl1ich was ~pprovcd unanimously and waR also supported by the United States. r therefore jmist that
the draft resolutions should be voted on b tll(~ order
in which they were submitted to the Security COlUlctl. In
that case, the Soviet draft resolution should hI; p·.!t to
the VD Le lirst.

52. Je pense que, lors du vote sur les projets de
resolution, le Conseil de secnrite doil: ·respeder fidelement la pmceaure qlli [l de ~tahlie all COllsel!, qui a
ete adoptc!~ a l'unanimite, et qui a donc aussi \"CI,ll
l'asscntimcnt des Etals-Unis. C'est pourquoi J'illsiste
pour que les projets de resolution ~oier.t mis aux voix
dans l'ordre ualls It:quel ils ont ctC prescntes au Conseil
de securite. En l'occurrenee, e'e5t le projet de rJsoluticll
de l'Unicn sovietiqnc qui doit etre mis aux voix d'abord.

53.

53,

Tile PRESIDENT ((rarlslated from Spanish): I

have no further speakers on my list. In accordance
with the rules of procedure, we should now proceed to
vote on the draft r~olutioJl5 before the Council. However, I believe that it would be undesirable to divide the
voting between two meetings and I shall, tllerefore, if
there are no objections, adjourn this meeting now and
reconvene the Cound this afternoon at 3.30 p,m.,
so that we can complete the voting at one metting.

Le PRESlDENT (traduit de I'espaunol) : Il n'y a
pal> d'autres oratcurs imerits, Le reglement voudmit
qae nous passions maintenant all vote sur les projels
d~ rb;olution dont le Conseil est saisi. Mais il ne me
semble pas souhaitable de repartir I~s votes entre deux
seances; c'est pourquoi je propose au Conseil, s'il n'y
voit pas d'inconvllnie.lll, de lever la sc,mce et de se
reunir cet apres-rr.idi a 15 h. ,30, afil] de procMer it
lOllS les \-'o~es en une s;eu)l' f(lis.

54. Mr. SOROLEV (Union of Soviet Socifllist Repub·
tics) (translated from Ru.~.lian): I have no objection to
your proposal to adjourn the meeting, but 1 should
like to ask a question to wlllch you might be able to
give :ne an answer.

1'1. SOBOLEV (Union des He}Jllbliqucs socialistGs
[iJ'adtlif du rm:sc] : Je ll'ui aucune objection
a formuler contre vatre propositiontendant iJ. suspendre
1::1 Reanc,p-. !vlais je voudrais po~er t:ne fJu~tion, it
laquelle vous pourrez peut-etre me repondre.

55, Yesterday, before the end of the meeliJlg, we
heard hints that new draft resolutions might be forthcoming. As the Soviet delegation has no information
about this, it does not want to be taken by surprise.
Wc do not wish to be forced to vote on a dra~t resolution immediately after its subnission. I should like
to ask the President if he knom whether any draft
resolutions nre being prepared, or whether at 3 o'clock
we shall have before us only the three drafts already
submitlcd,

55, Bier, aYal1t 1n fin de la sblnc.e, on nous a laissc
entendre que de nouvcaux projets de resohlt:on pOlll'raient Cire pl'esentes, La delegation sovictique n'm
est pas informee, et no us ne VOUrlriOIlS pas et1'e pris
a~l d~pO\1rV'.l. Nous ne VOUIOilS pas que I'on nous oblige
a voter sur Ull IJroj... t de resolution imme<tiatemcot
apres qu'il aura ete presente. Je voudrais sa voir, monsieur le Pn;~ident, si, a v()tr~ connaissancc, de :1OuveaL\X
projetf> de resolution sont en voie d'e.laboratiOll, ou
bien si nollS n~ scrOllS saisis a 15 heures qlte des trois
projets qui ont deja cte deposes.

56. The PRESIDENT (translated jrr.ml Spanish): So
far as I know, no new draft resolution has been submitted, hut T hHVP. been informed by the representative
of Japar. thal he is prep&ring a draft resolution which
cannot be submit!:ed until n vote has been taken on
the thmc draft resolutions r.QW Ldore the Council.

56. Le PRESIDENT (iraduil de /'CSPII.tlnol) . A ffin
connaissnnce, ancun 1l011VC3U projet de resolution n'u
lite pl'(;sente jusqu'ici. TOlltefois, le represcntflllt du
Japan m'a fait l;3voir qu'il pr6pnrait Ull projet c11;
resolution, mais ne pn1rl1lit en saisir le Conseil qu'apres
que les troi:; )1rojets de resolution aetuels ,mront etc

54.

S()vh~t1quel;)

mis aux voix.
57. Sir Pierson DIXON (l;nited Kingdom)~ It seems
to me a very sellGible idea, it I may say so, to visualize
adjo:lrning the n:eeting JlOW and not proceeding at
this mo:t:lent to the voting. However, I take it that
procedure would not p-xclude any further speeches
that the members of the Council might wish to make,
when we resume at 3.30. I, myself, migh'~ w:sh to say
a little mure, On that understanding, which I fcel
<:ertain will meet with his approval, I readily fall

Sir Pierson DIXON (T{()Y~llnle-Uni) {!raduii de
l'anglais] : L'idee de lever la seance maintenant et
Of'. n~ pas proceder inunediatement au vote me semble
tres raisonnable. Je pense que cette procedure laisS2ra
eependant aux. membres du Conseil qui le souhaiteraient la possiIJilit6 de prendre il nouveau la parole
lorsque nous no us reunirons de nOllVcau, a 15 h. 30.
11 se peut qw~, pOllr ma part, j'aie quelques mots :i
ajouter. Si V(]llS etes d'aecord sur ce point, eomme je
57.

13

iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiil'rl

in with the suggestion which the President has
made.

le peusc, JlJonsieur le President, j'accepte volonticrs
la suggestion que vous avez faite.

58. The PRESIDENT (IJ'W1Slaled from Spanish):
I agree willl the United Kingdom representative.

58, Le PRESIDENT (traduil de I'espagnol) : Jl~
suis d'accard avec le representant du Royaume-Uni.

I Call1lPOII the representative of the United States.

59. Je dOllne la parole all representant des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique,

60. Mr, LODGE (United States of America): Let me
say, first, that it is quite agreeable to me that we
adjourn until 3.30 p.m., as tile President suggests.

GO. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amcrique) /tradail de
l'an.glais] : le voudrais d'abore! dire qu'il me convicnt.
parfaitemcnt que ]Jous levions la seance jusqu'a 1511. 3D,
COJlU11e le President le propose.

61. Mr. Sobolev said that I had demanded priority for
the United States draft resolution - at le<lst that is
what I heard in the English interpretation of his
remarks. That is not quite correct. J, did not demand
priority. I made a motion for priority, which is done
regularly in the United Nations, as the records of the
Security Council will demonstrate. A member has a
right to make that motion; then it is up La thc members
of the Council to vote either for or against it.

D'autre par~, M. Sobolev u dit que j'avais c~igc
la priorite pour le projet de resolution des Etats-Unis
- c'est dll mains ee que j'ai compris en ecantant !'interpretation ell anglais de son intervention. Cl.' n'est pus
tout a fait cXllCt. lc n'ai pas rcclame la priorite. J'ai
prescnte une motion de priorite, sclon une procedure
qui, les proces-verbaux dll Conseil de securite I'attestelll.
est absolument courantc a l'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Tout membre a le droit de presenter une motion
de eette nature. Il appartient ellsuitc aux membres du
Conseil de securite de votcr pour ou contre.

62. I anJ not demanding anything, I am making a
motion. A motion for priority is not precluded by any
rules that I have ever heard of in any parliamentary
body. Our own rules in the Council are provisional
rules. They were adopted in that form, I believe,
when Mr. Sobolev wa~ Secretary of the Security Council,
jf I am not mistaken. So I am sure he appreciates that
fact. Underlying all these consideratioll~ is the fact
that the Security Councjl is the master of its own procedure. It can take anything it wants to and put
it ahead of anything else. That is an inherent basic
right of any parliamentary body.

G2. Je n'exige rien : je presente une motion. Je n'~ti
jamais entendu dire que le reglement intcrieur d'aucUll
organe pnrlementaire interdit les motions de prioritc.
Le l"llglement interieur du Couseil est provisoil'e. Il a
He adopte sous eette forme alors que M. Sobolev etait.
si je ne trompe, secretaire du Conseil de securite. Je
s'Llis done sOl' qu'i] sa it parfaitement queUe est In situation. Le fait essentiel, c'est que le ConseiI de seeurit6
est maitre de sa propre procedure. 11 pent decider
d'examiner en premier lieu toute question qu'il juge
bono C'est la un droit fonr.amcntal que posse-de tout
organe pllrlementaire.

The meeting J'Ose at 12.2/j p,m,

La seance est lcuce Ii 12 h. 25.

59,

61.

c
,
,

r',
I

'o{' •

,,

l-

t
.,

I

14
Printed in France

m..s. 0.35 i 2/6 stg. ; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or eqUivalent Jll other currencies)

Price:

12139- - Fcbrunry 1960-~ 1 ,67!i

~
