VI,

Reaolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(b) Implementation of United Nations resolutions
relating to the right of peoples under colonial and
foreign domination to self-determination;17
and expresses its thanks to their authors;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to give maximum publicity to the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
to give the widest possible publicity to the struggle
being waged by oppressed peoples for the realization
of their self-determination and national independence;
17. Decides to consider this item again at its thirtyfourth session on the basis of the reports that Governments, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations have been requested to submit concerning the strengthening of
assistance to colonial Territories and peoples under
foreign domination and control.
63rd plenary meeting
29 November 1978

33/25.

Enlargement of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1166 (XII) of 26 November 1957, in which it provided for the establishment
of an Executive Committee of the Programme of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as
well as its resolutions 1958 (XVIII) of 12 December
1963 and 2294 (XXII) of 11 December 1967, in
which it provided for subsequent increases in the
membership of the Executive Committee,
Bearing in mind the interest in the work of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the range of refugee problems confronting the Office,
Noting that the Executive Committee has at present
a membership of thirty-one States Members of the
United Nations or members of any of the specialized
agencies,
1. Decides to increase the membership of the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme by up to nine additional members;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at
its first regular session of 1979, to elect, in consultation
with the regional groups, up to nine additional members of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme from those States with a demonstrated interest in and devotion to the solution of
the refugee problem.
63rd plenary meeting
29 November 1978
33/26.

Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of
his Office 18 and having heard his statement,19
11 E/CN.4/Sub.2/405 (vols. I and II).
1 8 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/33/12) and Supplement No.
12A (A/33/12/Add.1).

139

Recalling its resolutions 32/67 and 32/70 of 8 December 1977 and noting the gravity of the problems
continuing to face the High Commissioner in his efforts
to assist refugees and displaced persons in many parts
of the world,
Reaffirming that the activities of the High Commissioner are eminently humanitarian in character and
that there is need to assist, on as wide a basis as
possible, his efforts to promote permanent solutions
through voluntary repatriation, local integration or
resettlement in other countries,
Commending Governments for the humanitarian
spirit in which they have received refugees and for
the generous manner in which they have contributed
to alleviating suffering,
Deploring the fact that refugees often face the threat
of refoulement, arbitrary detention and the denial of
asylum and noting that it is necessary to ensure their
basic human rights, protection and safety, inter alia,
through further accessions to and more effective implementation of international instruments, notably the
1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees20
and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of
Refugees, 21
Noting that the increased needs of the refugees and
displaced persons of concern to the Office require the
widening of financial and other support from Governments and the closest co-operation of United Nations
bodies and non-governmental organizations,
1. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff for the efficient
manner in which they continue to discharge their many
responsibilities in assisting refugees and displaced persons and takes note with appreciation of the report
of the High Commissioner, including the report of the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme on its twenty-ninth session; 18
2. Requests the High Commissioner to intensify his
efforts to assist refugees and displaced persons of concern to his Office, especially with a view to providing
urgent humanitarian assistance to the large and increasing numbers in need in Africa, Asia and Latin
America;
3. Further requests the High Commissioner to continue to promote permanent and speedy solutions, in
close co-operation with Governments, United Nations
bodies and non-governmental organizations;
4. Commends Governments that are actively encouraging voluntary repatriation or return as a solution
to the problems in their area and requests the High
Commissioner to render all possible assistance in such
situations in lending help in the rehabilitation of the
returnees;
5. Urges Governments to continue to co-operate
closely with the High Commissioner in efforts to
achieve the self-sufficiency and, where possible, the
integration of refugees in countries of asylum, and to
accept for resettlement, on the widest possible basis,
refugees from countries of first asylum;
6. Further urges Governments to continue to facilitate the work of the High Commissioner in the field
19 Ibid., Thirty-t~i~d Sessi?n, Third Committee, 43rd meeting,
paras. 1-13; and 1b1d., Third Committee, Sessional Fascicle,
corrigendum.
20 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545 p. 150.
21 Jbid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
'
