,ra'
W

I NA TIONS UNIES

UNITED NA TIONS

~~

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
FIFTEENTH YEAR

864

th MEETING: 31 MAY 1960
hne SEANCE: 31 MAl 1960

QUINZIEME ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SieURITB
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/8C4)
Adoption of the agenda . . . .

0

•

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

••

0

0

0

•••••

1

•

•

•

0

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

0

1

•

.0

•

•

Admission of new Members to the United Nations:
(~) Telegram dated 20 May 1960 frQ~ the Prime Minister of the
Republic of Togo addressed to the Secretary-General (S/4318);
(!!) Letter dated 21 May 1960 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/4320);
(~) Letter dated 24 May 1960 from the Permanent Representative
of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/4324) ..
0

••

0

••••••••••••••••

1

Date of election to fill a vacancy in the International Court of
Justice (S/4312) . . .
16
0

( 20 p. )

0

•

•

0

•

•

0

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

0

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

••

S/PV.864

TABLE DE8 MATIERE8

Pages

Ordre du jour provisoire (8/Agenda/864). • . . . . .
Adoption de l'ordre du jour

.

1

.

Admission de nouveaux Membres a. 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies:
~) T616gramme, en date du 20 mai 1960, adress6 au 8ecr6taire
g6n6ral par le Premier Ministre de la R6publique du Togo
(8/4318);
Q) Lettre, en date du 21 mai 1960, adress6e au Pr6sident du
Conseil de s6curit6 par le repr6sentant permanent de la
France aupr~s de l'Organisation des Nations Unies (8/4320);
~) Lettre, en date du 24 mai 1960, adress6e au Pr6sident du
Conseil de s6curit6 par le repr6sentant permanent de la
Tunisie aupr~s de I'Organisation des Nations Unies (8/4324) .
Date de 1'6lection destin6e a. pourvoir un si~ge cl la Cour internationale de Justice (8/4312) ..••••....•••...•.•••...

1
:)

ij

Sta
It
Re

1

h

No

l/

1.

16

2.

I
'J

I

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings of
the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.

,I

;~

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters
combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a
United Nations document.

3. ]

*

T

*

(

*

Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
comptes rendus des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des
supplements trimestriels awe: Documents officiels.
Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un
texte signifie qu'il s'a~it d'un document de l'Organisation.

rfJI

f

~)

(E)

(s)

EIGHT HUNDRED AND SIXTY -FOURTH MEETING
Held in New York, on Tuesday, 31 May 1960, at 3 p.m.
,I

HUIT CENT SOIXANTE-QUATRIEME SEANCE
Tenue d New York, le mardi 31 mai 1960, d 15 heures.

Present: The representatives of the following
States: Argentina, Ceylon, China, Ecuador, France,
Italy, Poland, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

President: sir Claude COREA (Ceylan).
Pr€lsents: Les repr€lsentants des Etats suivants:
Argentine, Ceylan, Chine, Equateur, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique, France, Italie, Pologne, Royaume-Uni
de Grande-Bretagne et dllrlande du Nord, Tunisie,
Union des Republiques socialistes sovilltiques.

Provisional agenda (5/ Agenda/864)

Ordre du jour provisoire (5/Agenda/864)

President: Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon).

i

,'I

f~

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Admission of new Members to the Uni' "'~
Nations:
(a) Telegram dated 20 May 1960 from the Prime
- Minister of the Republic of Togo addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/4318);
~) Letter dated 21 May 1960 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/4320);
(c) Letter dated 24 May 1960 from the Permanent
- Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/4324).
3. Date of election to fill a vacancy in the International
Court of Justice (S/4312).

3. Date de l'election destinee ~ pourvoir un si~ge h
la Cour internationale de Justice (S/4312).

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de I'ordre du jour

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Admission de nouveaux Membres ~ 1'Organisation
des Nations Unies:
~) Tlllegramme, en date du 20 mai 1960, adresse
au Secrlltaire gllneral par le Premier Ministre
de la Rllpublique du Togo (S/4318);
!?) Lettre, en date du 21 mai 1960, adressee au
President du Conseil de securite par le representant permanent de la France aupr~s de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies (S/4320);
g) Lettre, en date du 24 mai 1960, adressee au
President du Conseil de securite par le representant permanent de la Tunisie aupr~s de
1'Organisation des Nations Unies (S/4324).

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

The agenda was adopted.

Admission of new Members to the
United Mations

Admission de nou\,eaux Membres

ol'Organisation des Nations Unies
~) Telegramme, en date du 20 mai 1960, adresse au Secre.

(!!) Telegram dated 20 May 1960 from the Prime Minister of
the Republic of To go addressed to the Secretary-General
(5/4318);
O!) Letter dated 21 May 1960 from the Permanent Representative of France to the United NaHons addressed to the
President of the Security Council (5/4320);
(~) Letter dated 24 May 1960 from the Permanent Represent.
ative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (5/4324)

taire general par le Premier Ministre de la Republique
du Togo (5/4318);
p) Lettre, en date du 21 mai 1960, adressee au President
du Conseil de securite par le representant permanent de
la .France aupres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
(5/4320);
~) Lettre, en date du 24 mai 1960, adressee au President
du Conseil de securite par le representant permanent de
- Tunisie aupres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
(5/4324)

1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to point out that
the application of the Republic of Togo for admission
to membership in the United Nations [S/4318J was
addressed to the Secretary-General on 20 May 1960
by the Prime Minister of the Republic of Togo,
His Excellency Mr. Sylvanus Olympio.

1. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Lademande
d'admission ~ 1'Organisation des Nations Unies de
la Republique du Togo [S/4318J a ete adressee au
Secretaire general par Son Excellence M. Sylvanus
Olympio, premier ministre de la Republique du Togo,
le 20 mai 1960.

2. Following the procedure adopted by the Security
Council in similar cases during recent years, I should

2. Me conformant ~ la procedure suivie par le Conseil
de securite en des circonstances analogues au cours
1

like to suggest that the Council decide to consider
this application directly without first referring it for
e.'Cumination to the Committee on the Admission of
New Members, as provided in rule 59 of the
provisional rules of procedure. If there is no objection,
I shall t.'l.ke it that it is so agreed.

des derni~res annlls, je propose que le Conseil decide
d'examiner cette demande directement sans la
l'envoyer au Comitll d'admission de nouveaux
Membres, comme le dispose 1'article 59 de son
r~glement intllrieur provisoire. S'il n'y a pas d'objection, je considllrerai qu'il en est ainsi d€lcid€l.

n en est"ainsi decide.

It was so decided.
3. The PRESIDENT: In this connexion a draft
resolution has been submitted by France and Tunisia
[S/4322/Rev.2].

3. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de 1'anglais): Le Conseil
est saisi h ce sujet d'un projet de rllsolution presente
par la France et la Tunisie [S/4322/Rev.2].

4. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
In a telegram dated 20 May 1960, the Head of the
Togolese Government applied for the admission of
his country to our Organization. The French delegation immediately requested a meeting of the Security
Council to consider this request. A draft resolution
submitted by France and Tunisia is before the Council.
The French delegation hopes that it will be adopted
unanimously, thus expressing our satisfaction in
welcoming the Republic of Togo among us.

4. M. BERARD (France): Par t~legramme en date
du 20 mai 1960, le chef du Gouvernement togolais
a sollicite 1'admission de son pays au sein de notre
organisation. La delegation franQaise a demand€!
aussit8t la convocation du Conseil de securite pour
examiner cette requete. Un projet de resolution
franco-tunisien est depose devant le Conseil. La
d€llegation franQaise esp~re quIll sera vote h l'unanimit6 et que sera ainsi manifestee au Togo la
satisfaction que nous eprouvons h 1'accueillir parroi
nous.

5. Article 4 of the Charter of the United Nations
provides:

5. La Charte des Nations Unies pr6voit dans son
article 4:

"Membership in the United Nations is open to
all other peace-loving states which accept the
obligations contained in the present Charter and,
in the judgment of the Organization, are able and
willing to carry out these obligations."

"Peuvent devenir Membres des Nations Unies
tous autres Etats pacifiques qui acceptent les obligations de la Charte et, au jugement de 1'Organisation, sont capables de les remplir et dispos~s ~
le faire."

6. Forty years of close association with the Togolese
people and authorities have convinced my Government
that Togo fully deserves to take its place among the
United Nations and that it will play a useful part
in our Organization and make a welcome contribution
to the cause of peace, progress and international
co-operation. As the representative of France, the
former Administering Authority, I should like briefly
to explain the grounds on which this belief is based.

6. Quarante ans d'une association 6troite avec la
population et les autorites togolaises ont convaincu
le Gouvernement franQais que le Togo merite pleinement de prendre place parmi les Nations Unies et
qu'll apportera une participation utile h notre organisation, ainsi qu tune contribution bienvenue ~ la
cause de la paix, du progr~s et de la collaboration
internationale. Sans doute appartient-ll ~ la France,
puissance tutrice d'hier, d'exposer en quelques mots
au Conseilles faits qui justifient sa conviction.

7. The independence of Togo, which was proclaimed
on 27 April at Lomll, after consultation between the
Togolese and French authorities, W~5 the culminating
point of a gradual and succeiOsful process of
development that demonstrated the political maturity
of the Togolese people.

7. L'independance du Togo, proclamee le 27 avril
Lome, apr~s entente entre les autorites togolaises
et franQaises, est l'aboutissement d'une evolution
graduelle et heureuse qui a fourni la preuve de la
maturite politique du peuple togolais.

8. Immediately after the First World War, France
was made responsible for the administration of the
Territory of Togoland on behalf of the League of
Nations. France continued to hold that responsibility
in 1946 when the Mandates System was replaced by
the International Trusteeship System. The change
of name did not interfere with the work that had been
undertaken since the beginning of the Mandate. As
early as 1922 the first consultative institutions were
set up in Togo-the councils of notables, the economic
and financial council and the mixed communes whose
importance in the life of the country has steadily
increased. The Decrees of 6 January and 25 October
1946 set up a Representative Assembly responsible
for approving the budget. The creation of "conseils de
circonscription" in 1950 marked a new stage in the
democratization of local institutions. Representative
organs were thus established at all levels and the
political and administrative development of the
country advanced at a rapid pace.

8. Au lendemain de la premi~re guerre mondiale,
la France s'etait vu confier la missiond'administrer,
au nom de la Societe des Nations, le Territoire du
Togo. Elle a continu6 d'assumer la meme responsabilite lorsqu'au regime du mandat s'est substitue,
en 1946, celui de la tutelle. Ce changement d'6tiquette
n'a en rien trouble 1'oouvre entreprise d~s le debut
du mandat. D~s 1922, en effet, avaient ete creees
au Togo les premi~res institutions consultatives:
conseils de notables, conseilllconomique et financier,
communes mixtes qui, depuis lors, n' ont cessll
d'accroftre leur rale dans la vie du pays. Les decrets
des 6 janvier et 25 octobre 1946 ont lltabli une
Assembl6e repr6sentative charg6e de voter le budget.
En 1950, la crllation de conseils de circonscription
a marqull une nouvelle etape dans la voie de la
democratisation des institutions locales. Les organes
representatifs ayant ete ainsi mis en place ~ tous
les degres, 1'evolution politique et administrative du
, pays a pu se poursuivre ~ un rythme rapide.

se
A

14
ar
so

10
m
A
w

c
th
th
so
. thi
on
in
F
a
11

St

~

2

13.
To

.··1
~ . '.
.

.

9. A Council of Government was established by
the Act of 16 April 1955 and the Assembly was given
wider powers. On 24 August 1956 the Territory was
given internal self-government by a decree under
the "loi-cadre" of 23 June, and the Autonomous
Republic of Togo was officially proclaimed on
30 August. On 22 March 1957 another decree widened
the limits of self-government fixed the year before
and modified the division of powers between the
representative of the Administering Authority and
the Togolese Government. On 22 February 1958 the
powers reserved to the representative of France
were further reduced: all internal jurisdiction was
transferred to the Togolese authorities and France
retained responsibility only for external affairs,
defence and currency. The general election of April
1958 opened the way to independence. Following
French-Togolese negotiations, 27 April 1960 was
set as the date for independence after the General
Assembly of the United Nations had decided on
14 November 1958 to end the trusteeship. These
are the circumstances in which Togo became a
sovereign State.

9. Le 16 avril 1955, une loi instituait un Conseil de
gouvernement et lltendait les attributions de I 'Assambl(~e. Le 24 a.oilt 1956, un dllcret, pris en application
de la loi-cadre du 23 juin, accordait au Territoire
1'autonomie interne, et la Republique autonome du
Togo €!tait officiellement proclamee le 30 aodt. Le
22 mars 1957, un nouveau decret lllargissait encore
le cadre de I 'autonomie fix€! I 'annee precedente, en
modifiant le partage des competences entre le representant de 1'autorite administrative et le Gouvernement
togolais. Le 22 fevrier 1958, le domaine reserve ~
ce representant franc;ais etait encore reduit au profit
des autorites togolaises: 1'ensemble des competences
internes leur lltait transferll et la France ne conservait ses responsabilites qu'en mati~re de relations
exterieures, de dllfense et de monnaie. Les elections
g€!nerales d'avril 1958 ont ouvert la voie de l'ind€lpendance. Aux termes des negociations francotogolaises, la date en fut fixee au 27 avril1960,
apr~s que, je vous le rappelle, 1'Assembllle des
Nations Unies eut decidll, le 14 novembre 1958, de
mettre fin au rllgime de tutelle. Voilll les conditions
dans lesquelles le Togo est devenu aUjourd'hui \.\n
Etat souverain.

10. We cannot too much emphasize the climate of
mutual trust in which the ties between the
Administering Authority and the Trust Territory
were gradually relaxed while relations of friendly
co-operation were established between France and
the new independent State. Both in Paris and Lome
there was at all times a common determination to
solve in a friendly spirit the problems involved in
. this process of political development. The distinguished statesman Mr. Sylvanus Olympio declared
on 2 January 1960 that there had been no difficulty
in applying the statute of independence and that
French-Togolese friendship, which was the result of
a long association, was still firm and vigorous.

10. On ne saurait trop souligner l'atmosph~re de
confiance reciproque dans laquelle se sont progressivement delills les liens qui unissaient la puissance
tutrice et le Territoire sous tutelle, tandis que se
nouaient des relations d'amicale cooperation entre
la France et le nouvel Etat independant. n n'y eut
jamais, II Paris comme II Lome, qu'nne volonte
commune de resoudre, dans un climat d'amitie,
les probl~mes que posait cette evolution politique.
Le 2 janvier 1960, l'eminent homme d'Etat qu'est
M. Sylvanus Olympio a declare que 1iapplication
du statut de 1'indllpendance n'avait donne lieu II
aucune difficulte et que 1'amiti~ franco-togolaise,
nee d'une longue vie commune, demeurait solide et
vivante.

11. Togo now has all the attributes of a democratic
State. The Legislative Assembly, elected byuniversal
and direct adult suffrage, appoints the Prime Minister,
who is responsible to it. The powers of the legislature
and the judiciary are clearly separated. The judiciary
is independent and the administrative organization
has been modelled on that of the most advanced
countries of Western Europe. Local authorities have
wide administrative autonomy. The powers of the
lfconseils de circonscription" and municipal councils,
which are elected by the people of the area concerned, have recently been widened. The Togolese
Government, as Mr. Sylvanus Olympio recently said,
means to continue the decentralization and democratization of its institutions. The State which is
applying for membership in our Organization is
therefore fully democratic and responsible.

11. Le Togo dispose aujourd'hui de tous lea attributs
d'un Etat dllmocratique. L'Assemblee lllgislative,
lllue au suffrage universel et direct, designe le
Premier Ministre, qui est responsable devant elle.
Les cODi.plltences du pouvoir 16gislatif et du pouvoir
executif sont nettement sllparees. Le pouvoir judiciaire est autonome et I 'organisation administrative
a etll modellle sur celle des pays les plus evolues
d'Europe occidentale. Les collectivitlls locales beneficient d'une large autonomie de gestion. Les attributions des conseils de circonscription et des conseils
municipaux, elus par les populations locales, ont ete
recemment etendues. Le Gouvernement togolais, proclamait rllcemment M. Sylvanus Olympio, entend
poursuivre la d€lcentralisation et la democratisation
de ses institutions. C'est done un Etat pleinement
dllmocratique et responsable qui demande II faire
partie de notre organisation.

12. Over the last forty years the unity of Togo has
been firmly consolidated. The network of roads and
railways connecting aB parts of the Territory has
strengthened its cohesion. The peoples of Togo have
been drawn closely together by the application of
uniform institutions, the use of a common language,
a sense of belonging to a single State and a determination to build that State.

12. Au cours de ces 40 annlles, le Togo a fermement
scellll son unit€l. Le syst~me routier et ferroviaire
qui a €ltll lltabli entre tous les points du Territoire
a renforcll sa cohllsion. La pratique d'institutions uniformes, l'utilisation d'une langue commune, la
conscience et la volontll d 'appartenir II un mame
Etat ont etroitement rapprochllles diffllrents €ll€lments
de la population.

13. In economic matters, the joint efforts of the
Togolese leaders and the Mandatory Power over

13. Sur le plan llconomique, les efforts poursuivis
en commun durant pr~s d'un demi-si~cle par les
3

nearly half a century have laid a firm foundation
and placed the country in what is undoubtedly a
favourable position. As early as 1921 land tenure
arrangements were introduced with a view to
promoting the advancement of agriculture. Rational
methods of cultivation were taught by mutual benefit
societies and technical advisers, and loans in cash
and in kind were made to farmers. Maize, rice and
vegetables are now grown as well as the traditional
crops, manioc and yams. There are plantations of
coffee, cacao and cotton, as well as of coconuts
and oil-palms. The establishment of model farms
and measures to control disease have led to the
rapid development of stock farming. Especially since
1946, following the establishment of the Investment
Fund for Economic and Social Development, France
has striven to transform the Territories for which
it was responsible into modern countries, properly
equipped to use their natural resources. Under the
plan initiated in 1947, Togo's railway system has
been brought up to date, the road network has been
extended, harbour installations have been modernized
and a systematic survey of the COUl!try's natural
resources has been undertaken.

dirigeants togolais et la Puissance mandataire ont
assure au pays des fondements solides et une situation veritablement favorable. Dbs 1921 avait ete mis
en place un r~gime foncier destin~ A assurer 1'essor
de I 'agriculture. Des societes mutuelles, des agents
techniques diffusbrent les methodes rationnelles de
culture et des prets en argent et en nature furent
consentis aux cultivateurs. Aux vieilles cultures du
manioc et de 1'igname se sont jointes celles du mai~,
du nz, des l€lgumes; A 1'exploitation des cocotiers
et des palmiers A huile se sont ajout€les les plantations
de caf€l, de cacao et de coton. Gr~ce A des fermes
modbles et A la lutte contre les €lpid€lmies, 1'€llevage
a pris un rapide essor; specialement depuis 1946, h
la suite de la creation du Fonds d'investissement
pour le developpement economique et social, la France
s'est employee h transformer les territoires dont
elle avait la charge en pays modemes, dot~s d'un
6quipement appropri6 pour exploiter leurs ressources
naturelles. Dans le cadre du plan qui a d6bute en
1947, le Togo a vu sonmaterielferroviairerenouvel6,
son r~seau routier 6tendu, ses installations portuaires
modernis6es et un recensement syst6matiql1'3 de ses
ressources naturelles a ~t6 entrepris.

14. This transformation of the Togolese economy

14. Cette transformation de 1'6conomie togolaise a

required a considerable financial effort, to which
both the local authorities and the Administering
Authority contributed. In 1956, 1957, 1958 and 1959
France made a grant of 3,500 million francs to the
Togolese budget and 850 million francs were provided
for administrative equipment in 1958 and in 1959.
The Investment Fundfor Economic and Social Development provided Togo with 4,800 million francs for the
first development plan and 5,335 million for the
second, which was completed in 1959. Advances by
the Central Fund for Economic Co-operation to the
public sector total 1,000 million francs, in addition
to advances of 800 million to the private sector.
And only a few weeks ago, the Assistance and
Co-operation Fund, which has replaced the Investment
Fund for Economic and Social Development, granted
a credit of nearly 1,000 million francs to the Lom~
Government.

n~cessite

un effort financier considerable, auquel ont
contribu6 ll. la fois les autorit~s locales et l'Autorite
administrante. Au cours des annees 1956, 1957, 1958 et
1959, la France a consacr6 au budget togolais une subvention de 3 milliards et demi de francs, tandis que les
dotations pour 1'6quipement administratif atteignaient
850 millions en 1958 et en 1959. Les credits du Fonds
d'investissement pour le d~veloppement economique
et social se sont elevlls, pour le Togo, A 4 milliards
800 millions en ce qui coneerne le premier plan de
developpement et A 5 milliards 335 millions pour le
deuxibme qui s'est acheve en 1959. Les avances de
la Caisse centrale de cooperation economique se
montent h 1 milliard de francs pour le secteur public
et h 800 millions pour le secteur prive. Enfin, le
Fonds d'aide et de cooperation, qui a succede au
Fonds d'investissement pour le d6veloppement economique et social, a accord€l il y a quelqqes semaines
un credit de prbs de 1 milliard de francs au gouvernement de Lome.

15. The results of these efforts have been most
encouraging. Togo now exports coffee, cotton, oilseeds and cocoa to Europe and America. The balance
of trade last year showed a surplus of 500 million
francs CFA. The budget for 1960 is balanced: income
and expenditure are estimated at 2,800 millions
francs CFA. The country's economic and financial
stability seems to be assured. But it would be wrong
to imagine that that development of the State will
not require great efforts. When we welcome Togo
to membership in our Organization, we must be ready
to give it the assistance it needs. France, for its
part, has not spared its efforts and will continue
the policy it has followed in the past. There will be
even greater need for the many contributions Togo
has a right to expect, for the third plan, which is now
in progress, calls for an increase in cotton production,
the development of rice-growing in the northern
plains, the expansion of coconut plantations, more
intensive exploitation of the phosphates of Akoumap€l
and the modernization of the agricultural and industrial
infra-structure generally. The State which is joining

15. Les r€lsultats de ces efforts ont et6 particulibrement encourageants. Le Togo exporte aujourd'hui, en Europe et en Am€lrique, du caf€l, du coton,
des ol€lagineux, du cacao. Sa balance commerciale
s 'est sold€le, 1'ann€le dernn~re, par un exc€ldent de
500 millions de francs CFA. Le budget de 1960 est en
€lquilibre: 2 milliards 800 millions de francs CFA
sont pr€lvus pour les recettes et les depenses. La
stabilite €lconomique etfinanci~re paraft done assuree.
n serait vain cependant de se dissimuler que le dbveloppement de cet Etat exigera de multiples efforts.
En proclamant I'admission du Togo, nous devons etre
prets h lui apporter l'aide dontilabesoin. La France,
pour sa part, n'a pas menag6 ses efforts et continuera dans la voie que'elle s'esttracee. Lea multiples
contributions auxquelles le Togo est en droit de
s'attendre sont d'autant plus n€lcessaires que le
troisi~me plan actuellement mis en oouvre prevoit
un accroissement de la production cotonnibre, l'amenagement des rizibres dans les plaines du Nord,
1'extension des cocoteraies, une exploitation accrue
des phosphates d'Akoumap€l et, d'une manibre gEme-

1
s

~

"

I
I.

4

·,· .11'·.'

.2'>: :"'~i-~'."

mt

a-

the community of sovereign States is a State confident
of the future.

rale, la modernisation de 1'infrastructure agricole et
industrielle. C 'est un Etat confiant en l'avenir qui
entre dans la communaute des Etats souverains.

16. In social matters the picture is no less satisfactory. The country's health facilities have been
steadily developed. Hospitals with the most modern
equipment-in particular the Lome Hospital-dispensaries and leper hospitals have been built in the
main towns. Mobile health teams bring the benefits
of modern medicine to rural areas. Systematic action
has been taken to control epidemics: yellow fever
and sleeping-sickness have been virtually eliminated
and all medical care is free.

16. Le tableau n'est pas moins satisfaisant sur le
plan social. L'equipement sanitaire du pays a ete
activement pousse: des hopitaux, notamment celui de
Lome, dotes des installations les plus modernes, des
dispensaires, des leproseries ont ete construits dans
les principales agglomerations; des equipes sanitaires
mobiles apportent aux populations rurales le benefice
de la medecine moderne. La lutte contre les epidemies
a ete menee de mani~re systematique: la fi~vre
jaune et la maladie du sommeil ont pratiquement disparu dans ce pays ou tous les soins medicaux,
notons-le, sont gratuits.

17. Thanks to the work which has been done at
the same time in education, Togo already has trained
people for its administration. More than 500 educational establishments have been built. There are
three normal schools training primary school
teachers. The enrolment at the "lycee" at Lome,
and the "coll~ge" at Sokode and at private secondary
schools is increasing year by year. Scholarships
are awarded to young men and women to continue
their studies in French universities.' the number
granted last year having been 140. Finally, a national
school of administration has been founded, thus
providing for the training of future generations of
Togolese senior officials.

17. Gdce au travail accompli parall~lement dans le
domaine de 1'enseignement, le Togo dispose dej1l.
de cadres pour son administration. Plus de 500
etablissements d'enseignement ont ete construits.
Trois ecoles normales assurent la formation de
maitres de 1'enseignement primaire. Le lycee de
Lome, le coll~ge de Sokode et les etablissements
secondaires prives comptent, chaque annee, des
effectifs accrus. Des bourses, au nombre de 140
1'annee derni~re, sont accordees aux jeunes gens
et aux jeunes filIes qui poursuivent leurs etudes
dans les universites frangaises. Enfin, une ecole
nation~le d'administration a ete fondee etlaformation
des hauts fonctionnaires togolais se trouve ainsi
assuree pour les generations 1\ venir.

18. Togo is democratic, economically andfinancially
stable and rapidly developing socially and cultuJ:ally.
It is also a peaceful State. All those who know its
people and leaders know that their only desire is to
live in harmony with their neighbours and with all
States, near and far. All observers of good faith
agree that Togo threatens no one and tha~ it has no
ambition to expand. Its Prime Minister has repeatedly
voiced his Government's desire for peace. The facts
show that in this, as in other respects, Togo completely fulfils the conditions laid down in the Charter.

18. Democratique, economiquement et financi~re­
ment stable, en plein essor du point de vue social
et culturel, le Togo est enfin un Etat pacifique. Tous
ceux qui connaissent sa population et ses dirigeants.
savent que leur seul but est de vivre en harmonie
avec leurs voisins comme avec 1'ensemble des Etats
proches ou lointains. Tous les observateurs de
bonne foi s'accordent pour reconnaitre que le Togo
ne menace personne et qu'll ne nourrit aucune
velleite d'expansion exterieure. Son Premier Ministre
a exprime 1l. maintes reprises la volonte de paix de
son gouvernement. Les faits confirment qu'1l. cet
egard aussi le Togo remplit pleinement les conditions
prevues par la Charte.

19. In conclusion may I pay tribute to that enlightened
and wise statesman, Mr. Sylvanus Olympio, who now
guides the destinies of his country and whose position
at the head of this State is further guarantee of the
valuable contribution it will make to our Organization.

19. Qu'il me soit permis, en terminant, de rendre
hommage 1l. 1'homme d'Etat si eclaire, si sage, qui,
en la personne de M. Sylvanus Olympio, preside
actuellement aux destinees du pays et dont la presence 1l. la tete de cet Etat est un nouveau gage du
role heureux que celui-ci jouera dans notre organisatiun.

20. I feel sure that my colleagues at this table will
not disappoint the hope of the Togolese people and
its Government, and will recommend to the General
Assembly, by a unanimous vote of the Council, that
Togo be admitted to membership in our Organization.

20. Je suis convaincu que nos coll~gues presents
autour de cette table ne voudront pas dllcevoir 1'espoir
que nourrit la population togolaise aussi bien que son
gouvernement de voir recommandee 11. l'Assemblee
generale, par un vote unanime du Conseil de securite,
1'admission du Togo dans notre organisation.

21. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French):
A few weeks aro, the members of the Trusteeship
Council, in disc tssing the accession to independence
of the former Trust Territory of Togoland, expressed
their gratification at the emergence of a new African
State and at the honourable manner in which the
Administering Authority has discharged its obligations, and expressed the hope that this new State
Would become a Member of the United Nations.

21. M. SLIM (Tunisie): n y a quelques semaines,
les membres du Conseil de tutelle, discutant de
1'accession 1l. 1'independance du Territoire anterieurement sous tutelle du Togo, ont exprime leur
joie de voir naitre un nouvel Etat africain, et leur
satisfaction pour la faQon honorable avec laquelle
l'Autorite administrante a su s'acquitter de ses
obligations et leur espoir que ce nouvel Etat vienne
renforcer les rangs des Nations Unies.

lis

or

Its

de

Int

du

:s,

rs

ns

es
ge
11.

nt

(le

,nt

lln

es

en
~,

es

es

a

,nt

te

et
b-

es
nt

ds
lle
ds
:le

le

de
se

ie
le
iU
0-

BS

r-

r-

n,
le
:le

Bn
~A

~a

'e.

bls.
re

,e,

:ies
de
le
>it

ad,

lle

a-

5

22. n nous appartient aujourd'hui d'examiner la
demande de la R€lpublique du Togo en vue d'~tre
admise comme Etat Membre de 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies.
23. L'histoire r€lcente duo Togo nous est famili~re
~ tous. Le Conseil de tutelle et la Quatri~me Commission de 1'Assembl€le g€ln€lrale ont eu ~ en ~on­
naitre et surtout ~ connaitre de 1'€lvolution de ce
pays presque r€lguli~rement depuis 1946.

22. We now have before us the application of the
Republic of Togo for admission to membership in
the United Nations.
23. The recent history of Togoland is familiar to
all of us. The Trusteeship Council and the Fourth
Committee of the General Assembly have had occasion
to become familiar with it and, particularly, to deal
with the progressive development of this country
almost regularly since 1946.
24. The representative of France has eloquently
summarized the various stages of Togoland's progressive development towards independence. I might
presume to draw a few useful conclusions from that
summary.

24. Le repr€lsentant de la France vient de tracer un
tableau €lloquent des diff€lrentes €ltapes qui ont marqu€l 1'€lvolution du Togo vers 1'ind€lpendance. n me
reviendra peut-~tre d'en tirer quelques conclusions
utiles.

25. Togoland was placed under French mandate by
the League of Nations and continued to be administered
by France after the establishment of the United
Nations under the terms of a Trusteeship Agreement
approved by the General Assembly on 13 December

25. Territoire plac€l sous mandat de la France du
temps de la Soci€lt€l des Nations, le Togo a continue
d'~tre administr€l par ce pays apr~s la creation des
Nations Unies, en vertu d'un accord de tutelle approuv€l
par 1'Assembl€le g€lnllrale le 13 d€lcembre 1946.

1946.

26. L'Autoritll administrante n'a pas cherch~ ~
denier ~ notre organisation le droit de tutelle sur
le Togo, et encore moins le droit d'avoir ~ connaltre
de son €lvolution dans tous les domaines, conformement au paragraphe B de l'Article 76 de la Charte.
n nous est agreable de rendre hommage ~ la France
pour le respect que, dans le cas du Togo, elle a
temoigne ~ 1'€lgard de ses obligations vis-~-vis de
la Charte.
27. Et crest ainsi que le peuple togolais, accomplissant normalement son evolution natureUe vers le
plein epanouissement de sa personnalite propre et
de sa souverainete, accllde aUjourd'hui ~ l'independance politique, dans le calme, la quietude, et
1'amitie sincllre avec 1'ancienne Autorite administrante. Comme cet exemple merite d'~tre medite!
Rien ne sert de s'opposer ~ l'evolution naturelle
des peuples vers la dignit€l, la liberte et 1'independance. La Charte a prevu, parmi d'autres choseg,
le moyen le mieux approprie et le plus pacifique qui
permette une cooperation saine entre les Nations
Unies et les autorit€ls administrantes d'anciens territoires sous mandat. n serait heureux que, dans
1'intedt de la bonne harmonie entre peuples et
nations, ces principelS soient respectes et que 1'on
cesse de s'opposer ~ leur application, s'agissant de
territoires anciennement sous mandat.

26. The Administering Authority did not seek to
deny the United Nations the right of trusteeship over
Togoland or the right to be informed of its advancement in all fields, in accordance with Article 76 b
of the Charter. It is our pleasant task to pay a tribute
to France for the respect it has shown, in the case
of Togolarid, for its obligatiotls under the Charter.

27. Thus, the people of Togoland, having progressed
in the normal way towards the full development of
their own personality and sovereignty, are now
attaining political independence calmly, without disturbance, and in genuine friendship with the former
Administering Authority. It is an example well worth
pondering! Nothing can be gained by opposing the
natural advancement of peoples towards dignity,
freedom and independence. The Charter has provided,
among other things, the most appropriate and peaceful
means of achieving proper co-operation between the
United Nations and the Administering Authorities
of former mandated territories. It would be a good
thing if, in the interest of harmonious relations
between peoples and nations, those principles were
respected and the opposition to applying them to
former mandated territories was ended.
28. Universal respectfor the international obligations
deriving from the Charter is the sole guarantee of
the maintenance of international peace and security.
This, as we see it, is the first important concept
which we have to ponder in connexion with Togoland's
attainment of independence.
29. In Togoland, the internal situation has at times
showed improvement and at other times deterioration,
but it may be said with certainty that, on the whole,
the development has been harmonious primarily
because the Administering Authority respected the
unanimous will of the people.
30. At the risk of prolonging the debate, I feel that
it is essential to draw a second valuable conclusion
from the Togoland experiment, namely, that the
General Assembly was well-advised in recommending
that legislative elections should be held in Togoland

28. Le respect, par tous, des obligations internationales d€lcoulant de la Charte est la seule garantie
du maintien de la paix et de la s€lcuritll internationales. C'est l~, ~ notre avis, la premillre r€lflexion
importante que 1'accession du Togo ~ 1'independance
ofire ~ notre meditation.
29. Au Togo, la situation intllrieure a llvolu6 tantat
vers le mieux, tantSt vera le pire; mais on peut dire
avec certitude que, dans 1'ensemble, 1'€lvolution a llta
harmonieuse, gr~ce notamment au respect, par l'Autorit€l administrante, de la volont€l unanime du peuple
togolaia.
30. Je ne voudrais pas allonger ici le dllbat; mais n
me semble essentiel aussi que 1'on tire la deuxillme
conclusion utile de cette experience togolaise. n
s 'aID-t, en effet, de la decision heureuse prise par
l'Assemblee generale de faire procMer au Togo ~
6

r la
etre
des
i~re

om-

DOn-

e ce

run

larme
:ons

du
tnue
des
luve

l

3 ~
sur

nre

ne-

rte.
.nce

Le a

de

lisle
l et

de-

, et
dsite!
elle
en,eB,
qui

ons
erans
et
.'on
. de

na-

ltie

Ila-

ion

Ilce

tUlt

ire
ete
topIe

III
me

under United Nations supervision. I do not want to
e..xaggerate, but I will say that United Nations supervision of the electoral operations can be regarded
as a major factor in the success and the smoothness
of the Togoland experiment. Most members of this
Council undoubtedly recall the statement made by
the Prime Minister of the Republic of Togo,
Mr. Sylvanus Olympio, to the Fourth Committee
at the thirteenth session of the General Assembly
concerning the elections in his country and on the
role played by the United Nations in ensuring their
genuineness and reliability.!J

des elections legislatives, sous le controle de notre
organisation. Je ne veux rien exagerer; mais je puis
dire que le contrClle, par notre organisation, des
operations electorales a eta pour beaucoup dans le
succ~s pacifique et serein de 1'experience togolaise.
La plupart des membres de notre conseil se rappellent, sans doute, la declaration faite devant la
Quatri~me Commission, lors de la treizi~me session
de l'Assemblee g{merale, par le Premier Ministre
de la Republique du Togo, M. Sylvanus Olympio, au
sUjet des elections dans son pays et du role joue
par notre organisation pour leur sinc~re et veridique
deroulementll.

31. It is because those elections decisively changed
and improved the relationship between the Administering Authority and the Togolese people that I
venture to lay stress upon them, hoping that from
this example the United Nations will draw the conclusion that it would be to the benefit of all mankind
if this course was followed wherever a similar
problem arose in the not yet fully sovereign continent
of Africa. This example shows the hollowness of
the claim that truly free and honest elections can
be held under an administration still imbued with
certain colonial practices.

31. C'est parce que ces elections ont joue un rl)le
determinant dans la reconversion et 1'assainissement
des rapports entre l'Autorite administrante et le
peuple togolais que je me permets d'en parler avec
insistance, esp€Jrant que notre organisation saura
mediter cet exemple que 1'humanit6 enti~re gagnerait
~ voir suivre partout oh se pose un probl~me semblable dans cette Afrique qui n'est pas encore absolument souveraine. Cet exemple demontre 1'inanite
de pr€ltendre avoir des elections vraiment libres
et sinc~res sous une administration encore imbue
de certaines pratiques coloniales.

32. These are the two observations which I feel
are called for in considering the example of Togoland.

32. Ce sont l~ les deux observations que je crois
devoir faire en meditant sur 1'exemple du Togo.

33. The Republic of Togo has at last entered the
great family of independent and sovereign States,
and thus its bonds of friendship and constructive
co-operation with the former Administering Authority,
as well as with all other States, are being strengthened in an atmosphere of equality, dignity and mutual
advantage.
.

33. Mais la Republique du Togo est enfin entr€le dans
la grande famille des Etats independants et souverains.
Les liens d'amiti€l et de saine cooperation avec
1'anclen pays administrant, et avec toutes les autres
nations, se consolident ainsi dans 1'egalite, la dignite
et le respect des interets reciproques.

34. May we be permitted to express our joy at
seeing a new African country come to join the
international community. My delegation, 'which has
had the honour of being asked by Mr. Sylvanus
Olympio, the Prime Minister of Togo, to support
in the Council the application of Togo for admission
to membership in the United Nations, has a number
of reasons to believe that the new African republic
will make a serious and peaceful contribution to
the work of our Organization. The existing relations
between the Tunisian Government and the Togolese
Government confirm us in 'J'.r.&. h~1ief.

34. Qu'il nous soit permis d'exprimer la joie que
nous eprouvons de voir un nouveau pays africain
naftre ll. la vie internationale. Ma delegation, qui a
eu l'honneur d'etre chargee par le Premier Ministre
togolais, M. Sylvanus Olympio, de soutenir, au sein.
de ce conseil, la demande d'admission du Togo comma
Etat Membre de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies,
a plus d'une raison de croire que la nouvelle Republique africaine apportera une contribution serieuse
et paisible aux travaux de notre organisation. Lel!l
rapports qu'entretient actuellement le Gouvernement
tunisien avec le Gtluvernement togolais nous fondent
~ le croire•

35. At this time when a new African State is about
to join the ranks of our Organization, may I also
be permitted to address a solemn appeal to those
States which still exercise authority over certain
territories in Africa to exhibit realism and to respect
the will of the peoples for whom they are responsible,
so that the great endeavour of peace and of decolonization, which constitutes for Africa the outstanding
phenomenon of the second half of the twentieth century,
may be characterized by harmony and peace.

35. Qu1 il me soit permis aussi, au moment oil. un
nouvel Etat africain vient renforcer les rangs de
notre organisation, d'adresser un appel solennel aux
Etats qui ont encore des territoires sous leur autorite
en Afrique pour qu'lls fassent preuve de r6alisme,
quIlls respectent la volont6 des peuples dont ils ont
la charge, et pour qu.;J s'accomplisse, dansPharmonie
et la paix, la grande entreprise d'amiti6 et de
d6colonisation qui constitue pour le continent africain
le phenom~ne essentiel de la deuxi~me partie du
~me si~cl~

36. May I once again congratulate the people and
the Government of Togo on the independence which
represents the culmination of their efforts, and
the French Government on having successfully led
them to that goal.

36. Qu'il me I!loit permis, enfin, de renouveler mes
f6licitations au peuple et au gouvernement du Togo
pour 1'independance qui vient couronner leurs efforts,
ainsi qu'au Gouvernement franc;ais pour les avoir
conduits avec succ~s h 1'ind6pendance.

lJ Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirteenth Session.
Fourth Committee. 782nd meeting.

11 Documents officiels de l'AssembUie g~n~rale, treizil!me session,
Quatril!me Commission, 782l!me s~nce.

n

lar

) ~

7

37. I hope that the Council will unanimously adopt
the draft resolution which my delegation, together
with the French delegation, has the honQur to submit
[S!4322!Rev.2].

37. J'espbre que le Conseil adoptera ll. 1'unanimite
le projet de resolution que notre delegation a 1'holUleur
de presenter conjointement avec la delegation franQaise [S!4322!Rev.2].

38. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): The
United States welcomes this meeting of the Security
Council, because it gives us the opportunity to
demonstrate in a tangible way our pleasure over the
achievements of the Government and the people of
Togo.
39. After forty-two years of international status
under the League of Nations as well as under the
United Nations, the people of Togo reached the
fulfilment of their inherent right to govern themselves
on 27 April 1960, when the independence of Togo
was proclaimed. A United States delegation, headed
by our Attorney-General, Mr. William Rogers, had
the honour of participating in the ceremonies marking
this memorable occasion.

38. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [traduit de
l'anglais]: La d~legation des Etats-Unis se felicite
de pouvoir aujourd'hui temoigner de faQon concrMe
de la satisfaction que lui apportent les succbs obtenus
par le gouvernement et le peuple togolais.
39. Aprbs 42 ans d'un regime international, sous les
auspices de la Societ€) des Nations, puis de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies, le peuple togolais est
parvenu au plein exercice de son droit inherent ll. se
gouverner lui-meme le 27 avril 1960, jour oil. a ete
proclamee 1'independance du Togo. Une delegation
des Etats-Unis, ayant ll. sa tete M. William Rogers,
attorney general, a eu 1'holUleur de participer aux
ceremonies qui ont marque cet ev€mement memorable.

40. Togo is the smallest of the African territories
to achieve independence thus far. But while Togo
might be small in comparison to the vastness of
the African continent, it is interesting to note that
there are twenty-one independent States whose area
is less than that of Togo and fifteen which are smaller
in pOj,Julation.

40. Le Togo est le plus petit des territoires africains qui aient jusqu'ici atteint leur independance.
Mais, si le Togo semble petit dans 1'immense continent africain, il est interessant de noter que 21
Etats independants ont une superficte moindre que
le Togo et 15 une population moins nombreuse.

41. The United States has from the beginning taken
a keen interest in the work of the International
Trusteeship'System, and we are naturally proud of
the part it has played in the political development of
Togo. We are also happy to acknowledge the success
of the Government of France in carrying out its
responsibilities under the Trusteeship System.

41. Les Etats-Unis ont d~s 1'origlne porte 'Un vii
interet ll. 1'oouvre accomplie par 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies dans le cadre du regime international
de tutelle et nous sommes fiers, ll. juste titre, du
role que 1'Organisation a joue dans le developpement
politique du Togo. Nous sommes egalement heureux
de rendre hommage au Gouvernement franQais pour
la faQon dont il a su mener h bien les t~ches qui
lui incombaient en vertu du regime de tutelle.

42. The United States has no doubt that the voice
of Togo should and will be heard with respect and
attention at the United Nations. Its people have a
reputation for hard work. The Prime Minister of
Togo, Mr. Sylvanus Olympio, whom it has been my
good fortune to meet on several occasions, has for
many years participated in the work of the United
Nations and is for good reason held in great esteem
here. The United States takes particular pleasure
in conveying congratulations to him and in sending
sincere best wishes to the Government and the people
ofTogo.

42. Les Etats-Unis ne doutent pas que la voix du
Togo sera ecoutee ll. 1'Organisation des Nations Unies
avec la deference et l'attention qu'elle merite. Le
peuple du Togo est COlUlU pour son ardeur au travail,
et M. Sylvanus Olympio, que j'ai eu le grand plaisir
de rencontrer h plusieurs reprises, participe depuis
bien des annees aux travaux de 1'Organisation. oil.
il est, h juste titre, tenu en grande estime. Les
Etats-Urrls sont particuli~rement heureux de lui
exprimer leurs felicitations et d'adresser leursvceux
les plus sincbres au gouvernement et au peuple
togolais.

43. The United States will vote in favour of the
resolution submitted by France 8,nd Tunisia, which
recommends the admission of Togo to membership
in the United Nations.

43. Ma delegation votera en faveur du projet de resolution presente par la France et la Tunisie, qui
recommande que le Togo soit admis ll. 1'Organisation
des Nations Unies.

44. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): We have
met at the request of France and Tunisia to consider
the application of the Republic of Togo for admission
to membership in the United Nations. France and
Tunisia jointly, and felicitously, have also sponsored
the draft resolution before us, which recommends
the admission of this newest of states.

44. Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de
l'anglais]: Nous noUB sommes reunis sur 1'initiative
de la France et de la Tunisie pour examiner la demande d'admission de la Republique du Togo comme
Membr& de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. La
France et la Tunisie ont aussi. de faQon fort heureuse.
presente le projet de resolution dont le Conseil est
saisi et qui recommande 1'admission de ce tout
nouvel Etal.

45. I should like to say at once that my Government
is confident that the Republic of Togo is well qualified
to join the United Nations. We are happy to support
the draft resolution and look forward to welcoming

45. Je tiens tout de suite h dire que mon gouvernement est convaincu que la Republique du Togo est
pleinement qualifiee pour entrer ll. 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies. Nous sommes heureux d'appuyer le
8

the R
comin
46. '1'
memb
theG
capabl
Chart
we sh
of To
reflec
in the
into t
to thi
the as
of the
the U
indivi
of sta
to way
and th
ticular
the Re
which
extent
Organi
shortl)'
47. '1'
is the
develo
the U
watch.
Africa
GoverD
alrea
people
Olymp'
Sir A
Majes
on 27
48. W

to Fra
the '1'
the ca
ofTog
of Tog
napons
marks
as an
to the
admira
in whi
Membe
Territ
49. It
consid
Africa
during
second
applica
itself a
there.
forwar
yet an

~--_-

"
L
'

'

-'C- - . -

the Republic of Togo as a fellow Member at the
coming' fifteenth session of the GEmeral Assembly.

projet ie resolution et nous nous felicitons de pouvoir
bientl . ll. la quinzi~me session de 1'Assemblee generale, llccueillir la Republique du Togo panni nous.

46. The unanimity with which, I am confident, the
members'of the Security Council will decide to advise
the General Assembly that we have found this applicant
capable of shouldering the responsibilities of the
Charter, and the unanimity with which, I am confident,
we shall recommend the admission of the Republic
of Togo to membership in the United Nations, will
reflect the good will and good wishes generally felt
in the international community for this State entering
into the twentieth century on its own. We are gllld
to think that this "debut" should be facilitated by
the association of such a State in our community
of the United Nations. There are many ways in which
the United Nations itself, as well as its Members
individually, can be of assistance in the early days
of statehood. Much· thought has recently been given
to ways in which contacts betweeIl the United Nations
and the emerging States can be strengthened, particularly on the economic side. We would hope that
the Republic of Togo, aware of the friendly welcome
which awaits it, will draw to the fullest possible
extent on the facilities available through this
Organization, of which the new State is expected
shortly to be a Member itself.

46. L'unanimite avec laquelle, j'en suis stir, les
membres du Conseil de ·::;curite decideront de faire
savoir ll. 1'Assemblee generale que nous avons juge
le Togo en mesure d'assumer les responsabilites que
nous fait la Charte, et 1'unanimite avec laquelle, j'en
suis certain, nous recommanderons d'admeftre la
Republique du Togo ll. 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies seront 1'expression de la sympathie que 1'ensemble de la communaute internation?le eprouve ll.
1'eqard de cet Etat pour qui le ~me si~cle marque
le debut de 1'independance, ainsi que des vceux
qu'elle forme ll. son endroit. Nous sommes heureux
de penser que cette transition sera facilitee par la
participation du Togo ll. la communaute des Nations
Unies. D y a bien des fa90ns dont 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies elle-mame et chacun de ses membres
peuvent aider un Etat aux premiers stades de son
independance. On s'est attache, derni~rement, ll.
chercher comment etablir des rapports plus etroits,
notamment sur le plan economique, entre 1'Organisation et les nouveaux Etats. Nous souhaitons que
la Republique du Togo, sachant 1'accueil amical qui
1'attend, ait recours le plus possible aux moyens
que lui offre 1'Organisation, dont elle doit elle-mame
sous peu devenir Membre.

47. The pleasure I feelin welcoming this new Member
is the greater when the applicant is a country whose
development to the point of full independence we in
the United Nations have been specially concerned to
watch. Togo is the third Trust Territory in West
Africa whose people have attained independence. The
Government and people of the United Kingdom have
already conveyed their warm congratulations to the
people of Togo and their Prime Minister, Mr. Sylvanus
Olympio, on their achievement. This was done by
Sir Alexander Knox Helm, who represented Her
Majesty the Queen at the celebrations in the Republic
on 27 April.

47. Le plaisir que j'eprouve ll. saluer ce nouveau
Membre est d'autant plus grand que le Togo est un
pays dont 1'Organisation des Nations Unies a suivi
avec un inter~t particulier 1'evolution jusqu'll. la
pleine independance. Crest le troisi~me territoire
sous tutelle d'Afrique occidentale dont la population
est parvenue ll. 1'independance. Le gouvernement
et la population du Royaume-Uni ont dejll. exprime
leurs vives felicitations au peuple du Togo et ll. son
premier ministre, M. Sylvanus Olympio, pour les
succ~s qu'ils ont obtenus. Ces felicitations leur ont
ete exprimees par la voix de sir Alexander Knox
Helm, qui representait Sa Majeste la Reine aux
ceremonies de 1'independance, le 27 avrll.

48. We should also like to offer our congratulations
to France, the Administering Authority for what was
the Trust Territory of Togoland. It is the work and
the care of France, in collaboration with the people
of Togo themselves, which has enabled the Republic:
of TogQ now to take its place in the community of
nations. As the accession of Togo to independence
marks the end of France's service to this Organization
as an Administering Authority, I should like to express
to the representative of France the gratitude and
admiration which my delegation has felt for the way
in which France, acting on behalf of all the other
Members, has performed its duties to the two Trust
Territories confided to it.

48. Nous tenons egalement ll. feliciter la France,
autorite administrante pour ce qui etait autrefois
le Terr:l.toire sous tutelle du Togo. Cc Bont 1'ceuvre
et les soins de la France, en collaboration avec la
population du Togo elle-mame, qui ont permis ll. la
Republique du Togo de prendre aujourd'hui sa place
dans la communaute des nations. Et, puisque 1'accession du Togo ll. 1'independance marque la fin des
tdches de la France, en tant quIAutorite administrante,
aupr~s de 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies, je tiens
ll. exprimer au repr6sentant de la France la gratitude
et 1'admiration que nous eprouvons pour la faQon
dont la France, agissant au nom de tous les autres
Membres, slest acquitt€le de sa mission ll. 1'6gard des
deux Territoires sous tutelle confi6s h ses soins.

49. It was only four months ago that we met to
consider the application of Camel'oun, the first
African Territory to seek to join the United Nations
during this year. The Republic of Togo is now the
second of what may well be a record number of
applicants from the continent of Africa in 1960,
itself a demonstration of stirring progress being made
there. We in the United Kingdom of course, look
forward with particular pleasure to the advent of
yet another West Mrican State, Nigeria, later In

49. n y a ll. peine quatre mois, nous nous reunissions pour examiner la demande d'admission du
Cameroun, le premier territoire africain qui ~t
exprlme le d€lsir- d'entrer hl'OrganisationdesNations
Unies au CQurs de la pr~sente ann6e. La R6publique
du Togo est aujourd'hui le deuxi~me Etat du continent
africain ll. demander son admission au cours d'une
annlle qui marquera sans doute un record par le
nombre des demandes emanant de ce continent, fait
qui suffit ll. prouver les progr~s saisissants que 1'on

.......:,.-.:..•.......

9

the year. It is therefore as an outrider of a growing
band of vigorous and hopeful African States, as well
as in its own right, that I am now glad, in anticipation,
to assure the Republic of Togo of the welcome which
awaits it in the United Nations.

enregistre en Afrique. Le Royaume-Uni, bien entendu,
attend avec un plaisir tout particulier la venue, ultllrieurement au cours de la prllsente atUllle, d'un
autre Etat d'Afrique occidentale, la Nigllria. crest
done en sa qualitll d'llclaireur d'un groupe de plus
en plus nombreux d'Etats africains vigoureux et
offrant les plus grands espoirs, aussi bien qu'en
sa qualitll propre, que je suis heureux, aujourd'hui,
de pouvoir assurer la Rllpublique du Togo del'accueil
qui 1'attend ~ 1'Organisation des Nations Ullies.

50. Mr. TSIANG (China): In the latter part of April
this year my Government sent a special delegation
to Lomll, headed by Ambassador Liu Chieh who
served on the Trusteeship Council for many years,
to join with the representatives of other Governments
in celebrating the attainment of national independence
by the Togolese people. It was a joyous occasion
and we are happy to have been participants.

50. M. TSIANG (Chine) [traduit de 1'anglais]: A lafin

devel
Syste
towar(

du mois d'avril dernier, mon gouvernement a chargll
une dlllllgation spllciale ayant ~ sa tete M. Liu Chieh,
ambassadeur de Chine, qui a sillgll au Conseil de
tutelle pendant plusieurs annees, de se rendre ll. Lome
pour participer, avec les reprllsentants d'autres
gouvernements, aux f~tes qui ont marqulll 'accession
ll. 1'indllpendance nationale du penple togolais. Ce
furent Ill. des cerllmonies joyeuses, auxquelles nous
sommes heureux d'avoir pris part.

51. Today, on behalf of the Government and people
of the Republic of China, I would like to convey once
more our warmest congratulations to the Government
and people of Togo for their achievement of national
independence. It is indeed an achievement of which
Prime Minister Sylvanus Olympio and his people
may well be proud. My delegation will vote for the
draft resolution jointly sponsored by France and
Tunisia.

51. Aujourd'hui, au nom du gouvernement et du
peuple de la Rllpublique de Chine, je tiens une fois
de plus ll. adresser nos flllicitations les plus
chaleureuses au gouvernement et au peuple du Togo
pour etre parvenus ~ 1'ind€lpendance. C 'est Ill. certes
un succbs dont le Premier Ministre, M. Sylvanus
Olympio, et le peuple du Togo peuvent ll. juste titre
etre fiers. Ma d6l€lgation votera en faveur du projet
de r6solution pr6sent6 par la France et la Tunisie.

52. The present occasion has another significant
aspect. For some forty years France has been
entrusted with the administration of Togoland, first
under the League of Nations Mandate and more
recently under the United Nations TrusteeshipAgreement. The representative of France gave us a moment
ago a brief but valuable report on the progress made
under French trusteeship.

52. n est un autre aspect qu'on ne saurait passeI'
sous silence. Pendant une quarantaine d'annees, la
France a 6t6 charg6e, d'abord dans le cadre du regime
des mandats de la Socilltll des Nations, puis dans
celui de 1'Accord de tutelle des Nations Unies, du
soin d'administrer le Togo. n y a un moment, le
representant de la France nous a fait un expose bref
mals 610quent des progr~s accomplis par le Togo sous
la tutelle de la France.

53. My delegation wishes on the present occasion
to congratulate the French for the accomplishment
of a great task.

53. Ma dlllllgation tient ll. saisir cette occasion pour
fllliciter la France d'avoir mene ll. blen une grande
tAche.

54. Mr. CORREA (Ecuador) (translatedfrom Spanish):
The Security Council is meeting once again to consider
the application for admission of a new Member of the
United Nations, and for a second time this year the
application for admission emanates from a State
which prior to its independence was administered
under the International Trusteeship System.

54. M. CORREA (Equateur) [traduit de I 'espagnol]:
Une fois de plus le Conseil de sllcuritll se rlmnit pour
examiner la demande d'admission d'un nouveau pays,
et, pour la seconde fois cette annlla, cette demande
est celle d'un Etat qui, avant d'etre independant, se
trouvait sous le r~gime international de tutelle.

55. The delegation of Ecuador supports the draft
resolution submitted by France and Tunisia recommending the admission of Togo as a Member of
the United Nations, and wishes to place on record
that we have the greatest satisfaction in giving our
support to this motion. The reasons for this are as
follows.

55. La dlll6gation llquatorienne appuie le projet de
resolution, dllpos6 par la France et la Tunisie, qui
recommande d'admettre la Togo comme Membre de
I 'Organisation des Nations Unies. Elle 1'appuie, je
tiens ll. le dire, avec une profonde satisfaction. et
cela pour les raisons suivantes.

56. The independence of Togo is yet another GXample
of the due application of the principle of selfdetermination of peoples, as set forth in the United
Nations Charter, and demonstrates the validity of the
principle as a decisive factor in the solution of
certain international problems.

56. Dans le cas de Ilind6pendance du Togo, nous
voyons une fois de plus suivijusqu'auboutle principa,
inscrit dans la Charte des Nations Unies, de la libre
determination des peuples; cela prouve bien que ce
principe est valide en tant qu'616ment determinant
de la solution de certains probl~mesinternationaux.

57. The independence of Togo is, furthermore, an
event demonstrating the positive contribution which
the United Nations has made to peace and the political

57. L'accession du Togo ll.l'indflpendance dllmontre
aussi la contribution positive que 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies a apportAe ll. la paix et au develop-

10

60. 0

to tak
as a :
Franc
Admin:
and t
Trust
happy
of the
of Tog

61.
like tc
Togole
and to
now a
as an
becaus
few y
GeneI'
person
their
dete
direct
62. In
my b
Gover
have
acquai
Olymp
the Fo
or as
indepe
We ar
his c
his no
his pe
Africa

development of peoples through the Trusteeship
System, under which Territories gradually progress
towards the goal of independence.

pement politique des peuples gdce au regime international de t1.1telle applique h des territoires qui
atteignent progressivement leur objectif d'independance.

58. The admission of Togo to the United Nations
will constitute a further step towards universality,
towards which we are moving ever doser, with the
consequent strengthening of the representative
character of our Organization and hence its ability
to exert an influence regardless of territorial or
national considerations.

58. L'entree du Togo parmi les Nations Unies sera
un pas de plus vers 1'universalit€l de notre organisation, universalit€l dont nous nous rapprochons
chaque jour davantage et qui renforce le caract~re
repr€lsentatif de 1'Organisation ainsi que 1'influence
qu 'elle peut e.xercer sans restrictions territoriales
ou n.1tionales.

59. Lastly, the admission of Togo to the United
Nations will in our view be a welcome example of
the effectiveness of the principle of juridical equality
between States, a factor of special importance to
countries whose population and area are small. The
Government of Togo, acting OL behalf of only
1.1 million people, will enjoy in the United Nations
the same rights as all other Member States, and
its contribution will certainly be very valuable.

59. Enfin, 1'admission du Togo comme Membre de
1'Organisation des Nations Unies constituera, ~ notre
avis, un heureux exemple de l'application du principe
de 1'€lgalit€l juridique des Etats. principe qu'appr6cient tout particuli~rementles pays dont la population
est peu €llev{m et la superficie modeste. Le Togo,
qui compte seulement 1.100.000 habitants, exercera
dans cette Organisation les memes droits que tous
les Etats Membres et il apportera sans aucun doute
une tres precieuse contribution h nos travaux.

60. On behalf of the Government of Ecuador, I wish
to tak~ this opportunity of stating that my country,
as a Member of the United Nations, is grateful to
France for the contribution which it has made as
Administering Authority to the progress of Togo
and to the achievement of the objectives of the
Trusteeship System. I might add that I was very
happy to hear the French representative's analysis
of the progress made during the French administration
of Togoland.

60. Au nom de mon gouvernement, je tiens h d€lclarer
h cette occasion qu'en sa qualite de Membre de
1'Organisation des Nations Unies, I 'Equateur remercie
la France pour la maniere dont elle a, comme Autorite
administrante, contribue au d€lveloppement du Togo
et h 1'accomplissement des objectifs du regime international de tutelle. J e peux dire que j'ai llcoute
avec grande satisfaction notre coll~gue franQais iaire
la synthese des progres accomplis durant I 'administration fr&hQaise du Togo.

61. On behalf of the people of Ecuador, I should
like to extend the most cordial welcome to the
Togolese people upon their attainment ofindependence
and to congratulate them on the fact that they have
now assumed the management of their own affairs
as an independent nation. I do this with real emotion,
because I was fortunate enough to visit Togoland a
few years ago with a mission of the United Nations
General Assembly, and I had the opportunity
personally to admire the high qualities of the people,
their love of peace and freedom and their firm
determination to ensure that their future should be
directed towards the highest levels of human progress.

61. De la part du peuple equatorien, je souhaite ici
la plus cordiale bienvenue au peuple togolais au
moment oh, ayant atteint son objectif d'indllpendance,
il commence h administrer librement ses destinlles.
C 'est avec une llmotion sincere que je le fais, parce
que j'ai eu la chance de me rendredans ce territoire,
II y a plusieurs annlles avec une mission de
l'Assembllle gllnllrale des Nations Unies, etquej'aipu
admirer personnellement les qualitlls de ce peuple,
son amour de la paix et de la libert€l et sa ferme
volont€l d'orienter sa destintle vers les plus hauts
niveaux du progr~s humain.

62. In conclusion, I would venture to express here
my best wishes for the success of the Togolese
Government. Many of us here in the United Nations
have had the opportunity of becoming personally
acquainted with the Prime Minister, Mr. Sylvanus
Olympio, when he appeared as a petitioner before
the Fourth Committee and the Trusteeship Council,
or as the leader of his people in their struggle for
independence or, lastly, as head of Government.
We are sure that !lis faith in the future of his people,
his cultural attainments, his firm convictions and
his noble spirit will assist him in successfully leading
his people and in contributing to a better future for
Africa.

62. Qu'll me soit permis enfin d'exprimer ici mes
mellleurs vceux de succ~s au Gouvernement togolais.
Beaucoup d'entre nous ont eu 1'occasion d'apprlmier
la per~onnalitll de son chef, M. Sylvanus Olympio,
d'abord comme plltitionnaire devant la Quatri~me
Commission ou le Consell de tutelle, puis comme
aniDllateur de son peuple dans la lutte pour 1'independance, et finalement comme chef du gouvernement.
Nous sommes certains que sa foi dans le destin de
son peuple, sa culture, la fermetll de ses convictiGnS
et la gen€lrositll de son esprit le conduiront vel'S le
succes, pour le bien de son peuple et de 1'avenir du
continent africain.

63. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The Security
Council has before it the application of the Government of the Republic of Togo for membership in the
United Nations. The birth of a new State in Africa
is a happy event, indicating that yet another blow
has been struck at the last remaining pillars of

63. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovilltiques) [traduit du russe]: Le Consell de s6curit€l
est saisi de la demande d'admission h 1'0rganisation
des Nations Unies pr€lsent€le par la Rllpublique du
Togo. La naissance d'un nouvel Etat africain est
un llv{mement heureux qui montre qu'un nouveau
coup a etll portll aux derniers bastions du colonialisme,
11

colonialism, from the ruins of which new independent
States are rising.

sur les ruines duquel s 'el~vent de nouveaux Etats
independants.

64. Togo was able to attain its independence primarily
as a result of the prolonged and stubborn efforts
of the Country's patriotic forces, with the present
Prime Minister, Mr. Sylvanus Olympio, at their head.
At the same time, a certain role, if only a modest
one, was played by the United Nations, many of
whose Members, among them the Soviet Union, had
consistently upheld Togo's legitimate right to independent e.xistence as a sovereign State.

64. L' accession du Togo Al'ind€lpendance est devenue
pOSSible, avant tout, gr!tce A la lutte longue et opini~tre des forces patriotiques togolaises, ayant A
leur t~te 1'actuel Premier Ministre, M. Sylvanus
Olympio. L'Organisation des Nationa Unies, dont
beaucoup de Membres, et notamment l' Union
sovietique, nfont cesse de dllfendre le droit legitime
du Togo A 1'ind6pendance et h la souverainete, a
egalement joue un rClle, modeste peut-~tre, mais
certain.

65. The Soviet Union has the most sincere feelings

65. L'Union sovietique est 1'amie la plus sinc~re
des peuples africains. Sa sympathie est toujours
allee et ira toujours h tous les peuples qui luttent
contre la domination coloniale, pour 1'independance
et la liberte nationales, pour le droit h disposer
de leur propre avenir. n est done naturel que 1'Union
sovietique ait ete parmi les premiers A saluer
1'apparition, sur le continent africain, d'un nouvel
Etat independant, la Republique du Togo. Le 26 avril,
le Gouvernement sovietique a solennellement reconnu
la Republique du Togo en tant qu'Etat independant et
souverain et s 'est declare pret h lltablir avec elle
des relations diplomatiques. AUjourd'hui, l'Union
sovietique appuie sans reserve la demande d'admission
h 1'Organisation des Nations Unies presentee par
la Republique togolaise. Elle votera pour le projet
de resolution recommandant hI'Assemblee generale
d'admettre cette republiquecommeMembredel'organisation.

of friendship for the African peoples. Its sympathies
have always been, and will continue to be, with all
the peoples who are battling against colonial
domination and for independence and national freedom,
for the right to be masters of their own destinies.
It is natural, therefore, that the Soviet Union should
be among the first to welcome the emergence, on
the African continent, of the new and independent
State of the Republic of Togo. On 26 April the Soviet
Government formally announced its recognition of the
Republic of Togo as an independent and sovereign
State, and its readiness to establish diplomatic
relations with it. Today the Soviet Union announces
its full support of the Togolese Government's application for membership in the EDited Nations, and
its intention, to vote in favour of the draft resolution
recommending to the General Assembly that the
Republic of Togo be admitted to membership.
66. The admission of a new Member to the United
Nations is a significant event in the life of the
Organization. But, while expressing our satisfaction
at this development, we must not forget that there
are other countries which have long been awaiting
recognition of their right to enter the United Nations
family. I would take this opportunity to recall that
since 1946 the Council has. had before it an application
for membership in the United Nations from the
Mongolian People's Republic, a State which fully
meets the requirements for membership laid down
in the United Nations Charter. In our view, it is
high time to take an affirmative decision on the
application of the Mongolian People's Republic for
membership in the United Nations.

L'admission d'un nouvel Etat Membre est un
evenement marquant dans la vie de 1'Organisation.
Tout en exprimant notre satisfaction h ce sUjet,
nous ne pouvons oublier que d'autres Etats attendent
depuis longtemps que soit reconnu leur droit h faire
partie de la famille des Nations Unies. Je saisis
cette occasion pour rappeler au Conseil de securite
que, depuis 1946, il est saisi de la demande d'admission presentlle par la Rllpublique populaire mongole,
Etat repondant pleinement aux conditions prevues
par la Charte pour l'admission denouveauxMembres.
A notre avis, il est grand temps de donner une suite
favorable h la demande d'admission de la Republique
populaire mongole.

67. I should like to conclude by sincerely wishing
the new State of Togo all success in the strengthening
of its independence, in the developing of its economy
and its culture, and in the securing of happiness
and prosperity for its people. The Soviet delegation
is confident that the Republic of Togo, when it
becomes a Member of the United Nations, will make
a worthy contribution to the work of our Organization.

67. En conclusion, je souhaite sinc~rement aunouvel
Etat togolais de rlmssir h consolider son indepen-

70.

to s
spon
Cou
adm
Nati

71.
pen
haY
subs
Unitl
be
moS'
Afril
takiI

66.

dance, A developper son €lconomie et sa culture, h
assurer le bien-etre et la prosperite de son peuple.
La dlllegation sovietique est convaincue que la Republique togolaise, une fois Membre de 1'Organisation,
jouera dignement son rClle dans les activites des
Nations Unies.

68. Mr. ORTONA (Italy): My delegation is especially
gratified .to take part in the proceedings of this
Council concerning the admission of the Republic
of Togo to the United Nations.

68. M. ORTONA (Italie) [traduit de l'anglais): Ma
delegation est particuli~rement heureuse de prendre
part aux debats du Conseil touchant 1'admission de
la Republique du Togo h 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies.

69. In fact, this is the second time during this
calendar year that the Security Council has convened
to consider the admission to our Organization of an
African State which has attained independence, and
again, in the very near future, the Council will be
called upon to consider the admission of other African
nations which are expected to attain the status of

6&.

C 'est, de fait, la seconde fois depuis le debut
de 1'annee que le Conseil de securite se reunit pour
discuter de 1'admission h 1'Organisation d'un Etat
africain parvenu h 1'indllpendance, et, dans un tr~s
proche avenir, le Conseil sera de nouveau appel€!
h examiner 1'admission d'autres nations africaines qui
acquerront vraisemblablement le statut d' Etat sou-

12

74.

Show
step
the
an 0
of
line
Gene
Econ

sovereign and independent States. Among these nations
I am glad to refer to Somalia, whose independence
will be solemnly proclaimed on 1 July next. That is
an additional reason why my country, geographically
so near Africa, is Viewing with special interest the
emergence of independent States in the African
continent. Indeed, we have been more than mere
spectators; we have actually participated actively
in this evolution, furthering the political, social and
economic advancement of an African nation, and
have been fully aware of the share of responsibility
that each and every one uf us must bear.

verain et indllpendant. Au nombre de ces nations, je
suis heureux de citer la Somalie, dont 1'indllpendance
sera solennellement proclam€le le ler juillet prochain.
C'est une autre raison pour laquelle mon pays, si
pr~s g€lographiquement de l'Afrique, porte un int€lr~t
particulier 11. la naissance d'Etats ind€lpendantsll.
l'int6rieur du continent africain. Certes, nous avons
jou€l un a\}tre role que celui de simples spectateurs;
nous avons, de fait, particip€l activement 11. cette
€lvolution, en aidant au progr~s politique, social et
llconomique d'une nation africaine, de mame que nous
avons nous aussi pris conscience de la part de responsabilit€l qui incombe 11. chacun de nous.
70. La delegation italienne est, aujourd'hui, parti-

70. Today the Italian delegation is especially pleased
to support, and indeed to welcome, the draft resolution
sponsored by France and Tunisia inViting the Security
Council to recommend to the General Assembly the
admission of the Republic of Togo to the United
Nations.

culi~rement

heureuse d'appuyer - elle 1'accueille
mame avec une reelle satisfaction - le projet de
resolution presentl'l par la France et la Tunisie
visant A ce que le Conseil de sl'lcurite recommande
11. l'Assemblee generale d'admettre la Republique
du Togo 11. l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

71. We are fully confident that Togo, as an inde-

71. Nous sommes pleinement convaincus que le Togo,
en tant qu 'Etat indllpendant, 11. l'exemple des autres
Etats africains qui ont acquis recemment leur independance, apportera une contribution utile et constructive 11. l'ceuvre de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Je pourrais ajouter que cette contribution sera particuli~rement prooieuse 11. une l'lpoque otl., port€ls par un
courant 11. la fois trtls puissant et riche de promesses,
les peuples d'Afrique sont en voie de r€laliser leurs
aspirations nationales et prennent une part de plus
en plus active aux affaires mondiales.

pendent State, just as other African countries which
have recently gained independence, will contribute
substantially and constructively to the work of the
United Nations. I might add that this contribution will
be particularly valuable at a time when, through a
most powerful and promising trend, the peoples of
Africa are fulfilling their national aspirations and are
taking an increasingly active part in world affairs.

72. May I add that we are sure thatthis participation
v.ill be matched by that high sense of responsibility

72. Puis-je ajouter que cette participation, nous
en sommes certains, s 'accompagnera de ce sens lllev€l
des responsabilit€ls que doivent avoir tous les
Membres de I' Organisation des Nations Unies.
L 'Organisation, du fait mame de ses objectifs ainsi
que des r~gles et procMures dans lesquelles s'inscrit
son action, affirme, souligne et favorise le principe
d'€lgalitll dont doivent s'inspirer toutes les socillte~
humaines ainsi que les organismes internationaux
dans une atmosphtlre d6mocratique. C'est pourquoi
nous nous felicitons aUjourd'hui que notre famille
s'accroisse d'un nouveau membre, car nous sommes
certains que, dans 1'esprit dont je viens de parIer,
le Togo nous epaulera lui aussi dans'l'accomplissement de notre tache et contribuera de faQon constructive 1l. faire respecter les principes sur lesquels
se fonde notre charte. Nous saisissons cette occasion
pour adresser nos felicitations et nos vreux au
Premier Ministre de la Republique du Togo, dont
chacun d~ nous connaft les eminentes qualites.

which should inspire all the Members of the United
Nations. We are an Organization which, by virtue of
its aims, its rules and procedures, recognizes,
enhances and furthers that principle of equality
which must guide all human societies as well as
international bodies on a democratic basis. That is
why today we applaud another member joining our
family, for we are sure that in the spirit that I have
described Togo will be another constructive addition
to our labours and to the furthering of those principles
which are at the basis of our Charter. We wish on
this occasion to convey our greetings and good
wishes to the Prime Minister of the Republic of
Togo, whose outstanding qualities are known to all
of us.

73. The independence of Togo represents the crowning
of the mission of progress entrusted to France by
the international community. The Government and
people of France may well pride themselves on its
successful accomplishment, for it represents one
more episode for which they can certainly be congratulated.

73. L'independance du Togo represente le couronnement de la mission de progr~s confiee 1l. la France
par la communaute internationale. Le gouvernement
et le peuple franQais peuvent certes atre fiers de la
reussite de cette entreprise et crest HI. un nouveau
succ~s clont il y a sans aucun doute lieu de les feliciter.

74. We have also taken due note of the interest
shown by the Secretary-General in the very first
steps of the new independent African State and of
the presence at the independence ceremonies of such
an official of the Organization as the representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Spinelli. This is in
line with those policies which, rightly, the SecretaryGeneral outlined during recent meetings of the
Economic and Social Council, showing how our

74. Nous avons aussi dltment not6 1'int6ret que le
Secretaire gen€lral a manifeste 11. 1'€lgard des toutes
premillres mesures prises par le nouvel Etat africain
independant, ainsi que la pr€lsence, lors des ceremonies de l' ind6pendance, d' un fonctionnaire de
1'Organisation aussi 6minent que le repr6sentant du
Secr6taire general, M. Spinelli. Ces initiatives
rapondent bien aux principes que le Secr€ltaire g6neral
a fort justement expos€ls au cours des recentes

13

Organization can be of assistance in connexion with
the special problems which the new States have to
solve in the early stages of their independence.

r€lunions du ConseU 6conomique et social, montrant
comment 1'Organisation peut aider les nouveaux
Etats h r€lsoudre les probl~mes particuliers auxquels
Us ont h faire face aux premiers stades de leur
indllpendance.

75. It is certainly meaningful and proper that the
Council should give favourable consideration to the
admission of the Republic of Togo to the United
Nations. shortly after its independence has been
proclaimed. This. we feel. will avoid any interruption in the relationship between the Togolese
people and this Organization which has already given
most concrete and highly satisfactory results. a
relationship which will continue now on a new basis
befitting the sovereign and independent status of
Togo. and which also should reflect the special
interests of the Organization in the welfare of the
people of this new State in conformity with the task
the Members of the United Nations have set themselves to assist each other in making the hopes of
mankind for a brighter future come true.
76. The Italian delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution submitted by France and Tunisia.
77. Mr. MICHALOWSKI (Poland): Once again we
have gathered in this chamber in order to consider
a question concerning the great African continent.
We are here to recommend for admission to the
United Nations another newly emerged, independent
African State. Togo. It will be the eighth new independent African State to be admitted to the United
Nations within the last four years.

75. n est sans aucun doute toutindiqull que le Cons~il
envisage favorablement 1'admission de la Rllwblique
du Togo h 1'Organisation des Nations Unies peu de
temps aprlls la proclamation de 1'ind6pendance de
ce pays. Ainsi pourra-t-on, selon nous. 6viter que
ne s'interrompent entre le peuple togolais et 1'Organisation des relations qui ont dlljh eu des r6sultats
tdls concrets et tr~ssatisfaisants. relations qui se
poursuivront d6sormais sur une base nouvelle rllpondant au statut souverain et ind6pendant du Togo et
qui devraient reflllter llgalement 1'int6dt particulier
que 1'Organisation porte au bien-@tre de la population
de ce nouvel Etat. Les Nations Unies ne se sont-e11es
pas fixll pour ~che de s'aidermutuellementhrealiser
les espoirs de 1'humanitll en un avenir meUleur?

76. La de16gation italienne votera en faveur duprojet

de resolution pr6sente par la Franceetla Tunisie.
77. M. MICHALOWSKI (Pologne) [traduit del'an-

ins
to
mo

glais]: Nous voici. une fois de plus. reunis dans
cette salle pour examiner une question qui interesse
le grand continent africain. Nous sommes ici pour
recommander 1'admission h 1'Organisation des Nations
Unies d'un autre Etat africain independant. qui vient
d'appara1tre. le Togo. Ce sera le huiti~me nouvel
Etat independant d'Afrique admis aux Nations Unies
au cours des quatre derni~res annees.
78. Le Togo est parvenu h 1'ind6pendance nationale
grice h la lutte acharn6e de son peup].e pour la
libert6. Ce r6sultat s'inscrit dans le cadre du
processus de d6sintegration du syst~me colonial.
qui est l'un des traits les plus marquants de notre
6poque. Le continent africain. comme hier le continent
asiatique, fait aujo1l!'4'hui des principes de libre
determination une r6alit6 concrllte; U. donne vie aux
id6es qui sont h la base de 1'Organisation et de la
Charte. Le peuple polonais suit avec la plus vive
sympathie la lutte que les peuples du continent africain
mllnent pour leur ind6pendance.

78. The attainment of national independence b-y Togo
took place as a result of the hard struggle of its
people for freedom. It is part of the process of
disintegration of the colonial system. which is one
of the most important developments of our days.
The African continent, much in the same way as
Asia yesterday. is realizing today the principle
of self-determination; it is putting life into the
ideas which are the basis of our Organization and
its Charter. The Polish people are looking forward
with the greatest sympathy to the fight of the peoples
of the African continent for their independence.

79. The Polish delegation wishes to support the
application for the admission of Togo to the United
Nations in the sincere belief that the people of Togo
will achieve success in their effort for truly independent national political and economic development
and democratic forms of government. Therefore.
the Polish delegation will support the draft resolution
submitted by France and Tunisia.

79. La d6l6gation polonaise tient h appuyer la demande d'admission du Togo h 1'Organisation des
Nations Uni3S. 6tant sinc~rement convaincue que le
peuple togolais r6ussira h assurer au Togo un developpement 6conomique et politique vllritablement independant. et une forme democratique de gouvernement.
C'est pourquoi la delllgation polonaise appuiera le
projet de resolution presente par la France et la
Tunisie.

80. Mr. QUIJANO (Argentina)

(translated from
Spanish): The delegation of Argentina wishes to
state that it supports the application for admission
to the United Nations which the Prime Minister of
the Republic of Togo has submitted on behalf of
his Government. We shall therefore vote in favour
of' the draft resolution submitted by France and
Tunisia, recommending to the General Assembly the
admission of Togo to membership in the United
Nations.

80. M. QUIJANO (Argentine) [traduit de l'espagnol):
La de16gation argentine declare qu'elle appuie la
demande d'admission que le Premier Ministre de la
Republique du Togo a prllsentee au nom de son gOllvernement. Par consequent. nous voterons pour le
projet de rllsolution, depose par la France et la
Tunisie. qui recommande h l'Assembl6e gimerale
d'admettre le Togo comme Membre de 1'Organisation
des Nations Unies.

81. Argentina has always upheld the principle of the

81. L'Argentine a toujours dMendll le principe de
1'universalit6 des organisations internationales. €lIb-

universality of international organizations. as a necee-

14

83.

to
TOI

In

u·
of
ind
SUI

of

85.

of
of
the
Wo
se
na
of
one
it
in
tha

86.
the
the
re
co
to
sov
Go

feU

tin
and
suc

WOI

sary condition for the total achievement of their
goals; and it is for this reason that we view with
great satisfaction the continuing expansion of the
United Nations, looking towards the ideal of every
people in the world being represented in it. We are
even more gratified in the present case, because it is
that of a country whose growth and progress towards
independence have taken place under the International
Trusteeship System and thus supplies a further
example which strengthens our faith in the correctness
and wisdom of the 'provisions of our Charter.
82. In supporting this application for admission, we
desire to commend France for the constructive
spirit in which it has fulfilled its obligations as
Administering Authority-a spirit which has led to
the happy result reached with the proclamation, on
27 April last, of the independence of the Republic
of Togo. We see in this attitude of France a
reaffirmation of its respect for the right of every
people in the world to self-determination, and we are
happy to record this fact.

ment nbcessaire h la pleine realisation de leurs
objectifs; c 'est pourquoi nous constatons avec grande
satisfaction l'expansion continue de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies, le but ideal etant la participation
de tous les peuples du monde. Dans le cas present,
cette satisfaction est d'autant plus grande qu'il
s 'agit d'un pays dont le developpement et le progr~s
vers 1'independance se sont produits sous le regime
international de tutelle; ce nouvel exemple confirme
notre foi en la sagesse et la prudence des preceptes
de notre charte.
82. En appuyant cette demande d'admission, nous
voulons f6liciter la France de 1'esprit constructif
avec lequel elle s'est acquittee de ses rcsponsabilit6s
administratives; c 'est cet esprit qui a permis
1'heureux denouement concretise le 27 avril dernier
par la proclamation de 1'independance de la Republique
du Togo. Nous voyons en cette attitude de la France
une nouvelle affirmation, que nous sommes heureux
de reiever, de son respect du droit de tous les
peuples du monde h la libre determination.
83. En conclusion, la delegation argentine veut exprimer le souhait chaleureux de voir la Republique
du Togo, gdce aux efforts de sa population et aux
consens des patriotes devoues qui 1font amenee h
1'independance, surmonter les obstacles du present
et avancer resolument vers l'avenir. Elle n'abordera
pas seule cette entreprise, car les Nations Unies
ont reconnu h sa juste valeur le mouvement vers
1'independance politique qui accompagne en Afrique
le progr~s ~onomique: notre organisation ne cessera
jamais de cooperer ll. la pleine realisation de ces
deux objectifs.

83. In conclusion, the Argentine delegation wishes
to express its fervent hope that the Republic of
Togo, through the efforts of its people and the
inspiration of the dedicated patriots who have led it
to independence, will overcome the difficulties of the
moment and advance resolutely towards the future.
In this task it will not find itself alone, for the
United Nations has recognized the full importance
of the movement going forward in Africa towards
independence and economic advancement, and will
supply constant co-operation for the full achievement
of these two goals.
84. The PRESIDENT: Spealdng now in my capacity
as representative of CEYLON, I should like to make
use of this opportunity to welcome the Republic of
Togo as a free, independent and sovereign State
and to express the hope that this Council will unanimously recommend its admission to membership
in the United Nations.

84. Le,~RESIDENT (traduit del'anglais):Jevoudrais
maintenant, en qualite de representant de CEYLAN,
saisir 1'occasion qui m 'est offerte de rendre hommage
h la Republique du Togo, Etat libre, independant et
souverain, et d'exprimer l'es,poir que le Conseil
recommandera ll. l'unanimite son admission h 1'Organisation des Nations Unies.
85. Le Togo, qui, avant la premi~reguerre mondiale,
faisait partie des territoires alIemands d'outre-mer,
est devenn, '-A la fin de cette guerre, un territoire
sous mandat sous les auspices de la Societe des
Nations. Aprtls la dewtitlme guerre mondiale, n
poursuivit sa marche vers I 'autonomie et 1'independance dans le cadre du regime international de
tutelle. L 'admission, de la Republique du Togo h
I 'Organisation des Nations Unies rev~t done une importance toute particulitlre, de m~me qu'elle est un
motif de satisfaction tr~s reelle puisqu'elle est le
fruit de la cooperation internationale tendant h faciUter I'accession h I'independance des pays sous
mandat, puis sous tutelle.

85. Before the First World War, Togo formed part
of the German territories overseas and at the end
of that war became a mandated territory under
the League of Nations. After the end of the Second
World War, it continued in its advancement towards
self-government and independence under the International Trusteeship System. Hence, the admission
of the Republic of Togo to the United Nations is
one of very special significance and satisfaction, as
it is one of the heirs of international co-operation
in the promotion towards independence of countries
that were under mandate and, later, trusteeship.

86. Le Gouvernement ceylanais a toujours appuye
la cause de la Uberte en faveur des nations dependantes. Crest done avec une satisfaction d'autant plus
grande que nous voyons, une fois encore, un nouveau
pays achever son independance. Du point de vue
historique egalement, crest un 6venement d'un grand
int€lr~t que I'accession ll. la pleine souverainete d'une
nouvelle nation africaine. Ma delegation, au nom du
gouvernement et du peupIe ceyIanais, adresse ses
felicitations les plus chaleureuses ll. la Republique
du Togo et ll. son eminent Premier Ministre,
M. Sylvanus OIympio, et leur exprime ses meilleurs
vreux de prosperite et de succ~s. C'est egalement

86. The Government of Ceylon has always supported
the cause of freedom for dependent nations. It is,
therefore, with added satisfaction that we see the
realization once again of full freedom by another
country. Historically too, it is of great interest to us
to see one more nation of Africa emerging into full
sovereignty. The Ceylon delegation, on behalf of the
Government and people of Ceylon, extends its warmest
felicitations to the Republic of Togo and to its distinguished .Prime Minister, Mr. Sylvanus Olympio,
and conveys its best wishes for all prosperity and
success. We also look forward with pleasure to
working with the members of the delegation of the

15

Republic of Togo when it becomes a member of
this august body in the near future, and we believe
that Togo will D',~ke a great and valuable contribution,
as a Membe: ,~: the United Nations, towards the
realization of the aims of the United Nations.

avec plaisir que nous envisageons la perspective
de collaborer avec les membres de la delegation de
la R€lpublique du Togo au moment oi\ ce pays deviendra, dans un proche avenir, Membre de 1'Organisation,
et nous sommes convaincus que le Togo, une fois
admis ll. 1'Organisation, contribuera fort utilement
ll. 1'accomplissement des fins des Nations Unies.

87. I should like to congratulate the Government
of France for gUiding the Togolese people and leading
them along the path of freedom which has brought
them independence. I was gratified to listen to the
statement made by the representative of France
when he gave us an account of the work of social
and economic progress and advance made by the
Togolese people under the trusteeship of the United
Nations, and we are gratified that France, as the
Administering Authority under the Trusteeship
System, has been able to give such help to the
people of Togo. I am sure that France has as much
right, therefore, to feel proud and happy today in
the work it has done towards the emergence of the
new independent State, as Togo has the right to feel
proud and happy today in entering the international
community of free and independent States. We hope
that the friendly relations which have existed between
the Togolese people and the French people will
continue on a basis offraternityandequality.

87. Je tiens aussi ll. f€lliciter le Gouvernement
d'avoir su guider le peuple togolais dans
la voie de la liberte qui 1'a mene ll. 1'independance.
Crest avec grand plaisir que j'ai entendu le representant de la France retracer les progr~s sociaux
et economiques du peuple togolais dans le cadre du
regime international de tutelle et nous sommes
heureux que la France, en tant qu'Autorite administrante, ait pu lui fournir une aide aussi precieuse.
Je suis certain que la France est tout autant fondee
ll. se sentir aUjourd'hui fi~re et heureuse de 1'reuvre
qu'elle a accomplie pour permettre au nouvel Etat
d'acc€lder ll. 1'ind€lpendance que le Togo peut etre
fier et heureux d'entrer dans la commtmaute internationale des Etats libres et ind€lpendants. Nous
souhaitons que les relations amicales que le peuple
togolais et le peuple fran(;lais ont entretenues se
poursuivent dans une atmosph~re de fraternite et
d'egalite.

88. The delegation of Ceylon has great pleasure,
therefore,' in supporting the draft resolution which
has been submitted jointly by France and Tunisia,
and will vote in favour of that draft resolution.
89. In my capacity as PRESIDENT, I shall now
put to the vote the draft resolution submitted by
France and Tunisia [S/4322/Rev.2].

88. Crest done avec plaisir que la delegation cey1anaise appuiera de son vote le projet de resolution
dont la France et la Tunisie ont saisi le Conseil.

fran~ais

89. En qualite de PRESIDENT, je vais maintenant
mettre aux voix le projet de resolution de la France
et de la Tunisie [S/4322/Rev.2].

The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.

A l'unanimite. le projet de resolution est adoptee

Date of election to fill a vacancy in the International
Court of Justice (5/4312)

Date de I'election destinee
pourvoir un siege Cl la Cour
internationale de J IJstice (5/4312)

90. The PRESIDENT: This item has become a sad
necessity owing to the passing away recently of
Sir Hersch Lauterpacht, a member of the International
Court of Justice. His death occurred on 8 May 1960 in
London.
91. Judge Sir Hersch Lauterpacht was elected a member of the Court at the electionheld on 7 October 1954.
In accordance with Article 13 of the Statute of the
Court, his term of office would have expired on
5 February 1964.
92. Born in Zolkiew on 16 August 1897, he graduated
from the University of Vienna as Doctor of Laws
in 1922 and as Doctor of Political Science in 1923.
He became Doctor of Laws of the University of
London in 1927 and of the University of Cambridge
in 1948. He was called to the bar by Gray's Inn in
1937 and was made a King's Counsel in 1949. He
was elected Fellow of the British Academy in 1950
and became a member of the Institute of International
Law. He was an eminent lawyer and a great judge.

90. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de 1'anglais): L'inscription de ce point ll. notre ordre du jour est due ~
un triste evenement: le dec~s survenu ~ Londres,
le 8 mai 1960, de sir Hersch Lauterpacht, membre
de la COUI' internationale de Justice.
91. Sir Hersch Lauterpacht avait ete elu juge ~
la Cour le 7 octobre 1954 et, conformement ~
l'Article 13 du Statut de la Cour, son mandat devait
expirer le 5 f6vrier 1964.

9

dl

a

92. Nil ll. Zolkiew le 16 aoilt 1897, sir Hersch
Lauterpacht avait fait ses etudes ~ 1'Universite de
Vienne oi\ il avait obtenu le diplome de docteur en
droit en 192.? et celui de docteur ~s sciences politiques
en 1923. Docteur en droit de l'Universite de Londres,
en 1927, puis de 1'Universite de Cambridge, en 1948,
sir Hersch Lauterpacht avait ete admis au barreau
par la Gray's Inn en 1937 et6taitdevenu conseiller du
Roi en 1949. Elu "fellow· de 1'Academie britannique
en 1950, sir Hersch Lauterpacht etait membre de
1'Institut de droit international. C'etait un juriste
eminent et un grand magistrate

93. He was editor of the British Yearbook of
International Law and of the Annual Digest and
Report of Public International Law Cases. He has
written many authoritative books and has contributed
a great deal to the development and codification of

93. RMacteur en chef du British Yearbook of
International Law et de l'Annual Digest and Report of
Public International Law Cases, sir Hersch Lauterpacht etait 1'auteur de nombreux ouvrages faisant
autorit€l et il a grandement contribue au develop16

10

si

international law. His death at a comparatively
early age is a great loss not only to his country but
also to the world.

lve

de

:m,

(lis
ent

94. Under Article 14 of the Statute ofthe International
Court of Justice, the Security Council is called on
to fix the date of the election of a member to fill
a vacancy in the International Court of Justice.
95. In accordance with the practice followed on other
such occasions, I have the honour to submit to
the Security Council the following draft resolution,
which was circulated at the beginning of this meeting:

~nt

.ns

}e.

'eo-

.UX

du

es
s-

"Le Conseil de s€lcurit~,
"Apprenant avec regret le d€lc~s survenu le 8 mai
1960 de sir Hersch Lauterpacht, juge 11. la Cour
internationale de Justice,
"Constatant que, de ce fait, il y a un si~ge h
pourvoir h la Cour internationale de Justice· pour
la periode non encore accomplie du mandat du
d€lfunt, et qu'il convient de pourvoir ce si~ge,
conform€lment aux dispositions du Statut de la
Cour,

"The Security Council,
"Noting with regret the death of Judge Sir Hersch
Lauterpacht on 8 May 1960,

le.

ee

re

;at

"Noting further that a vacancy in the International
Court of Justice for the remainder ofthe deceased's
term of office has thus occurred and must be filled
in accordance with the terms of the Statute of
the Court,

re

r-

us

lIe
se

et

"Notant que, conform€lment aux dispositions de

"Noting that, in accordance with Article 14 of
the Statute, the date of the election to fill this
vacancy shall be fixed by the Security Council,

aon

1'Article 14 du Statut, la tIate de 1'lllection destin€le
h pourvoir ce si~ge doit 8tre fixlle par le Conseil

de s€lcuritll,
"Decide qu'il sera procede h une election, en vue
de pourvoir le si~ge vacant, durant la quinzi~me
session de l'Assemblee g(merale."

"Decides that an election to fill the vacancy shall
take place during the fifteenth session of the
General Assembly."
96. If there are no objections, I shall consider this
draft resolution as adopted.

nt
~e

e.

96. S'il n'y a pas d'objection, je considererai que le
projet de rllsolution est adoptee
A l'unanimite, le projet de resolution est adopte.

The draft resolution was adopted unanimousl]'.

ur

s,

97. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): I am
very grateful to you, Mr. President, for the tribute
you have paid to the late Sir Hersch Lauterpacht
this afternoon, and I shall not fail to transmit it to
Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom and
also to the family of the late Judge.

97. Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de
1'anglais): Je suis particuli~rementtouche, Monsieur
le President, de 1'hommage que vous venez de rendre
11. la mllmoire de sir Hersch Lauterpacht et je ne
manquerai pas d'en faire part au Gouvernement de
Sa Majeste dans le Royaume-Uni, ainsi qu'hlafamille
du juge dllfunt.

98. If I may add a few words on behalf of the 'United
Kingdom delegation, the late Judge was a man who
throughout his life devoted his energies to the
promotion of the rule of law in international affairs
and the settlement of international disputes by judicial
means. Among' his numerous writings, his two books
on the development of international law by the
Permanent Court of International Justice and by the
International Court of Justice are well known.

98. Si je puis me permettre d'ajouter quelques mots

~e

~
~

it

i,

,

au nom de la delegation du Royaume-Uni, je rappellerai que le juge d6funt a, pendant sa vie enti~re,
consacr€l toute son energie h favoriser le r~gne du
droit dans les affaires internationales et le r~glement
des diffllrends internationaux par deS moyens juridiques. Parmi ses nombreux ouvrages, ses deux
livres sur le developpement du droit international
dtl 11. la Cour permanente de Justice internationale et
h la Cour internationale de Justice sont connus de
tous.

99. DUl'ing his term of office on the International
Court, he was seldom content to be simply 'one of
the judges concurring in the majority judgement,
and no one can read his separate or dissenting
opinions without being impressed by his fervent
deSire to serve the ideals of international justice.
By his untimely death, both the International Court
and legal scholarship in the United Kingdom, and
indeed throughout the world, have suffered a great
loss.

"

U

u
e
e
e

99. Dans 1'accomplissement de ses fonctions h la
Cour internationale, sir Hersch Lauterpacht s'est
rarement contentll de s'associer au verdict de la
majorite et nul ne peut lire ses opinions individuelles
ou ses opinions' dissidentes sans etre frapp€l du fervent
d6sirqui l'animait de servir 1'ideal de justice internationale. Sa mort prematur6e est une lourde pem
tant pour la Cour internationale que pour la science
du droit dans le Royaume-Uni, comme sans aucun
doute dans le monde entier.
La s~ance est leree

The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

t

l_

pement et ~ la codification du droit international. Sa
mort, h un §ge relativement jeune, est una grande
perte non seulement pour son pays mais pour le
monde entier.
94. Aux termes de 1'Article 14 du Statut de la Cour
internationale de Justice, le Conseil de stlcurit€l est
appeltl 11. fixer une date pour 1'tllection destin€le h
pourvoir le si~ge devenu vacant.
95. Me conformant h la pratique suivie en des circonstances analogues, j 'ai 1'honneur de soumettre
au Conseil de stlcurit~ le projet de r€lsolution dont
je vais donner lecture et qui a 6t6 distribu€l au d€lbut
de la pr€lsente stlance:

17

a 17 h 20.

SALES AGENTS FOR UNIT~D NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARG!NTlNA.ARGENTINE
Editarlal Sudamerlcana, 5.1.., Alsina 500,
Buenos Aires.
AUSTRALlA·AUSTRALlE
Melbourne University Press, 369/71 Lansdale Street, Molbourno C.l.
AUSTRIA·AUTRICHE
Gorald & Co., Grabon 31, Wlen, 1.
B. WiillerstarH, Markus Slttlkusstrasso 10,
Salzburg.
BELGIUM·BEL~IQUE

Agenco et Mossagorlos de la Presso,
5.1.., 14-22, rue du Persil, Bruxelles.
BOLlVIA.BOLlVIE
L1breria Seleccianes, Casllla 972, La Paz.
BRAZIL.BRESIL
L1vraria Aglr, Rua Mexico 98.B, Calxa
Postal 3291, Ria de Janeiro.
BUIiMA·BIRMANIE
Curator, Govt. Book Depat, Rangoon.
CAMBODIA·CAMBODGE
Entreprise khmere de Iibrairie, PhnomPenh.
CANADA
The Queen's Printer, O"awQ, Ontario.
CEYLON·CEYLAN
Lake House Baokshop, Assoc. Newspapers
of Ceylon, P.O. Box 244, Colambo.
CHILE·CHILI
Editorial del Pacifico, Ahumada 57,
Santiago.
L1brerra Ivens, Casllla 205, Santiago.
CHINA·CHINE
The Warld Book Co., Ltd., 99 Chung
King Road, ht Section, Taipeh, Taiwan.
The Commercial Press, Ltd., 211 Honan
Rd., Shanghai.
COLOMBIA.COLOMBIE
L1brerla Buchhalz, Bogot6.
L1breria America, Medellrn.
Ubreria Naclonal, Ltda., Barranqullla.
COSTA RICA
Imprenta y Librerra Trejos, Apartado
1313, San Jose.
CUBA
La Casa Belga, O'Reilly 455, La Habane,.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA·TCHECOSLOVAQUlE
Ceskaslovensky Spisovatel, N6radnr Tifda
9, Praha 1.
DENMARK.DANEMARK
Elnar Munksgaard, Ltd., N;rregade 6,
K_l1enhavn, K.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
REPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Librerfa Dominicana, Mercedes 49, Ciu·
dad Trujillo.
ECUADOR.EQUATEUR
Llbrerra Cientffica, Guayaqull & Qulto.
EL SALVADOR.SALVADOR
Manuel Navas y Cra., 1a. Avenida sur
37, San Salvadar.
ETHIOPIA.ETHIOPIE
International Press Agency, P.O. Box
120, Addis Ababa.
FINLAND·FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu,
Helsinki.
FRANCE
Editians A. Pedane, 13, rue SouHlot,
Paris (Ve).
GERMANY.ALLEMAGNE
R. Eisonschmidt, Schwanthaler Strasse
59, Frankfurt/Main.
Elwert & Meurer, Hauptstrasse 101,
Berlin.Scllaneberg.
Alexander Horn, Spiegelgasse 9, Wies·
baden.
W. E. Saarbach, Gertrudenstrasse 30,
Ka'n (1),

GHANA
University Baokshop, University Colloge
of Ghana, P.O. Box Legon.
GREECE.GRECE
KauHmann Bookshop, 28 Stadion Street,
Athenes.
GUATEMALA
Sociedad Econ6mico-Flnanciera, 6a Av.
14-33, Gualemala City.
tiAITI
Llbralrie "A la Caravelle", Boite postale
111·B, Port-au·Prince.
HONDURAS
Llbrerlo Panamericana, Tegucigalpa.
HONG KONG·HONG.KONG
The Swindon Book Co., 25 Nathan Road,
Kowloon.
IC~LAND.ISLANDE

I!--kaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundssonar H.
F., Austurstraeti lB, Reykjovik.
INDIA·INDE
Orient Longmans, Calcutta, Bombay, Ma·
dras, New Delhi & Hyderabad.
Oxford Book & Stationery Co., New
Delhi & Calcutta.
P. Varadochary & Co., Madras,
INDONESIA.INDONESIE
Pembangunan, Ltd., Gunung Sahari 84,
Djakarta.
IRAN
"Guity", 4B2 Ferdowsi Avenue, Teheran.
IRAQ·IRAK
Mackenzie's Bookshop, Baghdad.
IRELAND.IRLANDE
Stationery Office, Dublin.
ISRAEL
Blumstein's Bookstores, 35 Allenby Rd.
and 48 Nachlat Benjamin St., Tel Aviv.
ITALY·ITALlE
Libreria Commissionaria .Sansoni, Via
Gino Capponi 26, Firenze, & Via D. A.
Azuni 15/A, Roma.
JAPAN·JAPON
Maruzen Company, Ltd., 6 Tori-Nichome,
Nihonbashi, Tokyo.
JORDAN.JORDANIE
Joseph I. Bahous & Co., Dar-ul.Kutub,
Box 66, Amman.
KOREA·COREE
Eul-Yoo Publishing Co., Ltd., 5, 2·KA,
Chongno, Seoul.
LEBANON,L1BAN
Khayat's College Book Cooperative
92-94, rue Bliss, Beirut.
LIBERIA

J. Momolu Kamara, Monrovia.
LUXEMBOURG
Librairie J. Schummer, Luxembourg.
MEXICO.MEXIQUE
Editoria~1 Hermes, 5.1.., Ignaelo Mariscal
41, Mexico, D.F.
MOROCCO·MAROC
Bureau d'e'udes et de participations
industrielles, 8, rue Mlchaux-Bellaire,
Rabat.
'
NETHERLANDS·PAYS·BAS
N.V. Martinus NijhoH, Lange Voorhout
9, 's·Gravenhage.
NEW ZEALAND·NOUVELLE·ZELANDE
United Notions Associotion of New Zealand, C.P.O. lOll, Wellington.
NORWAY·NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag, Kr. Au·
gustsgt. 7A, Osla.

PAKISTAN
The Pakistan Ca-aperatlve Baok Saclety,
Dacca, East Pakistan.
Publishers United, Ltd., Lahare.
Thomas & Thomas, "arachl, 3.
PANAMA
Jose Menend"z, Apartado 2052, Av. itA,
sur 21-5B, Panama.
PARAGUAY
Ageneia de Llbrerlas de Salvadar Nlzza,
Calle Pte. Franco No. 39-43, Asuncl6n.
PERU·PEROU
Libreria Internacional del Peru, S.A.,
Lima.
PHILiPPINES
Alemar's Book Stare, 769 Rizal Avenue,
Manila.
PORTUGAL
Livraria Rodrigues, 1B6 Ru" Aurea, L1..
boa.
SINGAPORE.SINGAPOUR
The City Book Stare, Ltd., Callyer Quay.
SPAIN·ESPAGNE
Llbrerra Bosch, 11 Randa Universidad,
Barcelona.
Llbreria Mundi-Prensa, Castella 37, Ma.
drid.
SWEDEN·SUEDE
C. E. Fritze's Kungl. Hovbokhandel A-B,
Fred.goton 2, Stockholm.
SWITZERLAND·SUISSE
Librairie Payot, S.A., Lausanne, Geneve.
Hans Raunhardt, Kirchgasse 17, Zurich 1.
THAILAND.THAILANDE
Pramuan Mit, Ltd., 55 Chakrawat Raad,
Wat Tuk, Bangkok.
TURKEY.TURQUIE
Librairie Hachette, 469 Istiklal Caddesi,
Beyoglu, Istonbul.
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA.
UNION SUD·AFRICAINE
Van Schaik's Bookstore (Pty.), Ltd., Box
724, Pretoria.
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLlCS·UNION DES REPUBLlQUES
SOCIALlSTES SOVIETIQUES
Mezhdunarodnaya Knyiga, Smolenskaya
Ploshchad, Moskva.
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC.
REPUBLlQUE ARABE UNIE
Librairie "la Renaissance d'Egyptell, 9
Sh. Adly Pasha, Cairo.
UNITED KINGDOM.ROYAUME.UNI
H. M. Stotionery OHice, P.O. Bax 569,
Landon, S.E.l.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
ETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Dacuments Service, Colum·
bia University Pr~:s, 2960 BraCldway,
New York 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Representacion de Editoriales, Prof. H.
D'Elra, Plaza Cagancha 1342, 1 0 piso;
Montevideo.
VENEZUELA
Llbreria del Este, Av. Mlranda, No. 52,
Edf. Golip6n, Caracas.
VIET·NAM
Librairie-Papeterie Xulln Thu, lB5, rue
Tu.Do, B.P. 283, Saigon.
YUGOSLAVIA·YOUGOSLAVIE
Cankarjeva Zalo~ba, Ljubljana, Slovenla.
Drtovno
Preduzete,
Jugoslovenska
Knjiga, Teraziie 27/11, Beagrad.
Prosvjeta, 5, Trg Bratstva i Jedinstv..,
Zagreb.
[6081]

Orders and inquiries from countries where sales agents have

not yet been appointed may be sent to: Sales and Circulation
Section, United Nations, New York, U.S.A.; or Sales Section,

United Nations Office, Palais des Nations, Geneva, Swifzerlancl.

Litho in U.N.

Les commandes et demandes de renseignemenls emanant cle
pays 0'; il n'existe pas encore de' deposilaires peuvenl litre
adresseas a la Section des venles et de la distribution,
Organisalion cles Nations Unies, New-York (flats-Un is cI'Ame·
rique): ou a la Section des venles, Organisation des Nations
Unies, Palais des Nations, Geneve (Suisso).

Price: $U.S. 0.35; 2/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or equivalent in other currencies)

24161-December 1960-1,675
