28

General Auembly -

respect of Greenland as terminated and had, therefore,
decided to bring to an end the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter,
Considering that resolution 742 (VIII) adopted by
the General Assembly on 27 November 1953 instructs
the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories to study any documentation transmitted
under resolution 222 (III) in the light of the list of
factors approved by resolution 742 (VIII) and other
relevant considerations that may arise from each concrete case,
Having studied the report8 prepared by the Committee 9n Information from Non-Self-Governing Territori~s during its session of 1954 on the question of
the cessation of the transmission of information on
Greenland and presented to the General Assembly in
conformity with paragraph 2 of resolution 448 (V)
of 12 December 1950,
Having examined the communication of the Government of Denmark in the light of the basic principles
and objectives embodied in Chapter XI of the Charter,
the criteria established by the list of factors, and of all
the other elements of judgment pertinent to the issue,
Bearing in mind the competence of the General Assembly to decide whether a Non-Self-Governing Territory has or has not attained a full measure of selfgovernment as referred to in Chapter XI of the
Charter,
1. Takes note of the conclusions set forth by the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories in its resolution ;9
2. Takes note of the opi'lion of the Government of
Denmark that due to the new constitutional status of
Greenland the Government of Denmark regards its
"responsibilities according to Chapter XI of the Charter
as terminated" and that consequently the transmission
of information under Article 73 e of the Charter in
respect of Greenland should be brought to an end;
3. Commends the action of the Member State concerned in including in its delegation to the General
Assembly representatives elected by the National Council of Greenland for the purpose of furnishing information on constitutional changes in Greenland;
4. Takes note that when deciding on their new
constitutional status, through their duly elected representatives, the people of Greenland have freely exercised their right to self-determination;
5. Expresses the opinion that, from the documentation and the explanations provided, Green1and freely
decided on its integration within the Kingdom of Denmark on an equal constitutional and administrative
basis with the other parts of Denmark;
6. Notes with satisfaction the achievement of selfgovernment by the people of Greenland;
7. Considers that due to these circumstances the
Declaration regarding Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the provisions established under it in Chapter XI
of the Charter can no longer be applied to Greenland;
8. Considers it appropriate that the transmission of
information in respect of Greenland under Article 73 e
of the Charter should now cease.
499th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.
8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Supplement No. 18, part onP <Prt;n,, lX.
• Ibid., para. 61.

Ninth Session

850 (IX), Consideration of communications re•
lating to the cessation of the transmission
of information under Article 73 e of the
Charter

The General Assembly,
Considering that, by resolutions 222 (III), 448 (V)
and 742 (VIII), it has approved principles which
should be followed in evaluating situations indicative
of the attainment of a full measure of self-government
by the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories and
the consequent cessation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter,
Having approved in 1953 and 1954 resolutions10
relating to the cessation of the transmission of information concerning Puerto Rico and Greenland respectively.
Considering that the experience gained should be
used by the General Assembly to perfect the methods
and procedures to be followed in such cases,
Considering further the necessity of laying down
procedures enabling the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories to discharge its
functions under General Assembly resolution 742
(VIII),
1. Expresses the opinion that communications received from the Members concerned relating to the
cessation of the transmission of information under
Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of any Non-SelfGoverning Territory should be examined, as indicated
in resolution 742 (VIII), with particular emphasis on
the manner in which the right of self-determination has
been attained and freely exercised;
2. Considers that, in order to evaluate as fully as
possible the opinion of the population as to the status
or change in status which they desire, a mission, if
the General Assembly deems it desirable, should, in
agreement with the Administering Member, visit the
Non-Self-Governing Territory before or during the
time when the population is called upon to decide on its
future status or change in status ;
3. Considers that the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories might study
means by which it could, at the appropriate time,
draw the attention of the General Assembly to the
forthcoming changes in the status of the Territory
concerned;
4. fovites the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to include in its report to
the General Assembly at its tenth session any proposals
that it considers desirable concerning the implementation of the present resolution.
499th plenary muting,
22 November 1954.
851 (IX). Report of the Committee on South
West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having established by resolution 749 A (VIII) of
28 November 1953, "until such time as an agreement
is reached betwten the United Nations and the Union
of South Africa, a Committee on South West Africa",
10

See resolutions 748 (VIII) and 849 (IX).

Reeolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Having requested that Committee to "examine,
within the scope of the Questionnaire adopted by the
Permanent Mandates Commission of the League of
Nations in 1926, such information and documentation
as may be available in respect of the Territory of
South West Africa" and to "transmit to the General
Assembly a report concerning conditions in the Territory taking into acount, as far as possible, the scope
of the reports of the Permanent Mandates Commission
of the League of Nations",
Having considered the report 11 of the Committee on
South West Africa,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the work of the
Committee;
2. N ates the report and observations regarding conditions in the Territory of South West Africa, contained in annex V of the report of the Committee;
3. N ates with concern that, in the opinion of the
Committee, the administration of South West Africa is
in several aspects not in conformity with the obligations
of the Government of the Union of South Africa under
the Mandate ;
4. N ates with satisfaction that the representative of
the Union of South Africa participated in the substantive discussion in the Fourth Committee of the report
on conditions in the Territory of South West Africa;
5. Invites therefore the Government ~f the Union of
South Africa to co-operate with the Committee on
South West Africa and, in particular, to submit to
the Committee reports on its administration of the
Territory of. South West Africa and to assist the Committee on South West Africa in the examination of
such reports or such information and documentation
as may be available to that Committee;
6. Requests the Committee on South West Africa
to analyse and summarize the substantive discussion of
the South West African question in the Fourth Committee of the General Assembly and to transmit this
analysis and summary to the Government of the Union
of South Africa for its information;
7. Requests further the Committee on South West
Africa to examine the extent to which and the manner
in which the specialized agencies and extra-budgetary
organs of the United Nations might contribute to the
social, economic and educational advancement of the
inhabitants of the Territcry.
501st plenary meeting,
23 November 1954.

*

*

*

At its 512th plenary meeting on 14 December 1954, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee to the President, approved the nomination of THAILAND
and the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA to fill the vacancies occurring in the Committee on South West Africa.

852 (IX). Status of the Territory of South West
Africa
The General Assembly,
Having recommended, by its resolutions 65 (I) of
14 December 1946, 141 (II) of 1 November 1947, 227
11 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Supplement No. 14, and documents A/2666/Corr.1 and A/
2666/Add.1.

29

(III) of 26 November 1948, 337 (IV) of 6 December
1949, 449 B (V) of 13 December 1950, 570 B (VI)
of 19 January 1952 and 749 B (VIII) of 28 November
1953, that the Mandated Territory of South West
Africa be placed under the International Trusteeship
System, and having repeatedly invited the Government
of the Union of South Africa to propose, for the
consideration of the General Assembly, a Trusteeship
Agreement for South West Africa,
Having accepted, by its resolution 449 A (V) of 13
December 1950, the advisory opinion of 11 July 1950
of the International Court of Justice concerning South
West Africa, inter alia, to the effect that:
(a) While "the provisions of Chapter XII of the
Charter do not impose on the Union of South West
Africa a legal obligation to place the Territory under
the Trusteeship System", they "are applicable to the
Territory of South West Africa in the sense that they
provide a means by which the Territory may be
brought under the Trusteeship System",
(b) " ... the Union of South Africa acting alone
has not the competence to modify the international
status of the Territory of South West Africa", and
" ... the competence to determine and modify the international status of the Territory rests with the Union
of South Africa acting with the consent of the United
Nations",
Considering that, in accordance with Chapter XII of
the Charter, all Mandated Territories which have not
achieved independence have been brought under the
Trusteeship System with the sole exception of the
Territory of South West Africa,
1. Reiterates its resolutions 65 (I) of 14 December
1946, 141 (II) of 1 November 1947, 227 (III) of 26
November 1948, 337 (IV) of 6 December 1949, 449 B
(V) of 13 December 1950, 570 B (VI) of 19 January
1952 and 749 B (VIII) of 28 November 1953, to the
effect that the Territory of South West Africa be
placed under the International Trusteeship System;
2. Reasserts that the normal way of modifying the
international status of the Territory would be to place
it under the Trusteeship System by means of a Trusteeship Agreement in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter XII of the Charter.
501st plenary meeting,
23 November 1954.

853 (IX). Participation of the indigenous inhahitanl8 of the Trust Territories in the work
of the Tru11teeship Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 554 (VI) of 18 January
1952 and 653 (VII) of 21 December 1952 in so far
as they concern the participation of the indigenous
inhabitants of the Trust Territories in the work of the
Trusteeship Council,
Concerned to ensure that the political, economic,
social and educational advancement of the inhabitants
of the Trust Territories and their progressive development towards self-government or independence shall
be attained in accordance with the freely expressed
wishes of the peoples concerned,
Considering that it is essential to employ to their
fullest extent the means which are already enumerated
in the Charter to ensure that, as free public opinion
