Genera) A11sembly-Twenty-~econd Se.ion

the General Assembly, a report containing the replies
received from Member States in accordance with
paragraph 3 above;
5. Recommends that no legislative or other action
be taken which may be prejudicial to the aims and
purposes of a convention on the non-applicability of
statutory limitation to war crimes and crimes against
humanity, pending the adoption of a convention by the
General Assembly ;
6. Decides to give high priority to the completion
of the draft convention on the non-applicability of statutory limitation to war crimes and crimes against
humanity, with a view to its adoption at the twentythird session.
1638th plenary meeting,
18 December 1967.
2339

(XXII). International Year for Human
Rights

The GeneraJ Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1961 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 designating the year 1968 as International Year for Human Rights,
Recalling also its resolutions 2081 (XX) of 20 December 1965 and 2217 (XXI) of 19 December 1966
relating to the International Year for Human Rights,
Reaffirming its conviction that the celebration of the
International Year for Human Rights, including the
holding of the International Conference on Human
Rights, will contribute significantly to the promotion
of universal respect for and observance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as
to race, sex, language or religion,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the International Year for Human Rights,11
H<Wing also considered the report of the Preparatory
Committee for the International Conference on Human
Rights,12
Bearing in mind the conclusions and recommendations of the International Seminar on Apartheid, Racial
Discrimination and Colonialism in Southern Africa,
held in 1967 at Kitwe, Zambia, of the Seminar on the
Realization of Economic and Social Rights contained
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, held
in 1967 at Warsaw, Poland, and of recent United
Nations seminars on human rights held at Manila,
Philippines, at Kingston, Jamaica, and at Helsinki,
Finland,
1. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States, specialized agencies, regional organizations and
national and international organizations concerned that
have supplied information on the measures and activities
contemplated or undertaken by them in connexion with
the International Year for Human Rights;
2. Welcomes the measures taken or envisaged by
the Secretary-General to co-ordinate activities undertaken in connexion with the International Year for
Human Rights and to implement the relevant parts of
the programme for the Year set forth in the annex
to General Assembly resolution 2217 A (XXI) ;
11 A/6866 and Add.I

and 2.
the General Assembl_v, Twcnty-suond
Su.non, Annexu, agenda item 58, document A/6670.
11 Official Records of

3. Further welcomes the special activities contemplated or undertaken by other organs of the United
Nations in connexion with the International Year for
Human Rights ;
4. Invites Member States, the specialized agencies,
the regional intergovernmental organizations and the
national and international organizations concerned to
continue to intensify throughout 1968 their efforts and
undertakings in the field of human rights, including
the measures set out in the annexes to its resolutions
2081 (XX) and 2217 A (XXI), and to keep the
Secretary-General informed of these efforts and undertakings ;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Preparatory
Committee for the International Conference on Human
Rights for the work it has accomplished;
6. Takes note of the provisional agenda for the
!nternational Conference on Human Rights, contained
m annex II to the report of the Preparatory Committee;
7. Expresses the hope that the Conference will devote particular attention to the adoption of l]leasures
to ensure the immediate and complete elimination of
all forms of racial discrimination, apartheid and
colonialism ;
8. Decides to modify rule 34, paragraph 1, of the
draft rules of procedure of the Conference 18 to read
as follows:
"Decisions of the Conference on all matters of
substance shall, unless otherwise decided, be taken
by a simple majority of the representatives present
and voting" ;
9. Invites the Council of Europe, the League of
Arab States, the Organization of African Unity and
tht'. Orga~ization of American States and any other
reg10nal intergovernmental organizations particularly
concerned with human rights to send observers to the
Conference ;
10. Invites non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council
that have a demonstrable interest in the items on the
provisional agenda for the Conference and may wish
to he present at the Conference to send observers to it;
11. Invites other non-governmental organizations
that may be interested in sending observers to the Conference to make application to the Secretary-General
before 1 February 1968 and requests the Preparatory
Committee to consider such applications and to approve
them if the non-governmental organizations concerned
are of recognized standing, are international in their
structure and have a demonstrable interest in the items
on the provisional agenda for the Conference;
12. Decides to add the following rule to the draft
rult's of procedure of the Conference :18
"OBSERVERS FOR NON-GOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATIONS

"Rule 62
"Observers for non-governmental organizations invited to this Conference may, with the authorization
of the General Committee, circulate through the
Secretariat written statements of a general character
on questions of human rights which are on the agenda
of the Conference" ;
rn Ibid, annex I.

. . . . . . . . aclopled -

. . . . . . . . of. ...........

13. R1qu1sls the Secretary-General to present to the
Conference all appropriate documentation and to arrange for the necessary staff and facilities, taking into
account the nature and purpose of the Conference ;
14. R1qu1sts the Secretary-General to submit a
further progress report to the General Assembly at its

•

co---•·--

•

twenty-third session on the meuurea and activities
referred to in ~ragraph 4 above and a final report
on the International '1ear for Human Rights to the
Assembly at its twenty-fourth session.
163811' ,,,,_., "'"""I,

18 D1t"""w 1961.

• •

Oalaer dechion,
Bouiq, bulldlag and p)annl■I
(lte,n 51)
Town twinning •• a mean• of lnterDatlonal eo-operadoa
(I,. ... 52)

At its 1638th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1961, the General Aaembly
approved the recommendation of the Third CornmitteeH that the consideration
of items 51 and 52 should be postponed to the twenty-third session.

Elimination of all fonm of raelal cUaerbnlaatloa
(kern SS) 11

Quation of the Tiolatioa of human right■ -d frm.......tal freednw1,
lncludiq polleie■ of radal dbcrbmaadoa aad
ad of
apardaeia, In all eormtrl-, witla pardealar ref...,. to eolenlel ad
other dependent eouatrl• and tel'l'ltorle■
(I,._ 56)

...,..doll

At its 1638th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1967, the General Auembly
approved the recommendation of the Third Committee11 that the consideration
of items 55 and 56 should be postponed to the twenty-third session.
u Ibid., agenda items 51 and 52, document A/'1fXYl.. para. 3.
11 See also re10lution 2332 (XXII), para. 8.
11 01/kiol R,cordl of tlN Gfftfflll ~1fflllbl:,,

item, SS and 56, document A/6'Hl, parL 6.

TUlftJly-neou Stuiott, ~..,,,,, apnda
