S/PRST/2008/3

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 February 2008
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5830th meeting of the Security Council, held on 4 February 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregion”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern regarding the situation
in Chad.
“The Security Council supports the decision of the African Union dated
2 February 2008 strongly condemning the attacks perpetrated by armed groups
against the Chadian Government, demanding to put an immediate end to the
violence and calling on all the countries of the region to respect the unity and
territorial integrity of the Member States of the African Union.
“The Security Council in particular welcomes the decision by the African
Union to mandate the Libyan Leader, Colonel Muammar Gaddafi, and
President Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of Congo, to engage the
Chadian parties with a view to ending the fighting and to initiate efforts aimed
at seeking a lasting solution to the crisis.
“The Security Council strongly condemns these attacks and all attempts
at destabilization by force, and recalls its commitment to the sovereignty,
unity, territorial integrity and political independence of Chad.
“The Security Council urges all States in the region to abide fully by the
obligations they have entered into with regard to respect for and securing of
their common border, in particular under the Tripoli Agreement of 8 February
2006, the Riyadh Agreement of 3 May 2007 and the Sirte Agreement of
25 October 2007.
“The Security Council calls upon the States of the region to deepen their
cooperation with a view to putting an end to the activities of armed groups and
their attempt to seize power by force.
“The Security Council calls upon Members States to provide support, in
conformity with the United Nations Charter, as requested by the Government
of Chad (S/2008/69).
“The Security Council expresses its concern regarding the direct threat
that the combats pose for the safety of the civilian population, including
internally displaced persons and refugees.
08-22710 (E) 040208

*0822710*

S/PRST/2008/3

“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and
The European Union force (EUFOR TCHAD/RCA), whose deployment in
eastern Chad and north-eastern central African Republic was authorized by
Resolution 1778 (2007), to contribute to the protection of vulnerable civilian
populations and to facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance.
“The Security Council expresses its concern over the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel, UN personnel and European Union personnel and
material deployed in Chad. It underlines that all parties have a responsibility to
ensure the protection of all these personnel and of the diplomatic personnel
present in Chad.”

2

08-22710
