S/PV.9069

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9069th meeting

Tuesday, 21 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-39235 (E)
*2239235*

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Lithuania, Slovakia and Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Alice
Nderitu, Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide;
Ms. Liubov Tsybulska, Head of the Centre for Strategic
Communication and Information Security; and
Mr. Jared Andrew Cohen, Chief Executive Officer of
Jigsaw and Adjunct Senior Fellow at the Council on
Foreign Relations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Nderitu.
Ms. Nderitu: I would like to thank the President of
the Security Council, Ambassador Ferit Hoxha, and the
other members of the Council for inviting me to brief
them on the topic of incitement to violence, leading to
atrocity crimes.
My mandate as Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide is to act as a
catalyst to raise awareness of the causes and dynamics
of genocide, alert the relevant actors through early
warning where there is a risk of genocide and advocate
and mobilize for appropriate action. In addition, since
2019 my Office has served as the focal point in the United
Nations system for the implementation of the United
Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech,
which integrates that priority into the work of the
whole United Nations system, including at the country
level, in all its agencies, funds and programmes, as a
key element for advancing all relevant United Nations
agendas. That is done in full respect for the essential
right of the freedom of expression, as provided under
international human rights law.
This week, on 18 June, we commemorated the firstever International Day for Countering Hate Speech. My
Office and the Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of
2/30

21/06/2022

Morocco, the driving force behind General Assembly
resolution 75/309, which established that International
Day, also co-sponsored a side event in the Trusteeship
Council on 17 June on the role of education in addressing
the root causes of hate speech and advancing inclusion,
non-discrimination and peace. The International Day
for Countering Hate Speech was officially marked at a
high-level informal meeting of the General Assembly,
which was convened by the President of the Assembly
yesterday, 20 June.
We all know from history the devastating impact
that incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence
and hateful and divisive narratives can have by
generating hatred and incitement to violence. We saw it
in the lead-up to the Holocaust, in Rwanda in 1994 and
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1995.
My Office also works with technology and social
media companies to ensure that they adequately fulfil
their responsibilities for addressing hate speech on their
platforms, align their policies with international human
rights standards and strengthen their commitment to
putting the protection of human lives at the forefront.
My Office has developed guidance and policies,
including on addressing and countering coronavirus
disease-related hate speech, as well as, in the past
few months, on Holocaust and genocide denial as hate
speech and gender-based hate speech.
The Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide, which was adopted on
9 December 1948, emerged from the shadows of the
Holocaust. The International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights states that any advocacy of national,
racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited
by law, and that direct and public incitement to genocide
is a crime prohibited under international law. These
also represent indicators of risk and potential triggers
for the commission of atrocity crimes in the Framework
of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes — the methodology
that my Office uses for analysis.
The 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide specifically
identifies as punishable offenses conspiracy to commit
genocide, direct and public incitement to commit
genocide, attempts to commit genocide and complicity
in genocide. The prevention of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes is a legal obligation for States
under international law.
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9069

United Nations intergovernmental organs have
held meetings and adopted several decisions since the
start of the conflict in Ukraine. The Secretary-General
has visited the region and called for the cessation of
hostilities. He remains fully engaged with key actors,
including the Governments of the Russian Federation
and Ukraine, while reiterating the message that there is
no alternative to diplomacy.

redouble their efforts to help to the restoration of peace.
I also called on religious leaders to use their influence
to support efforts to resolve the ongoing conflict
rather than inflaming it further. I reminded them, as
I reminded other actors, that advocacy of national,
racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence is prohibited under
international law.

I have advocated publicly and privately in my
engagement with a range of Member States for the need
to reinforce prevention and accountability efforts.

Pursuant to its resolution 49/1, the Human Rights
Council established the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine, which
complements the important work of the United Nations
Human Rights Monitoring Mission of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Ukraine.
Among other things, the Commission is mandated to
investigate all alleged violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law;
to establish the facts, circumstances and root causes
of any such violations and abuses; and to collect,
consolidate and analyse evidence of such violations and
abuses, including their gender dimension, in view of any
future legal proceedings. At the same time, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights continues to document civilian casualties and
the impact of hostilities, monitor freedom of movement
and receive and report on allegations of human rights
violations. In addition, the thirty-fourth special session
of the Human Rights Council in May was devoted to
Ukraine and among other things called for a cessation
of hostilities. The Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court has also announced his decision to
open an investigation into the situation in Ukraine.

In a statement dated 18 March, I acknowledged the
16 March order by the International Court of Justice
indicating provisional measures in the case concerning
allegations of genocide under the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
I echoed the Court’s pronouncement that States parties
must honour their obligations to prevent and punish the
crime of genocide in good faith and act only within the
limits permitted by international law and in conformity
with the spirit and aims of the United Nations. The
Court spoke, and it is imperative to ensure that the
provisional measures it indicated are implemented in
full and without delay in order to prevent any further
loss of life.
I also called for a cessation of hostilities and
the protection of civilians. I echoed the concerns
of other senior United Nations officials regarding
the heightened risks of sexual violence, especially
trafficking in persons, which has a significant impact
on women and children. I acknowledged the important
role of regional and international efforts to address
the ongoing humanitarian crisis with the millions who
have been displaced. I also stressed the importance of
ensuring that all parties adhere to international human
rights law, international humanitarian law and all other
related obligations and principles.
Before the start of the current conflict this year,
my Office had already been working closely with
the United Nations country team in Ukraine to
support intercommunal dialogue efforts. I encourage
prioritizing accountability and the continuation of such
intercommunal efforts.
On 14 April, I reiterated my strong concern about
the continuing deterioration of the situation in Ukraine,
with the ongoing loss of life and intensified suffering.
I called on all who are in a position of influence and
those able to effect real change on the ground to

Serious allegations have been raised, including
indications of the possible commission of genocide
and war crimes. Determinations of the commission of
the crime of genocide can be made only by a court of
competent jurisdiction. My Office does not carry out
criminal investigations of specific incidents, present
or past. Without judicial or quasi-judicial powers, my
Office does not determine whether specific situations,
either ongoing or from the past, legally qualify as
any of the international crimes of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. In my role as
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, my
main responsibility is prevention, not adjudication.
Nevertheless, serious allegations of the commission of
international crimes in themselves constitute indicators
of the risk of the commission of such crimes. For that
reason, I can only reiterate my call to bring an end to

22-392353/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

this war in order to ensure the protection of civilians,
and accelerate diplomatic efforts to make both of those
things possible. Prevention focuses on the future, but it
also looks to the past, and the outpouring of hostility in
response to the war means that we must work harder to
protect everyone.
War is a problem created by humans and one
that humans have the capacity to resolve. History
has produced individuals and collective bodies who
have ended wars. Many people believe in the United
Nations and envision a world where peace, justice and
non-violent relations prevail. We need the membership
of the Security Council and the concerned parties to
articulate an inclusive vision and propose a road map
aimed at ending the war. That road map must consider
peace itself to be a process that is not indifferent to
injustice. Ending this and other wars requires sustained
action, including by bridging generational divides,
countering divisive rhetoric and hate speech, offline
and online, and addressing human rights violations,
which have a direct impact on livelihoods and the
quality of life.
In conclusion, as Secretary-General Guterres has
noted, the only solution to this conflict is a diplomatic
one. That will be possible with the commitment of all
parties. But with each and every delay, the escalation of
human suffering continues.
The President: I thank Ms. Nderitu for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Tsybulska.
Ms. Tsybulska: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to speak at this important meeting on behalf of civil
society, which, like my Government and, above all, our
brave armed forces, is now defending Ukraine from
Russia’s barbaric aggression.
Ukraine is going through the most difficult period
in its history. The largest war since the Second World
War has been going on in Europe. Russia wants to
destroy Ukraine literally, by killing and raping, but also
in a broader sense by eliminating our culture, language
and history — basically everything that shapes our
identity. Russia has demonstrated an imperial appetite
for hundreds of years. Ukraine’s history has been one
of continued struggle for survival and independence
against Russia’s attempts to conquer us, not to mention
its infliction on us of the Holodomor — a mass famine
in which the Soviets killed at least 4 million Ukrainians
by deliberately depriving them of food — during which
4/30

21/06/2022

the regime housed citizens of Soviet Russia in the
homes of people who had just starved to death. Their
homes were literally still full of the warmth of their
lives when the new owners moved in. That is exactly
what is happening now. Russia has brought famine to
our land and is blackmailing the entire world with a
food crisis.
In the 1920s and 1930s, Ukrainian writers,
artists and poets were tortured and murdered during
a period that has gone down in Ukrainian history as
the Executed Renaissance. According to Moscow,
the Ukrainian language and Ukrainian art should not
have existed. That is exactly what is happening now.
Russian teachers have forbidden children in Mariupol,
Kherson and Melitopol to speak Ukrainian. Ukrainian
libraries and museums are being destroyed with
ostentatious brutality.
I should not fail to mention the mass deportations
in the 1960s and 1970s of Ukrainian dissidents, who
were forcibly sent to the farthest corners of the Soviet
Union, where they died in intolerable living conditions
in labour camps. Again, deportations are exactly what
is happening now. In the space of just a few months,
more than 1 million people have been deported from
eastern and southern Ukraine to Russia, 307,000 of
them children. We Ukrainians have seen all of those
terrible crimes more than once, whether in relation to
us, the Crimean Tatars, the Baltic peoples, the Poles,
the Chechens or others. That is the modus operandi of
the Kremlin.
However, the current war is extraordinary for its
inhuman cruelty. It exhibits the brutality of medieval
wars, with bombings of maternity hospitals and
even cemeteries; deliberate attacks on shelters and
evacuation routes; the rape of women, men and children;
and the mass murder of unarmed civilians, all of which
everyone has certainly seen in the media. The Russian
army has demonstrated barbarity that is difficult to
imagine in the twenty-first century.
As soon as the full-scale invasion began, Ukrainians
everywhere asked just one question: “Why? Why do
they hate us so much?” And then the whole of society
united in a single effort to tell the truth to so-called
ordinary Russians. We would send them photos and
videos en masse of the atrocities committed by Russian
soldiers in Ukraine. We would call our acquaintances
and relatives in Russia to explain the horrors of the
war, hoping to arouse their sympathy. We thought
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

that when the Russians saw all of the atrocities, they
would surely condemn such lawlessness. Instead, we
saw a total absence of any compassion. There was
no compassion for the one-year-old boy from the city
of Izium who died after being raped by two Russian
soldiers simultaneously, or for the 16-year-old girl from
Irpin whose nails were torn off by Russians before
she was raped and shot in the head. The majority of
Russians have not condemned those war crimes. They
have begun to show pride and approval.
Many people think that those are isolated cases.
However, in addition to what we saw online, in addition
to opinion polls showing full support for the Kremlin’s
actions in Ukraine by Russians, we also listen to
interceptions — conversations between Russian
soldiers and their families. Here are just a few quotes.

S/PV.9069

forced labour and death for Ukrainians who refused to
comply with the Kremlin’s rule in Ukraine.
On 5 April, Dmitry Medvedev, former Russian
Prime Minister and President, currently Deputy
Chairman of the Security Council of the Russian
Federation, described Ukraine as a completely fake
nation and a copy of the Third Reich that does not
deserve to exist. He then went even further and proposed
to expand Russia from Lisbon to Vladivostok.
On the programme of the well-known propagandist
Vladimir Solovyov, one of the guests stated
the following:
“Ukraine cannot be repaired. You cannot repair this
construct. It has to be destroyed, as it is anti-Russia,
an entity that threatens Russia.”

From a conversation between a Russian soldier and
his wife, we intercepted:

Another well-known figure in Russia media, Anton
Krasovsky, who led the RT television channel said:

“You there, rape Ukrainian women and do not tell
me anything.”

“This country should not exist. And we will do
everything so that it does not exist. We will burn
down your Constitution.”

And from a conversation between a Russian soldier
and his mother, we intercepted:
“It is right that you kill them all. They are all Nazis.
And children too.”
These are the consequences of the consistent work of
the Russian propaganda machine. The Kremlin’s media
created an alternative reality for millions of people, in
which Ukrainians have ceased to be human beings and
must be physically exterminated on a massive scale.
All these years, Russian propaganda has been
systematically spreading hatred towards Ukraine and
the West, systematically dehumanizing us. It denies
the existence of Ukraine, the Ukrainian language and
culture. In some cases, Russian soldiers explicitly
justified their violence against civilians by referring to
programmes and articles they saw in the Russian media.
There is a lot of evidence for genocidal rhetoric.
My colleagues and I started a database to show the
longevity and systematic nature of the demonization of
Ukrainians. Here are just a few examples.
In an article from 4 April published by Russia’s
State-run RIA Novosti news agency, pro-Kremlin
journalist Timofey Sergeytsev called for the destruction
of Ukraine’s national identity and a campaign of brutal
punishment of its people. He called for imprisonment,

Finally, the head of Roscosmos, Dmitry Rogozin,
also posted recently on his Telegram channel that
“if we do not kill them — Ukrainians — as our
grandfathers did not kill them, we will have to die,
but our grandchildren will have to pay even more.
So let us better end it now.”
Colonialism became a mindset for the Russian
people, one in which there is no room for democracy,
human rights and freedom. The world missed that
very dangerous processes have begun to unfold in
Russia. The world’s largest country, with a population
of 140 million people, has begun to profess extremely
chauvinistic, nationalist and racist beliefs. We have seen
similar events play out in the history of humankind. We
know the terrible consequences it can lead to. For years,
we repeated “never again”, yet this horror is happening
again right in the heart of Europe. Russia is no longer
authoritarian. It is a totalitarian State in which the
regime has given a green light to its citizens to be as
cruel as possible. It gave them permission to kill, torture
and rape. That permission was delivered through the
media, through televisions and smart phones. Ordinary
Russians, who were then sent to Ukraine to fight, were
turned into murderers and rapists, and millions of
Russians back home were allowed to cheer and applaud
those actions.

22-392355/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The Kremlin has been saying for years that
Ukrainians are Nazis, that Russia protects Russian
speakers — liberating them from the Nazis. However, it
turns out that the Kremlin does not care about Russian
speakers. It kills them with the same fury as everyone
else. Thousands in the mass graves in Mariupol
spoke Russian. Russia liberated them from only one
thing — life.
Russian officials like to say that all these crimes are
staged and that there is no evidence. I have to disappoint
them. Thousands of pieces of evidence of Russian war
crimes have already been collected and continue to be
collected. Russia does not follow any rules of war. And
the whole world sees it.
It is very important to understand that this threat
exists not only for Ukrainians; it is a threat to the entire
Western world. After all, in recent years, the Russian
State media machine has also created an enemy image
of the Western countries. Russian State media speaks of
the erosion of moral values, of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization’s aggressive intentions towards Russia,
and it imposes on Russian citizens the view that Russia
has the historical right to bring order to the West.
There are already many victims of this war. It
is unlikely that we will ever be able to count them
accurately. But there will be more, much more, if we
do not stop Russia and do not do everything possible
to make the Russians understand their mistake. If this
process of bringing them back to humanistic values
does not happen, as it did in Germany, Russia will do
it again.
Russia has never reflected on its crimes in the
telling of its history. It did not reflect the bloody
revolution at the beginning of the last century. It did not
reflect Stalinism, purges, deportations, murders and
persecutions of journalists, activists and politicians,
the invasion of Georgia, the annexation of Crimea and
the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. That is
why Russia is committing these crimes with impunity,
over and over again.
It is now extremely important for us to study the
connection between what Russian propaganda has been
saying all these years and the mass atrocities committed
by the Russian army in Ukraine. However, we must not
only study, but hold accountable those who have been
inciting hatred and spreading genocidal rhetoric all
this time.
6/30

21/06/2022

It was systematic propaganda that enabled the
genocide, with specific people behind it. This is not a
mythical formation with no faces. We know the names
of those who fed hatred to a huge nation, in return for
generous compensation from the Russian State budget.
As a result, my country is flooded with blood and tears.
Let us not let these people avoid responsibility, together
with the rest of the Russian leadership, which should be
brought to justice. Let us avoid the trap of the banality
of evil when criminals claim that they only obeyed
orders. Unpunished evil returns. Let us finally punish
it and protect millions of free people in Ukraine and
across the world.
The President: I thank Ms. Tsybulska for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Cohen: It is truly a profound honour and
privilege to be invited to speak to the Security Council
today. I want to start by thanking the Government
of Albania, in particular Prime Minister Rama and
Foreign Minister Xhaçka, for the invitation. From
Afghanistan to Ukraine and on so many other issues,
Albania has stepped up to embody the best of what it
means to embrace a moral imperative.
When this Chamber was built and the Security
Council was established, no one at the time could
have conceived or imagined a future where nearly
65 per cent of the world’s population is connected to
something as complex as the modern Internet. But
missing from the discourse back then because of
the state of technology were words like distributed
denial-of-service attack, cyberattack, malware, virus,
trolling, online harassment, doxxing, Domain Name
System poisoning, hacking and so many other terms
that we find ourselves grappling with today. But while
these concepts are relatively new in the history of the
Security Council, the motivations behind them and the
potential consequences are as familiar as the history of
war and conflict.
The interconnectedness brought about by the
Internet and social media has advanced humankind in
ways we could never have deemed fathomable. It has
also given us unparalleled visibility. For example, if
we look at the war in Ukraine, there are more hours
of footage uploaded to YouTube, TikTok and other
platforms than there are aggregate minutes of the entire
war itself.
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

But with great promise also comes new
vulnerabilities. That is why I founded Jigsaw in 2010
at Google — because I wanted technology to address
the future challenges that could potentially destabilize
the Internet that was being created. Those challenges
are here today and are impacting the most vulnerable
segments of the world’s population, who are increasingly
caught in the crossfire of inter-State cyberconflict.
Like land, air and sea, the Internet has become a
critical domain to occupy during war. For nations at
war, their first strike is increasingly a cyberstrike.
Looking back to 2014, in the Donbas, before any tanks
crossed the border or any physical weapons were fired,
there was the systematic targeting of police officers
in the eastern part of Ukraine, encouraging them over
Telegram channels to defect, with result that, when the
first shots were fired, the support and rule of law would
be undermined.
Narratives are amplified to mitigate a perceived
threat or even topple democratic systems. From across
the globe, combatants can gain access to and attack
critical infrastructure that affects the livelihood of our
communities. This has brought digital and information
warfare to the forefront of geopolitical conflicts.
In 2016, I wrote in Time magazine that all wars
will begin as cyberwars. They will unfold silently,
invisibly and relatively inexpensively. I believe this to
be even truer today, but the types of attacks we see have
unfortunately diversified and democratized. Nowhere
is this more true than in Ukraine.
Let me be clear about one thing: for all nations
concerned about their cybervulnerabilities, there is
absolutely nothing that they will see in their countries
that will not be directed at Ukraine first and worse.
It has been disproportionately targeted by the most
advanced cyberattacks since 2014. It is essentially our
crystal ball for what is likely to come.
It is a testament to the Ukrainian effectiveness
in deflecting and countering these attacks that it
has become increasingly difficult to understand the
full breadth of what is playing out. As one example,
Russia’s cyberattacks on Ukraine are so egregious that
the Ukrainian elements of criminal ransomware groups
made up of both Russian and Ukrainian citizens, when
given the order to deploy ransomware, chose to defend
Ukraine instead and leaked the logs associated with
the ransomware.

S/PV.9069

Let me attempt to highlight five key attack vectors
that are illustrated in Ukraine. I have a rule that I am
not going to articulate and capture problems, without
subsequently offering examples of what can and should
be done about them
The first vector is attacks on critical infrastructure.
This is what we typically think of as traditional hacking
of systems and infrastructure. These attacks target
industrial capacities, government institutions and
essential non-governmental organizations, and they
often seek to take advantage of long-cultivated zeroday exploits to bring these institutions down. The term
“zero-day” refers to the time where basically there are
“zero days” to patch a vulnerability in a system, because
the vulnerability is discovered at the precise moment
of attack. Most of these attacks were mitigated in the
early phases of the war. But, even now, attacks against
Ukrainian institutions, individuals, and organizations
continue to accelerate.
Let us start with distributed denial-of-service
(DDoS) attacks, which overwhelm a website with
traffic coming from different compromised computers
around the world, with the aim of censoring the website
by knocking it off the Internet. This has been among
the most pervasive forms of attack since the mid1990s. Last month, Cloudflare mitigated the largest
HTTPS attack ever reported. These attacks are not only
getting larger; they are getting more sophisticated, and
they are targeting a broader cross-section of society.
As an example, 60 per cent of all DDoS attacks have
targeted institutions of education, where the primary
beneficiaries of those websites are young people, as
well as entities critical to telecommunications. They
are also developing so-called microfloods, which are
low-throughput attacks, which have been harder to
detect and have increased steadily, up by 123 per cent
over where they were at the beginning of this year.
In Ukraine, Russia has deployed DDoS attacks that
have taken down overall connectivity by 15 to 20 per cent
in the country, and, on multiple occasions, the attacks have
become so ferocious that Internet connectivity dropped
to close to zero. They have blocked access to essential
services, financial institutions, the Government and
critical non-governmental organization services. These
attacks are not only targeting institutions in Ukraine.
In May alone, many Government agencies around the
world reported numerous DDoS attacks, including the
Port of London Authority, Italy’s Supreme Council of
Magistrates, its customs agency, Ministries for Foreign

22-392357/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Affairs, Education, and Cultural Heritage, Estonia’s
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, and Germany’s Ministry
of Defence, the Bundestag and the Federal Police.
The second vector of attack focuses on organized
harassment through toxicity and deception. These
attacks have targeted prominent individuals and whole
classes of people. Deepfakes of alleged cocaine addiction
were used to seed and feed a harassment campaign
against President Zelenskyy. The aggression aimed
to undermine President Zelenskyy’s mental stability
while persuading public support towards Russia. In
another broad effort, numerous campaigns have aimed
at creating resentment towards Ukrainian refugees
throughout Europe, with the obvious goal of creating
change and havoc at the ballot box. Disinformation has
spread across social media platforms on refugee-linked
criminal activity and preferential treatment of refugees
over countries’ own citizens.
This strategy goes beyond Ukraine’s borders.
It focuses on grass-roots movements to drive public
and political support away from Ukrainian defence.
As an example, in Poland, where the vast majority
of refugees are women and where refugees are being
housed in individual Polish citizens’ homes, there is
a disinformation campaign targeting women of the
households, encouraging them to protect their husbands
against these refugees, playing on fears that some
individuals might have.
We have also seen attacks on the conversation more
broadly, which constitutes the third vector of attack.
Information warfare has made its way into the homes of
ordinary people across the globe. Activist and political
leaders now have a direct line of communication to
organize around a cause. This has enhanced the voices
of those living in societies where censorship is a dark
reality and is most pervasive. Authoritarian regimes
develop sophisticated strategies to disorient digital
conversations, and, if successful, they completely
control the narrative. One of the more complex cases
involved the creation of fake fact-checkers who sought to
create confusion by “fact-checking” Ukrainian claims
that were never made. In debunking fabricated false
claims, the effort aimed to position Ukrainians as liars
and sway public and political support towards Russia.
Such attacks have been amplified by a combination
of real-people trolls and enhanced chatbots and
challenged many platforms’ ability to respond quickly
and accurately.
8/30

21/06/2022

The fourth vector of attack has been the use of
misinformation and disinformation to incite and
justify extreme violence. Our team at Jigsaw has
developed research that confirms the ability to leverage
disinformation to motivate violence, especially to
motivate animosity toward what is called an “outgroup”.
The relentless Russian propaganda to its citizens that
Ukrainians were “Nazis” likely served to dehumanize
Ukrainians in the eyes of Russian soldiers, leading to the
many war crimes now alleged against Russian forces.
Efforts to reconstitute the Ukrainian Internet as the
Russian Internet constitute the fifth and final vector
of attack that I will speak about today. In the first
major city to be captured by Russian forces, Kherson,
targeted attacks on fibre-optic backbones and a power
outage took them offline, but then their Internet
traffic was routed through Crimea. Interestingly,
when Russia annexed the occupied Ukrainian territory
in 2014, it also took over their Internets, seizing the
assets of incumbent telcos and routing traffic through
Rostelecom. This “soft substitution” of one for the other
began after the Russian invasion of Crimea. Today that
model has been accelerated, and Donbas’ Internet is,
for all intents and purposes, now a Russian Internet.
Borders are still contested, but the digital frontier is
now already frozen.
Let us now talk about solutions. Each of these
attacks now forms part of the rubric and strategy of war
and has implications far beyond the current conflict
in Ukraine. It is increasingly urgent for the Security
Council to consider the digital implications of war and
explore legal revisions to cover such threats.
At Jigsaw, we are contributing in the ways we can.
Last month, we launched a new programme that we
are calling “Protect Your Democracy”. Protect Your
Democracy offers a suite of free tools to people and
organizations to help protect their access to the free and
open web, defend websites from cyberattacks, shield
their accounts from hacking and safeguard the digital
public square. In addition, Project Shield is a free
service that extends Google’s DDoS protection services
to websites not on Google’s cloud. Using what is called
a “reverse proxy”, the tool functions as an insurance
policy that protects the site when it needs it most.
Deployed first in Ukraine in 2014, where we first got
the idea, when we asked human rights and civil society
organizations what they needed, Shield is again active
at work in Ukraine. We are protecting more than 150
government, non-governmental, publisher, and human
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

rights organizations sites that are under repeated and
daily DDoS threat. Project Shield was specifically
recognized as contributing to Google’s receipt of the
first Ukraine Peace Prize.
Protect Your Democracy also aims to protect the
conversation. Included in the toolkit is a multilingual
product built by Jigsaw called “Perspective API”. The
technology helps content moderators monitor and detect
toxicity in text-based communications online. We do
this by amassing a data training set of annotated and
toxic comments and then training a machine-learning
model to measure toxicity by literally showing it billions
of examples in multiple languages of what other people
have described and labelled as toxic. Google, Reddit,
The New York Times and many other publications
around the world leverage that API to promote healthy
dialogue and discourse.
We have also published an open-source tool called
Harassment Manager, which helps users who are often
targets of harassment, such as journalists, human
rights defenders and civil-society leaders. It helps them
document and manage the harassment that they receive
on social media platforms, which can be voluminous
and down to the second. In partnership with Twitter and
Thomson Reuters Foundation, the tool will be freely
available for the Foundation’s community of journalists
this summer.
Our behavioural research and product development
teams are focused on helping users become more
resilient to misinformation and disinformation
while browsing and communicating online. We have
developed a technology that encourages users to think
carefully as they engage with low-quality content
across the Web. Our prototype on YouTube resulted in
a statistically significant increase in users’ ability to
spot manipulation.
We are exploring new techniques that protect
people against misinformation by teaching them to
spot and refute a misleading argument or tactic called
prebunking. We are currently exploring prebunking
campaigns in Central and Eastern Europe in response
to the anticipated disinformation around refugee flows
and look forward to reporting on its impact in the
coming weeks and months.
While the programme currently focuses on Central
and Eastern Europe, it will eventually be available in
more than 35 languages in the near term, including
Polish, Czech and Ukrainian. As we work to scale

S/PV.9069

the programme globally, we will continue to explore
emerging threats and what new tools should be built to
tackle them.
Finally, we have free and open-source tools that
help protect against attacks at the network level. Those
tools allow individuals who are experiencing a filtered
Internet in a moment of crisis to be able to contact
civil-society organizations in other countries that have
set up a cloud server to allow a channel for people in
those countries to be able to experience the Internet of
a different country. That tool is being used by activists
across the world.
Let me finish with a note of caution and a call
to action. In doing so, I want to reflect on one of my
favourite authors, Barbara Tuchman, who wrote Guns
of August, the seminal book on the causes of the First
World War. Her lesson was profound about the dangers
of mass mobilization and the type of powder keg that it
can create, where a small trigger can bring the world to
war. We understand the lessons associated with mass
physical mobilization. We are seeing that play out in
Europe at this precise moment, and that is why we all
are here today.
It is not clear to me that we understand the
consequences and the implications of the mass
mobilization of cyberwar. I am deeply, deeply
concerned that we are bringing the country to the brink
of a threshold that once we have crossed there will be
no going back. My caution is that while cyberwar is
less visible and harder to understand, it is far more
contagious, harder to control and increasingly has
physical-world implications. We have no deterrence in
the cyberdomain, and the world’s connected population
is caught in the crossfire, getting hit by the digital
equivalent of shrapnel on a daily basis. None of that can
be put back in a box once it has been deployed, and it
is not possible to control what ultimately happens to it.
States must find a way to turn the volume down
and settle on some kind of deterrence doctrine for
the cyberdomain. Companies and technology experts
have badly needed expertise, but there is no magical
algorithm or single fix for this. It will take a lot of
experimental efforts rather than a single grand effort to
protect our digital world. My hope is that in sharing a
little bit about Jigsaw’s work with the Council, it offers
one small example of what that experimentation can
look like.
The President: I thank Mr. Cohen for his briefing.

22-392359/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Albania.
I thank Special Adviser Nderitu for her insightful
presentation and the clear messages that we heard
here today. I thank Ms. Tsybulska for her account and
Mr. Cohen for a most insightful and thought-provoking
outlook on the contribution of the technology world,
including Jigsaw, to specific and targeted programmes
to keep the infinite Web as a healthy space of freedom.
For years, in the early 1930s, the Nazis used
virulently anti-Semitic newspapers such as Der
Stürmer to help incite the German people to the active
persecution of Jews. Years later, a failed and obscure
artist-turned-politician, a certain Adolf Hitler, would
implement exactly what he had anticipated in his
notorious book, with the consequences that we know,
engraved in posterity as the Holocaust. The world was
shocked, rightly. But everything that happened had
been said openly.
In 1994, a Rwandan radio station, RTLM, close to
the Government, did everything to incite Hutus against
the Tutsi minority, repeatedly describing the latter as
cockroaches and snakes. The station, unfortunately, had
many listeners. Within 100 days, an estimated 1 million
people, the overwhelming majority of whom were
Tutsis, were savagely slaughtered. The world witnessed,
powerless and with dismay, one of the most infamous
examples of human behaviour in modern history.
In the early 1990s, on a different continent, in
Europe, a Bosnian Serb television station would unleash
its primitive hatred of the Bosnian Muslims and fill
the air with uninterrupted praise for the Bosnian Serb
“liberating forces” from those undesirables, qualified
at that time as Turks. While a campaign of terror with
concentration camps, mass executions that saw some of
the worst atrocities in Europe since the Second World
War was going on, that television station and its many
followers applauded the heroic acts of their army — the
very army that committed genocide in Srebrenica.
A few years later, in Kosovo, the derogatory term
Shiptar, used for Kosovo Albanians, would notoriously
10/30

21/06/2022

help to promote incitement to violence and celebrate
the ethnic cleansing campaign that led to mass crimes
in Kosovo, including widespread sexual violence,
looting and the expulsion of hundreds of thousands of
people from their homes. The propaganda called it a
liberation — almost. The international community had
to intervene to put an end to that madness.
Fast-forward, in 2022, after years of rhetoric
denigrating Ukraine, on the eve of Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine the Russian President openly challenged the
country’s right to exist. He described Ukraine as an
artificial creation of the Bolsheviks, called its leaders
Nazis and decided that Ukraine should be de-Nazified.
What followed, as we know, was a brutal war of
aggression that has claimed more than 10,000 victims
and resulted in millions of refugees and spine-chilling
atrocity crimes, including executions; rape and sexual
violence; indiscriminate bombardments, with entire
cities reduced to rubble; deliberate attacks on shelters,
evacuation routes and humanitarian corridors; sieges;
and the forcible transfer of Ukrainians. It has also
unleashed a severe food-insecurity crisis throughout
the world.
What do these few meaningful examples have in
common? They happened at different times, in different
environments, with different actors, after all. Yes, but
when the worst kind of hatred and incitement of violence
is unleashed, it is only a matter of time before what
begins with dehumanizing words ends in bloodshed.
High-level Russian officials and State media
commentators repeatedly and publicly deny the existence
of a Ukrainian identity, implying that those who selfidentify as Ukrainians threaten the unity of Russia or
are simply Nazis and therefore deserve punishment.
Worse, the accusation in a mirror technique has
proved to be a powerful, historically recurring form
of incitement to mass atrocities. One accuses another
group of planning, or having committed, atrocities like
those one envisions against them. Milosević sent his
army to Kosovo under the false pretext of protecting
the Serbian minority there; he ended up in prison and
died behind bars as a war criminal.
The Russian propaganda machinery, including high
officials, made the utterly false claim that Ukraine had
committed genocide against the population in Russianbacked separatist-controlled areas as their pretext for
invading Ukraine. That is an absurd accusation, as
we know, which the International Court of Justice,
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the highest world Court, termed unsubstantiated and
dismissed as untrue with an order issued on 16 March
that to date has remained unheeded.
What do soldiers do when they hear their leaders
and commanders and carefully orchestrated State
propaganda use such dehumanizing terms? They echo
their content, and they end up committing atrocities.
Reported statements by soldiers include threats to rape
“every Nazi” in Ukraine, “hunting Nazis,” “liberate
you from Nazis” and “cleanse you from the dirt”. That
is what happened to the convicted Russian soldier who
admitted in court to killing an innocent man.
It is no surprise then that the war of choice in
Ukraine has further exacerbated the proliferation of
disinformation, news fabrication, conspiracy theories,
widespread misinformation and the incitement to
violence and hatred. We see more and more language
that demonizes and threatens people — not for anything
that they have done but simply because of who they are.
For us, the freedom of expression, online and
offline, is sacrosanct. No pretext can be used to curb
liberties and freedoms. But we must stand firmly
against genocide deniers, refuse history revisionists
and reject extremists who deny the fundamental right of
others and those who glorify criminals. We must refuse
those who want to use words to incite the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war and those who try to build
a path towards concentration camps or mass graves.
Any failure to prevent and condemn such acts fuels
a climate of fear and insecurity among the targeted
population and, as we have seen, the denial of genocide
and other atrocity crimes and the glorification of war
criminals become a major obstacle to trust-building and
reconciliation in post-conflict situations. For example,
in my region, instead of facing the truth and working
for reconciliation, inclusivity, peace and development,
certain political leaders have chosen the easier path of
transforming their countries into generators of hatred,
as we have seen in Republika Srpska and elsewhere.
Incitement to violence contradicts the normative
framework on human rights and undermines the rule
of law, the functioning of democratic societies and
the building of tolerant societies. It undermines core
values since it promotes the way to destroy them by
unleashing the worst human behaviour. We must be
able to learn from the past in order to prevent atrocities
in the future. We must make sure that younger
generations see in their neighbour not the enemy but

S/PV.9069

a human being who deserves the same respect. We
must challenge stereotypes and foster social solidarity
and the inclusivity of marginalized and discriminated
groups. Inclusivity creates strength; discrimination
fuels hatred.
That is why we need better education, critical
thinking, free and professional media for informed
citizens and the responsible use of the Internet and
social media. We should never sacrifice freedom, but if
we misuse it we threaten it. It is therefore our common
responsibility to prevent and protect. We can no longer
say that we do not know where incitement to violence
leads. We know that very well. We have seen it — and
that is why we must act.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): Let me
start by thanking you and your delegation, Sir, for
keeping a continued spotlight on accountability, in
particular your focus on holding those responsible for
committing atrocities to account. I also want to thank
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide Nderitu,
Ms. Tsybulska and Mr. Cohen for their compelling,
useful and deeply disturbing briefings today.
I believe those presentations provide another
sobering look at how disinformation and the misuse
of the Internet is fuelling the horrific suffering that
Russia’s brutal and illegal further invasion of Ukraine
is causing the people of Ukraine. I think it is clear from
what we have heard and what we know instinctively
that aggressors use hate speech and disinformation to
foment mistrust, agitate division and ultimately fuel
their violence, as we are seeing Russia do as it wages
its premeditated and unprovoked war against Ukraine.
Let me be clear: we strongly reject Russia’s
continued efforts to distort history for its own political
purposes. The Security Council must do the same.
The General Assembly has already rejected Russia’s
false narrative and its disinformation with regard to
Ukraine and other neighbouring countries, such as
when it attempts to smear neighbours as “neo-fascists
and “neo-Nazis”. Those lies are particularly egregious
and harmful, as they really detract from serious
critically important worldwide efforts to combat actual
anti-Semitism and violent extremism.

22-3923511/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We must all continue upholding peace and security,
defending human rights and promoting the rule of law.
That work must include condemning and combating
real anti-Semitism in all its forms, as well as other
forms of intolerance, discrimination, racism and
xenophobia. We must uphold in the Council the Charter
of the United Nations. We have a special obligation to
do so and to respond to lies with truth. We cannot allow
the rule of law to be replaced by the use of force. The
Council must be clear that any attempts to change the
internationally recognized borders of sovereign States
through the use of force are unlawful, irresponsible and
dangerous — a lesson drawn from the history of the
Second World War.
Since Russia launched its illegal and unprovoked
further invasion of Ukraine, credible reports from
a broad range of sources of atrocities committed by
Russia’s forces against civilians have grown with
every passing day. Bucha, Mariupol and Kherson will
go down in history as the sites of horrific atrocities
and human suffering. There are multiple credible
reports, as we heard from our briefer, of Russia’s forces
torturing and committing execution-style killings
of people found with their hands bound behind their
backs. And as we have discussed in the Council, there
is also a multitude of reports of women and girls being
raped — some publicly — and children illegally taken
away to Russia and put up for adoption. We also know
that Russia’s forces continue to deny safe passage to
civilians fleeing violence, as well as the humanitarian
organizations trying to reach those in need. Ukraine
has suffered from Russia’s aggression since 2014.
Before then Ukraine was a country at peace. Sadly,
the atrocities committed by Russia’s forces have only
multiplied since its full-scale invasion in February.
As you noted, Mr. President, Russia also continues
to flagrantly disregard the 16 March order of the
International Court of Justice for Russia to suspend
immediately its military operations in Ukraine. We
cannot remain silent. I say to my fellow Council members
that we must seek and achieve justice for victims. The
European Democratic Resilience Initiative, which
President Biden announced in March, will provide
up to $320 million in new funding to support societal
resilience and defend human rights in Ukraine. There
will also be a particular focus on accountability for war
crimes and the other atrocities committed by Russia’s
forces in Ukraine.
12/30

21/06/2022

Similarly, the European Union, the United Kingdom
and the United States have formed the Atrocity Crimes
Advisory Group to advise the war crimes unit of
the Office of the Prosecutor-General of Ukraine on
the collection, the preservation and the analysis of
evidence of atrocities to support the pursuit of justice
for survivors and victims.
We are also supporting a broad range of international
examinations of the mounting credible reports of
atrocities in Ukraine, including the examinations
conducted by the International Criminal Court, the
United Nations human rights monitoring mission in
Ukraine and the experts’ missions under the aegis
of the Moscow Mechanism of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, to name just a few.
That effort includes supporting the establishment of the
Human Rights Council’s Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine.
I would like to note that, just today, the Attorney
General of the United States, Merrick Garland, is
visiting Ukraine in order to see how, in addition, the
United States can help Ukraine preserve and ensure
accountability for the crimes being committed on
its soil.
Let me conclude by noting that some countries
on the Council have called for the peaceful settlement
of the conflict in Ukraine, while ignoring that one
country, Russia, started this conflict by illegally
invading and attacking its neighbour. Russia alone
bears responsibility for this war. Russia alone started
this war, and Russia alone can end it. I say to our
Russian friends that they should silence their guns now,
withdraw their forces from Ukraine’s territory, speak
truth and embrace diplomacy.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Albania for convening today’s important discussion,
and all our briefers for their compelling presentations.
As we said in the Council debate on identity and
conflict (see S/PV.8877) hosted by President Kenyatta
last year, history has shown us what happens when
identity is weaponized. From the Holocaust to Rwanda
to Bosnia, propaganda, disinformation and hate speech
have paved the way for war crimes, atrocities and
genocide. As the writer Anne Applebaum observed
recently, while not every use of genocidal hate speech
leads to genocide, all genocides have been preceded
by genocidal hate speech. Russia’s propaganda and
rhetoric about Ukraine are therefore profoundly
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

disturbing, and Ms. Tsybulska has given us numerous
examples of such rhetoric today. The State-controlled
media in Russia are tightly governed by the Kremlin,
which has for years repeated hate speech directed at
Ukraine and Ukrainians. That has seen senior Russian
figures deny that Ukraine has a right to exist or that
Ukrainian identity is separate from that of Russia.
There have been relentless false claims, notably
by President Putin, that members of the Ukrainian
Government are drug addicts and neo-Nazis. There
has been hate speech from former President Dmitry
Medvedev, who has said that Ukrainians are scum and
freaks. There has been the gross falsehood from Foreign
Minister Lavrov and other Russian diplomats that
Ukrainians were carrying out a genocide in Donbas,
an allegation that has no basis in fact. Time will tell the
full human cost of Russia’s invasion. The Council is
already aware of reports of mass graves and summary
executions in Bucha, Irpin and Mariupol, and there are
widespread reports of sexual violence. Investigations
into those atrocities are under way. International justice
will determine who should be held accountable.
I want to conclude with two points. First, digital
and social media platforms can be powerful vectors
for propaganda, disinformation and hate speech. We
note the efforts made by media companies to address
that issue and we thank Mr. Cohen for his participation
today. We call on them to strengthen their work in
that regard. Secondly, article 20 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights expressly
prohibits any propaganda for war or advocacy of
national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence. Hate
speech can also be a war crime. We call on the Russian
Federation to comply with its obligations and to stop
making such statements.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important
meeting, and the briefers for their valuable and
important remarks.
We are currently seeing reports of widespread and
blatant violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law being committed in Ukraine,
particularly in areas controlled or previously controlled
by Russian forces. Many of those violations may amount
to war crimes. We call on the Russian Federation to
immediately end its unprovoked war and its relentless
and brutal attacks on civilians. Russia’s war is in

S/PV.9069

itself a violation of international law. The principles
of the Charter of the United Nations are clear on the
illegality of the acquisition of territory by force. In
March, in its order on Allegations of Genocide under
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide (Ukraine v. Russian
Federation), the International Court of Justice ordered
Russia to immediately suspend its military operations
in Ukraine. Russia must comply with that legally
binding order. Yet it has continued its aggression and
disinformation, including about genocide taking place
in parts of Ukraine. The Russian leadership’s rhetoric
is not only false, but it is dangerous. Freedom of speech
is explicitly not extended to the advocacy of national,
racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement
to discrimination, hostility or violence, and for good
reason. Incitement of violence is recognized as a
warning sign, and as the Council has seen all too often,
messaging that spreads hostility and hatred can trigger
violence that may lead to war crimes, crimes against
humanity and even genocide.
We need to prevent and counter all forms of
incitement to violence, including through dialogue,
knowledge-sharing, education and objective reporting.
We must speak up against information that is false
and deliberately created to harm. Disinformation
and war propaganda reinforce insecurity, mistrust
and hostility, and ultimately undermine the basis for
future dialogue and peace. In countering that, we have
no better ally than independent journalism and a free
press. The press plays an essential role in providing
real-time documentation of violations of international
humanitarian law as well as human rights violations
and abuses. When the time for accountability comes,
that reporting will make it even more difficult for
Russian leaders to claim ignorance of atrocity crimes
being committed at their direction. It is essential, and
required under international humanitarian law, that
journalists and other media workers be protected. Yet
the Committee to Protect Journalists has confirmed
that at least 12 journalists have died while covering the
war in Ukraine. In Russia, scores of reporters have fled
the country or are facing prosecution as the country
continues to crack down on independent media.
We would like to recall the Security Council’s
authority to refer cases to the International Criminal
Court. There are ample indications of war crimes being
committed in Ukraine. They must not be forgotten.
Individuals at all levels must be held to account. There

22-3923513/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

21/06/2022

must be accountability for the sake of the victims, the
people of Ukraine and all countries with powerful
neighbours. We must defend our international order,
in which relations between States are determined by
international law, not power.

full support to the relevant international and regional
jurisdictions and mechanisms — as well as bilaterally,
with the deployment of a forensic support mission — to
ensure that those abuses are accurately documented,
and their perpetrators do not go unpunished.

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): First of all, I too would like to thank Ms. Alice
Nderitu, the Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, as well as Ms. Liubov Tsybulska and
Mr. Jared Cohen, for their very insightful briefings.

In that regard, we reiterate our call for support
for the International Criminal Court and cooperation
with it, as well as with all fact-finding missions and
commissions of inquiry.

Regrettably, hate speech and incitement to violence
are nothing new. They have fuelled many conflicts and
can lead to the commission of serious crimes, mass
atrocities and genocide. We saw it in Europe during
the Second World War. Today, new technologies create
specific challenges to which we must respond together
to ensure that they are tools for peace, not for conflict,
hatred and crime. Free access and the instantaneous
and massive spread of information online give
citizens access to huge amounts of information and
can contribute to the dynamism of civil society and
democratic movements. New technologies and modern
communication tools are now essential to ensuring that
crimes and gross human rights violations are reported
and denounced. We have seen that in Burma, Syria
and now in Ukraine. However, the Internet and social
networks are also vectors for the rapid and sometimes
systematic spread of manipulated information, as well
as hate speech and rhetoric.
We firmly condemn the war of aggression being
waged by Russia on Ukraine, where the number of
civilian victims increases every day and is supported by
a campaign led by the Russian authorities to normalize
hate speech and incite violence. The spread of such
rhetoric, in particular through disinformation and the
deliberate manipulation of information, as well as the
harsh restrictions on freedom of the press in Russia, is
extremely dangerous.
In line with General Assembly resolution
ES-11/1, adopted on 2 March, Russia must stop this
war and comply with international law. It must stop
its massive dissemination of false information and
outrageous propaganda.
The images of the atrocities committed in Bucha
and other areas previously occupied by Russian forces,
as well as in Mariupol, are absolutely unbearable
and have shocked the entire world. France is firmly
committed to standing by Ukraine and is providing its
14/30

France will also continue working with Mexico to
promote the initiative to prevent the use of the veto in
cases of mass atrocity crimes.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Ms. Nderitu,
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, for her
briefing and the work she is doing on the important
agenda of addressing hate speech. I also thank
Ms. Tsybulska and Mr. Cohen for their presentations
this morning.
We stand in solidarity with the people of Ukraine,
who are suffering due to the failure of the Security
Council to carry out its mandate. We welcome the
focus on the extensive hate speech and incitement that
is linked to the many atrocity crimes perpetrated in
Ukraine. It is clear that organized State and non-State
actors are aggressively utilizing hatred and incitement
to manage perceptions about the war. Even accusations
about human rights violations and war crimes have
been weaponized as part of the information war. The
people of Ukraine, the victims and the survivors
deserve better.
The surprise expressed in so many European
forums that such a catastrophic war and violations could
be happening in Europe signals a historical blindness
that has helped escalate the risks that turned into this
war. Europe, probably more than any other region, has
experienced multiple genocides, with hundreds of years
of repeated pogroms and large-scale atrocities due to
ethnic, religious and racial hatred.
Based on the historical record, there is little doubt
that hate speech and incitement are a precursor and
catalyst for atrocities against civilians. Kenya has
learned from its own history and from Europe’s dire
experience. We have therefore taken action to limit the
threat to our democracy and security arising from hate
speech and incitement. Our Constitution limits the right
to the freedom of expression, which does not extend to
war propaganda; incitement to violence; hate speech; or
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

advocacy of hatred that constitutes ethnic incitement,
the vilification of others or incitement to cause harm.
On that constitutional basis, we have enacted
laws against hate speech and established a national
cohesion and integration commission to continuously
work towards strengthening cohesion and challenging
division and civic hatred. Just under one week ago,
the commission launched its national action plan
against hate speech. The timing was to ensure that our
upcoming elections in August are not marred by that
dangerous crime. Kenya’s Chief Justice has responded
to the moment by gazetting five courts to deal with hate
speech prosecutions.
We provide those examples to emphasize our
conviction that practical and bold action is necessary,
not just in Kenya but worldwide. At a time when
conflicts that have been sparked and intensified along
the lines of identity are leading to protracted and deadly
wars, we must act to inclusively manage diversity as a
core State competence and priority.
At the top of such an agenda is combating hate
speech and incitement. That was a consistent message
from our delegation during our recent term in the
Council, as reflected in the open debate presided over
by His Excellency President Uhuru Kenyatta in October
2021 (see S/PV.8877) and the subsequent Arria Formula
meetings on hate speech, which were mentioned by the
representative of the United Kingdom.
Returning to the urgency of the situation in
Ukraine, we strongly urge all leaders in the warring
countries, as well as their allies and supporters, to
cease using derogatory concepts about the people
of Ukraine or any other peoples. They should ensure
that their media outlets are held to a standard that
demands accountability for hate speech and incitement.
The leaders should also impress on their military and
security personnel, particularly in the field, that they
must not target civilians. They must also maintain
consistent discipline against soldiers who abuse the
human rights of civilians and captured personnel.
We also urge all mainstream media and social
media outlets to remain vigilant in their due diligence,
verification and dissemination processes to prevent the
misuse of their platforms. It is important that efforts
be pursued to contain the proliferation of provocation,
misinformation and incitement. In that regard, Kenya
calls on the United Nations to undertake a thorough
investigation into the human rights violations being

S/PV.9069

committed in Ukraine. It should pay special attention
to the misuse of accusations of genocide, which only
weakens global resolve to prevent the occurrence of
that greatest of crimes.
We reiterate our call for a collaborative
approach — not just to Ukraine but also globally — among
Member States, the United Nations and major social
media companies towards combating hate speech and
incitement, in particular by developing a global code
of conduct for companies and early-warning tools to
detect escalation and facilitate pre-emptive measures.
Such efforts should be located within a global Internet
governance framework that addresses organized
misinformation and disinformation.
History has taught us that accountability for past
crimes constitutes a critical element of the prevention of
future acts. Serious allegations by all parties should be
treated with the seriousness they deserve by the Council
and relevant United Nations bodies. The conflicting
parties should agree and facilitate prompt, independent
and impartial investigations of all allegations. The
conflicting parties should also cooperate with the
United Nations organs and agencies charged with the
responsibility for preventing misinformation and hate
speech. They should cooperate with investigations and
abide by the findings thereof.
To conclude, I reaffirm Kenya’s solidarity with the
people of Ukraine and our support for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence
of Ukraine.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to start by
thanking all of our excellent briefers this morning for
their very insightful contributions.
History has taught us repeatedly that atrocity
crimes do not occur in a vacuum. An increase in
language that marginalizes and targets people on the
basis of their identity, race, religion or ethnicity, or on
the basis of their sexual orientation, gender identity,
disability or other status, is one of the first warning
signs of violence. Incendiary language lamenting,
glorifying or whitewashing the past and threatening
consequences against those who see things differently
harks back to darker times in history. Seeking to rectify
perceived grievances by resorting to military action
against another State to annex part of its territory
has absolutely no place in the twenty-first century.
This is why we call on the Russian Federation to stop
its efforts to establish occupying authorities and its

22-3923515/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

attempts to change the functioning of the Ukrainian
State, undermining its democratic foundations. Such
steps are yet further deplorable violations of Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We recall the importance of avoiding propaganda,
hate speech and intentionally divisive language.
Difference does not cause conflict; rather it is the
stoking of divisions for political purposes that is the
real driver of conflict. Russian accusations of genocide
against Ukraine were, and are, utterly false, just as
attempting to depict Ukraine as an existential threat
to Russia has no foundation. These false claims cannot
be used to justify the so-called pre-emptive strike back
Russia launched against Ukraine.
We know that today is the 118th day of Russia’s
unprovoked war against Ukraine. Ukraine’s cities
continue to be pummelled by Russia’s armed forces.
Ordinary Ukrainians continue to suffer; ordinary
Ukrainians continue to die for no reason. The loss of
life, damage to critical infrastructure, trade disruption
and outflow of refugees is having a devastating impact
on Ukraine’s economy, further impoverishing the
Ukrainian people. We want to underline in this context
that attacks directed against civilians and civilian
objects, indiscriminate attacks and disproportionate
attacks are all prohibited under international
humanitarian law.
The mission of experts from the Moscow
Mechanism of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe has reported a clear pattern of
violations of international humanitarian law by Russia.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has said that Russia has not merely ignored
international humanitarian law but has tossed it aside,
and she expressed shock at the scale of the destruction
and the numerous violations of international human
rights law. The International Criminal Court
investigation will prove important in ensuring
accountability for any international crimes committed
in Ukraine. We therefore call once again for compliance
with international humanitarian law, including the
obligations to attack only military objectives and to
take all feasible precautions in attack.
At this table, we have repeatedly called for an
end to the war against Ukraine and for the Russian
Federation to withdraw its forces and engage in true
dialogue and diplomacy towards peace. I will say it
again: it is never too late to do the right thing. However,
16/30

21/06/2022

while armed conflict continues, Russia must comply
with its obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. We will not tire of making that call — the
people of Ukraine deserve no less from us.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Undoubtedly, any incitement to violence and
hate speech has the potential to result in the commission
of crimes against humanity. As we have heard, reports
on the situation in Ukraine suggest that we are indeed
facing serious violations of international human rights
law and international humanitarian law. Images of the
existence of possible mass graves and evidence of the
alleged commission of war crimes and crimes against
humanity could constitute “unimaginable atrocities that
deeply shock the conscience of humanity”, as stated in
the Preamble of the Rome Statute.
However, it will be up to the duly constituted
tribunals to make the appropriate determinations.
For this reason, Mexico has not hesitated to support
the establishment of the International Independent
Commission of Inquiry established by the Human
Rights Council and the ongoing investigation by the
International Criminal Court to try and punish those
responsible for war crimes, crimes against humanity
or genocide, the prohibition of which constitute
peremptory norms of international law. We call on
all States to cooperate fully with these mechanisms.
Accountability for international crimes must always
be the norm, regardless of where they are committed.
To be clear: all international crimes, wherever and
whenever they are committed, are equally serious and
must be punished in an equal manner.
For its part, the International Court of Justice
will have to consider the application filed by Ukraine
relating to the application of the 1948 Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
The Security Council will be attentive to the decision
of the Court, which will arrive in due course. In the
meantime, Mexico urges Russia to fully comply with
the Court’s order of 16 March 2022, setting provisional
measures that are fully binding.
With each passing day and week, the humanitarian
needs become greater. As the conflict persists, it is the
civilian population that continues to pay the price, with
multiple immediate effects, as well as for generations to
come. On the humanitarian front alone, figures provided
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Affairs, the World Food Programme and UNICEF show
the scale of the challenge. Nearly 16 million people
are in need of humanitarian aid, while access to food,
clean water, health services, education and electricity is
shrinking exponentially, and funding has only reached
70 per cent of needs. In addition, residential areas and
civilian infrastructure continue to be unjustifiably
targeted in violation of international humanitarian law.
For its part, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees reports that there are some 5 million refugees
and more than 7 million internally displaced persons.
There is also a growing recognition that the
consequences of the conflict are no longer confined to
Ukraine or Europe. As my country mentioned last week,
the global rise in food prices and its consequences for
food insecurity affect the whole world, but especially
developing countries, first and foremost the African
continent. We are waiting for an agreement on safe
routes for the exit of grain and for the Council to lend
its support in following up on what is agreed upon,
hopefully in the very next few days.
For all these reasons, Mexico believes that
the Security Council should not lose sight of the
most pressing needs and support the efforts of
the United Nations and other mediators towards a
negotiated solution.
My delegation will continue to very clearly stress
the fact that people need to be at the very centre of
the Council’s action and the urgent need to stop the
hostilities, as the International Court of Justice ordered
in its provisional measures.
With the goal of seeing diplomacy recover its rights
over and above mutual accusations, which only escalate
the lack of understanding and the confrontation between
the parties, Mexico will continue working toward
the full operation of the collective security system
established by the Charter of the United Nations. For
that reason, together with France and more than 100
other Member States, we will continue promoting the
initiative of refraining from the use of the veto in the
case of mass atrocities.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to thank Ms. Alice Nderitu for
her informative briefing, and we listened carefully to
Ms. Liubov Tsybulska and Mr. Jared Cohen.
Today we are reminded once again of this war’s
terrible human cost, with thousands of people killed,

S/PV.9069

millions displaced and tens of millions around
the globe facing increased food insecurity. As the
conflict extends into its fifth month, it is clear that
the humanitarian needs are immense and will require
a prolonged response. Last week, the United Arab
Emirates delivered 27 tons of food and medical supplies
to assist those fleeing the conflict.
With the intense fighting in eastern Ukraine, there
are increasingly alarming reports of civilian casualties
and diminished access to necessities such as food, clean
water, electricity and sanitation. We express our deep
concern for the civilians trapped in Severodonetsk,
including at the Azot chemical plant. We are dismayed
that amid heavy combat there have been no significant
improvements in the delivery of humanitarian aid to
those in need.
The unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance
to civilians and allowing safe and voluntary passage to
those seeking safety remain an absolute necessity and
should be at the forefront of the Council’s considerations.
We stress once more that all parties must abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law.
As has been noted repeatedly in this Chamber,
preventing incitement to violence is a key component of
protecting civilians. Recognizing this, the international
community has sought to take steps to counter hate
speech. Indeed, yesterday the General Assembly
marked, for the first time, the International Day for
Countering Hate Speech. Nevertheless, we continue to
see a rise in incitement globally. In that regard, I would
like to highlight the following points.
First, we condemn in the strongest terms all
forms of hate speech and incitement. The United Arab
Emirates has consistently taken a strong and principled
stand, both domestically and internationally, against
hate speech and intolerance. Hate fuels extremism and
threatens peaceful coexistence. Constructive dialogue
is vital to fostering tolerance and can serve as a basis
for reconciliation. Women in particular are critical to
long-lasting, peaceful solutions and therefore must be
full, equal and meaningful participants in all peace
efforts, including mediation and dialogue.
Secondly, the Council must redouble its efforts
to address the malicious use of technology to spread
hate speech. The use of digital technologies to propel
the spread of misinformation, disinformation and
hate speech poses a particularly serious challenge in
conflict zones. Threats to humanitarian workers are

22-3923517/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

particularly insidious given the multiplicative effect on
the civilians they are trying to assist. To counter the
effects of incitement, we need to identify and employ
effective counter-narratives, support media literacy and
engage more closely with the private sector.
Thirdly, we believe that thorough investigations
and data collection are essential for accountability.
There are a number of ongoing investigatory and factfinding efforts, including the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine established by the
Human Rights Council, with a mandate to investigate
all alleged violations and abuses of human rights
and international humanitarian law. Impartially
establishing facts and circumstances is fundamental
to achieving justice for victims and survivors as well
as to combating impunity more broadly. It is therefore
essential that appropriate mechanisms be given the
time and space necessary to carry out their activities.
Finally, the violence in Ukraine is a stark reminder
that the Council must prioritize conflict resolution
and de-escalation. Our focus must be on finding a
diplomatic solution that will ease human suffering.
We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General and
others in trying to bring the sides together. We also
welcome their efforts to mitigate the broader impacts
of the conflict, including by seeking to facilitate
grain exports from Ukraine to help ease global food
insecurity. Ultimately, however, what is needed is an
immediate cessation of hostilities throughout Ukraine.
Bringing peace must be our ultimate objective, and the
Council must spare no effort to achieve that goal.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank the Albanian presidency
for having chosen this very pertinent topic for today’s
meeting. Unfortunately, Ms. Tsybulska, one of our
briefers, spoke about sexual violence, repeating what
Lyudmyla Denisova, the Ukrainian Ombudsperson,
said. The desire of Ukrainian propagandists to
demonize Russia at any cost is astonishing.
Also remarkable are Mr. Cohen and his fantastical
tales showing that the Nazis in Ukraine were created
and embedded into the public consciousness by Russian
hackers. Mr Cohen must have forgotten to mention that
our hackers have learned how to remotely make innocent
Ukrainians get Nazi tattoos, chant Nazi slogans and
torture and kill Russian-speaking Ukrainians.
The ideology of hatred and violence, inter alia
against one’s own people, is the basis of the State policy
18/30

21/06/2022

of the current Government of Ukraine. That ideology
provoked the horrific attacks committed by the Kyiv
regime against its own people and was one of the key
reasons for the current crisis in Ukraine. We should
recall that Russia had already raised those issues in the
Security Council last May, when we held an informal
Arria Formula meeting on neo-Nazism and radical
nationalism in Ukraine.
Today’s meeting is a good opportunity to determine
why the current Ukrainian leadership and its hate-filled
rhetoric are essentially inextricably linked.
When the Soviet Union collapsed, Ukraine, as a
sovereign country, just like other post-Soviet republics,
had the opportunity to build an independent statehood.
Ukraine had total free will to make its own geopolitical
choices. However, the choice of the elites who came
to power, with the prompting of the foreign Ukrainian
diaspora, favoured out-and-out nationalism and the
glorification of its legacy and gave credit to Hitler’s
accomplices, the leaders of the organization of the
Ukrainian nationalists, the Ukrainian Insurgent Army.
That quite naturally determined the path taken by the
new Ukraine vis-à-vis its neighbours.
There are always attempts to make us believe that
neo-Nazism and nationalism in Ukraine are marginal
phenomena. But, in fact, ultra-nationalism is the
mainstream policy of the Ukrainian authorities. We
do not have time to lay out the genesis of Ukrainian
nationalism and to quote all its founding fathers.
We just want to say that one of its founding fathers,
Dmytri Dontsov, put together the theory of integral
nationalism, which he borrowed from Charles Maurras,
the Frenchman who in 1899 set up a unit of nationalists.
I shall not go into detail here, but I will just say that this
theory is based on the ideology of hatred and favours a
caste-based society, the immoral achievement of aims
through brutality and cruelty, the dominance of an
active minority over and the overall majority and the
superiority of the Ukrainian race. Of course, all that
is leading to hatred towards Russia as the “kingdom of
darkness” and towards the Russian people. But we will
still find a way to alert members to all the details of
Ukrainian nationalist theories.
One of the ideologues of Ukrainian nationalism,
Mykola Mikhnovsky, monuments to whom can be
seen all over Ukraine, left to posterity his concept of
“Ukraine for Ukrainians,” whose essence he himself
articulated as “All people are your brothers, but Moskals,
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Polacks, Romanians and Yids are the enemies of our
people”. And those were not empty words. For example,
during the war the militants of the Organization of
Ukrainian Nationalists and the Ukrainian Insurgent
Army murdered hundreds of thousands of Poles, Jews
and Russians, with a level of cruelty that apalled even
the country’s Nazi occupiers. Is it any wonder that
antisemitism, racism, and Russophobia are currently
flourishing in today’s Ukraine?
However, given the fact that when Ukraine
became independent, Russians and Russian speakers
made up at least 60 per cent of the population, the
Ukrainian authorities had to postpone the realization
of their Russophobic agenda. The denial and soon
the denigration of the historical past they shared with
Russia, and the hatred of everything Russian, were
introduced into society gradually, year by year.
It is important to point out that the United States
and its Western allies were very interested in the
establishment of this Russophobia-based Ukrainian
nationalism, which they saw as an excellent opportunity
to sever the historical ties between Ukraine and Russia
in the service of their geopolitical needs. As a result,
the new statehood of once-multicultural Ukraine was
modelled according to Western bidding on a foundation
of primitive Russophobia, and therefore imbued with
the ideology of hatred from the very start. Against
its own national interests, Ukraine chose the path of
becoming an anti-Russian geopolitical project instead
of genuine sovereignty. That was not easy to achieve
in the essentially Russian and Russian-speaking southeastern region of Ukraine. The vain attempts of a
well-known Russophobe and multi-term Verkhovna
Rada deputy, Iryna Farion, who repeatedly declared
that all Russians were mentally retarded, are a case in
point. Following the Maidan anti-constitutional coup,
this Russophobe, who as it happens was in charge of
language and humanitarian issues in the Ukrainian
Parliament, complained in an interview,
“Fourteen per cent of Ukrainians say that Russian
is their native language. That means we have
5 million degenerate Ukrainians who must be
saved, even if we have to isolate those who do not
speak Ukrainian”.
I am citing this to explain how Russian-speaking
residents of Ukraine were treated following the Maidan
coup in 2014. The Kyiv junta’s very first steps were
a direct incitement to violence against the Russian-

S/PV.9069

speaking population. The entire population of the
country was divided into first- and second-class citizens.
Everyone who identified either as an ethnic Russian or
simply a Russian speaker fell into the second category.
A series of laws infringing on their rights were enacted.
In the post-Maidan years, with the help of Russophobes
such as Iryna Farion, whom I just mentioned, the Kyiv
authorities cultivated and institutionalized as State
policy a hatred of everything Russian, including its
culture, language and civilization itself, along with
those who embodied it, including Ukrainian citizens.
Kyiv called anyone who opposed the unlawful Maidan
authorities terrorists, separatists, puppets and inhuman.
Intolerance accompanied by violence became the Kyiv
regime’s calling card. One example was Borys Filatov,
a Verkhovna Rada deputy and later mayor of Dnipro,
who in March 2014 in his capacity as an official in the
Dnipropetrovsk administration said,
“In my opinion, there is nothing terrible in
expanding Crimea’s autonomy and making Russian
one of the official languages. It will help to avoid
an escalation of tensions and safeguard Ukraine.
[...] We have to give these scum these kinds of
promises and guarantees and make whatever
concessions are necessary. Then we hang them. We
hang them later”.
Those were not empty threats either. Suffice it to recall
the more than 40 Russian-speaking activists who were
burned alive in Odesa in May 2014. The inhabitants
of long-suffering Donbas are also well aware of that.
In August 2014, the pro-Maidan journalist Bogdan
Butkevich called the residents of Donbas “superfluous
people.” He said,
“Donbas is not just a depressed region. There
are a massive number of useless people there. [...]
There are about 4 million people in the Donetsk
region, and at least one and a half million of them
are superfluous.”
The story again did not end with calls to “slash the
Moskals” and “waste the Russkies” — I apologize for
the unsuitable language, but I am quoting. With the
support of the West, the Kyiv authorities decided to
put those words into action. In 2014, first Oleksandr
Turchynov and, subsequently, President Poroshenko,
instead of launching a dialogue about the place of
Russian culture and language in Ukraine, attacked
their own people, the Russian-speaking population of
Donbas, ordering air strikes and bombing peaceful

22-3923519/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

cities. Poroshenko made clear the fate that was in store
for the residents of Donbas when he said,
“We will have jobs; they will not. We will have
pensions; they will not. We will have support for
people, for children and pensioners; they will not.
Our children will go to schools and kindergartens;
theirs will be sitting in basements. [...] That is how
we will win this war”.
With her call to “destroy Moscow”, Iryna Farion, as
a member of the Freedom party in the Verkhovna Rada
in 2014, stated the main goal of this war:
“This is what we live for and why we came into the
world, to destroy Moscow, not just the Moskals on
our lands” — meaning Russian-speaking Ukrainian
citizens — “but the black hole in European security
that should be wiped off the world map.”
Speaking at a concert for fighters in the nationalist
battalions participating in Kyiv’s punitive operation
against Donbas, then-comedian Volodymyr Zelenskyy
cried out in ecstasy, “Guys, hats off to you for protecting
us from that scum.” His rhetoric remained the same
when he became President, and in November 2021 he
declared, in reference to the people of Donbas, “There
are representatives of people, but not all representatives
of people are human beings — there are other species
as well, I believe”. Following in his leader’s footsteps,
Mykhailo Podolyak, Adviser to the President of Ukraine,
said that the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics
are inhabited by “dirty, worthless individuals”, “bandits
and tiny dwarfs who are a complete waste of space”. In
April 2019, Andrei Reva, Ukraine’s Minister of Social
Policy, said about the citizens of Donbas, “I feel no pity
whatever for any of them. I feel pity for the soldiers and
officers with families who died there for that scum.”
I would like to point out that those are not
statements by some kind of marginal radicals. They
are members of the country’s senior leadership and
prominent politicians. Like their idols in the Third
Reich, Ukrainian nationalists see the solution to
the Donbas issue as freeing up living space. For
example, in May 2019, Semen Semenchenko, a former
Verkhovna Rada deputy and participant in the punitive
Donbas operations, said, “As I see it, Ukraine needs
a strategy for depopulating Donbas”. And once again,
that call was not just on paper. It is being implemented
by nationalist neo-Nazi groups such as the Azov
Battalion, the Aidar Battalion and others when they
shell civilian neighbourhoods in Mariupol, Kharkiv
20/30

21/06/2022

and Severodonetsk, to which there are hundreds and
hundreds of witnesses. The only way one can act like
that is if one hates the people of Donbas, and Russians
generally, with all one’s heart — just like the politicians
I mentioned.
The world learned from Petro Poroshenko’s recent
revelations that Ukraine never intended to implement
the package of measures for implementing the Minsk
agreements, which the Council has been trying to
achieve for seven years based on its resolution 2202
(2015), but simply used it to gain time to make military
preparations against Donbas and Russia. And it did so
with the patronage of our Western colleagues, using
the time to put together new Russophobic actions and
projects, including a totally discriminatory law on
the Russian language, the persecution of the Russianlanguage media and the pursuit and murder of Russianspeaking politicians, journalists and public figures,
hundreds of whom have suffered all over Ukraine
during the post-Maidan years.
The Ukrainian authorities, encouraged and goaded
by our Western colleagues, had no intention of stopping
there. On the eve of the start of our special operation, we
received reliable information that Kyiv had completed
preparations for a new large-scale offensive in Donbas.
Those plans were thwarted.
We could speak at length about Ukrainian
nationalism and its hateful rhetoric. We decided to
save time and prepared a selection of statements by
representatives of the official authorities of Ukraine
and well-known and popular public figures there. We
will distribute them shortly as an official Security
Council document so that members can understand
what real hate speech is in Ukraine today and how it is
used to justify violence against the Russian-speaking
population. I will just share some of the most recent
Russophobic steps taken by Ukrainian authorities — a
ban on receiving an education in Russian, on imports
of Russian books and on studying Russian literature,
even as foreign literature, in Ukrainian schools and
universities. Some members will say that Russia has
only itself to blame. However, in the light of what I have
already said, those steps look like a logical continuation
of the policy that the Ukrainian authorities have
consistently followed since the Maidan coup d’état. It is
just happening faster now.
In conclusion, I want to underscore that, despite
the surge of primitive Russophobia and racism in
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ukraine — behaviour that our African colleagues also
experienced as they tried to organize the evacuation
of their students during the first few days of our
special military operation — our positive attitude to
the Ukrainian people, culture and language has not
changed. Ukrainians are our brothers and friends.
It is just that Ukraine’s current leaders have been
implementing someone else’s geopolitical agenda
that is foreign both to us and to the Ukrainian people.
Today we heard accusations that we deny the Ukrainian
people their identity and want to obliterate Ukraine and
cauterize everything Ukrainian. That is absolutely not
the case. What we want to cauterize in Ukraine is its
burgeoning neo-Nazism and nationalism, which has
steadily turned the country into the anti-Russia and
into a direct threat to us and the inhabitants of Donbas.
And regrettably, our Western colleagues are directly
involved in that Ukrainian tragedy. What we are seeing
is genuine incitement to violence and Russophobia in
Ukraine. Western sponsors pulled the Kyiv negotiations
team out of the diplomatic dialogue aimed at finding
solutions and began competing with one another to
convince themselves and the whole world that a solution
could be found only on the field of battle with Russia.
The originator of one of those phrases, the European
Union’s High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy Josep Borrell, spoke last week in the
Council (see S/PV.9065).
Furthermore, the West has been providing Ukraine
with weapons, even long-range artillery, for targeted
strikes on Donbas and the destruction of the Russianspeaking civilian population. The United States,
Austria, Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Great Britain, Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Türkiye,
Sweden and the Baltic countries are not even the entire
list of the main suppliers of military equipment, worth
billions of dollars, to the Ukrainian regime. Just last
week, European and American weaponry aimed at
Donbas killed six civilians and injured more than 30.
Each of those countries has a direct responsibility for
prolonging the Ukrainian crisis and for the death of
civilians and Ukrainian soldiers, shoved to the front by
corrupt Ukrainian officials as cannon fodder.
Those countries are spending billions on a proxy
war with Russia till the last Ukrainian standing, which
is in itself a true incitement to violence. They also

S/PV.9069

pander to rampant Russophobia in their own countries,
thereby indulging the Poles, Czechs and Baltic peoples
who have participated in that for so long. There are
anti-Russian posters in some of their shops and bars
saying that they will not serve Russians. How is that
different from racism if we replace the word “Russians”
with the words “black people” or “Jews”? Why are they
so uncomfortable with those kinds of associations but
not when it comes to Russians? And if they do not feel
that way, why are they supporting the Cancel Russia
boycott campaign launched by Ukraine’s political
technocrats against Russian writers, musicians, artists
and sportsmen and women? Is that not hate speech
and policy?
Incidentally, we regularly hear that from the
representative of the Kyiv regime in Security Council
meetings, who with Western countries’ support insults
our country and our President and spews threats
at Russian diplomats. And none of Kyiv’s Western
supporters restrain him. But however hard they try, the
agony of the criminally Russophobic and neo-Nazi Kyiv
regime can only be prolonged, not stopped. The regime
was doomed in 2014 when it launched its criminal war
on its own people. Millions of Ukrainians are waiting
to be liberated from it, as the attitude to Russia’s army
of the people in the liberated territories shows. Our
special military operation will be completed and its
aims will be fully realized.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank the briefers
for their presentations.
The conflict in Ukraine is well into its fourth month
and its humanitarian costs are mounting. According to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the estimated number of civilian
casualties is more than 5,000, including 300 children.
More than 4,000 have had severe injuries due to the
conflict. The number of soldiers killed in action is
estimated at between 25,000 and 30,000. As many
as 60,000 soldiers could be wounded, and those
are conservative estimates. The actual toll may be
much higher.
Deliberate attacks on civilian targets and
indiscriminate shelling in densely populated areas
are unacceptable, especially in the case of strikes on
civilian buildings such as houses, hospitals and schools.
The use of explosive weapons in populated areas, such
as the city of Mariupol, is also cause for concern.
Attacks on infrastructure such as power generators and

22-3923521/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

water stations can further deprive large segments of the
population of basic services. We reiterate our call for the
full protection of civilians to be observed by all parties,
in accordance with the principles of international
humanitarian law of distinction, proportionality,
precaution and humanity.
Furthermore, all the parties should be committed to
the protection of vulnerable groups, especially women,
children, the elderly and people with disabilities.
Women and girls in particular face serious risks
due to sexual and gender-based violence, as well as
the threat of human trafficking. Those crimes are
abhorrent and should be firmly repudiated by the
international community. The reports of torture,
summary executions, forced deportations of civilians
and systematic and mass sexual violence, including
the rape of children, are worrisome and deserve broad,
independent and impartial investigation.
Humanitarian corridors are not being fully
protected. While a number of attempts have been made
to establish safe passage in order to evacuate civilians
fleeing from embattled areas, those corridors have failed
due to shelling and bombing. We reiterate our call on all
parties to ensure safe, timely and unimpeded access for
humanitarian personnel. Nevertheless, we are cognizant
that only a nationwide ceasefire will enable the civilian
population to be effectively protected. We should bear
in mind that nearly one fourth of Ukraine’s population
has been forcibly displaced since the beginning of the
war — a figure that is testimony to the intensity of the
conflict and the degree of disruption to normal life that
it inflicts on people. Around 7.2 million Ukrainians are
now living as refugees in other countries, especially
Ukraine’s neighbours. Those countries have displayed
remarkable solidarity in receiving the refugees, but we
should not underestimate the psychological impact of
their situation on its victims and in the case of children,
on their prospects for the future.
The conflict has worsened the global food crisis,
with devastating effects for highly vulnerable people all
over the world. The destruction of Ukraine`s productive
capacities on one hand, and unilateral economic
sanctions on the other, have contributed to the surge
in food and energy prices. For developing countries
in particular, which were still struggling with the
socioeconomic consequences of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, higher food prices have been a severe blow.
In such dire circumstances, it is high time for all the
parties involved to seek an avenue for ending this
22/30

21/06/2022

conflict before more atrocities are committed against
the civilians in the region and further humanitarian
crises ensue.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Special Adviser, Ms. Alice Nderitu, for her
informative briefing, as well as Ms. Liubov Tsybulska
and Mr. Jared Andrew Cohen for their contributions
to today’s debate. I welcome the participation at this
meeting of our colleagues the Ambassadors of Ukraine,
Lithuania and Slovakia.
A defining characteristic of the wars of the twentieth
and twenty-first centuries has undoubtedly been the
general public’s ability, through the use of media, to
follow on-the-ground developments in conflicts on a
daily basis. Advancements in technology and social
media have given us not only the ability to see images
in real time but also a near-limitless platform on which
to disseminate a cacophony of ideas and points of
view, including every kind of hate speech, as well as
propaganda and the rewriting reality.
In many ways, the war in Ukraine is a litmus test
for new ways in which the international community
can assess and deal with armed conflicts. There
has undoubtedly been a step forward in that regard,
beginning with the Gulf Wars, since which time the
general public has had access via television to images
of the battlefields and the reality of war — with
the fraught challenge of being able to distinguish
between information and disinformation. Hate speech,
especially via social networks, fuels hostilities, both
before conflicts emerge and while they are active. It
is clear that those who engage in such rhetoric fuel
belligerence, jeopardize the future and undermine the
prospects for peace.
We welcome the fact that the International
Criminal Court has opened an investigation into crimes
committed in Ukraine by all parties to the conflict.
In addition, a number of investigative teams have
been engaged in Ukraine since the early days of the
conflict to gather evidence and document allegations
of war crimes. Justice must take its course in a
transparent, impartial and independent manner. Those
responsible for committing crimes must ultimately be
held accountable.
The Security Council has on several occasions
addressed
the
increased
risk
of
displaced
civilians — women and children — being trafficked into
sexual slavery and illicit labour. We must thoroughly
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

investigate, without applying pressure or ideologies, the
crimes alleged to have been committed, including the
crimes of forced adoption and sexual violence against
women, girls and boys.
At the same time, the situation of African nationals
who are victims of violence, abuse or discrimination
should also be taken into account. The extent to which
the suffering of its people is recognized will influence
the judgement that Africa makes of the sincerity of the
paradigm shift in the understanding of war.
Being at war does not nullify the rule of law. Parties
to conflicts must respect the international conventions
protecting civilians in wartime, especially the Geneva
Conventions and their Protocols Additional, as well as
the relevant resolutions of the Council. We reiterate that
the best way to stop the climate of violence, crimes and
atrocities is to prevent or stop all wars from occurring.
Having never experienced armed conflict, my country
fundamentally opposes war.
We are worried about the many signs pointing
to a stalemate in the conflict in Ukraine. We remain
convinced that the international community has the
means to galvanize the war’s major actors to engage
in genuine, good-faith discussions to bring about a
cessation of hostilities and the prospects for peaceful
coexistence. We must urgently curb the humanitarian
crisis caused by the war in Ukraine, as well as its wider
impact. If we delay further, we could risk seeing more
innocent people shot, more civilian infrastructure
destroyed, more families shattered and thousands more
children orphaned by war.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my country’s
support for the humanitarian actors who are engaged in
the operations on the ground, as well as our deepest
sympathy for the people of Ukraine. My country calls for
a ceasefire and the opening of humanitarian corridors
in all localities in order to provide humanitarian aid in
the safest possible way.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
18 June, we marked the first International Day for
Countering Hate Speech, pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 75/309. Hate speech — the incitement to
discrimination, hostility and violence — often leads
to political tensions and may even aggravate armed
conflict. Regardless of the circumstances, we should
condemn and put an end to discrimination and violence
against specific countries, ethnic groups and religions;
make every effort to dispel hatred, division and distrust;

S/PV.9069

and advocate a culture of peace underpinned by reason,
inclusivity and solidarity.
The conflict in Ukraine has lasted nearly
four months. The ever-increasing casualties and
displacements are heart-wrenching. International
humanitarian law has laid out the boundaries for
wartime violence, and all parties to the conflict should
earnestly uphold them by ensuring maximum protection
for civilians and civilian infrastructure and facilitating
evacuation and humanitarian access. The international
community and humanitarian agencies should continue
to scale up humanitarian aid to the Ukrainian people
and spare no effort to mitigate the harm caused by this
violent conflict.
The circumstances and causes of any violations of
international humanitarian law must be ascertained.
Any allegations should be based on facts. Pending the
final findings, all parties should avoid unwarranted
accusations. Sending in more lethal weapons will only
fuel animosity, exacerbate conflicts, trigger a wider
humanitarian crisis and claim more innocent lives.
Social media must never become a lawless space
in which to spread hatred and incite violence. Certain
social media platforms have adapted their policies for
political ends, permitting one-way hate speech. Such
a practice is extremely dangerous. It is imperative to
strengthen Government oversight over social media
platforms, which should not be given free rein.
Prolonged and enlarged conflicts bring greater
security risks and spillover effects, from which no
party can benefit. The members of the international
community should work together to de-escalate the
situation, defuse the crisis and facilitate peace talks
in order to create the conditions for the parties to
resume negotiations and achieve a ceasefire without
further delay. We advise certain countries to refrain
from adding further fuel to the fire to serve their own
geopolitical self-interests or forcing other countries to
take sides, which intensifies divisions and antagonism
within the international community.
As Secretary-General Guterres noted in his
speech marking the International Day for Countering
Hate Speech,
“[H]ate speech incites violence, undermines
diversity and social cohesion and threatens
the common values and principles that bind
us together”.

22-3923523/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Hate speech among countries can also poison the
international political climate, to the detriment of world
peace and stability.
In the context of the conflict unravelling in Ukraine,
antagonism has been permeating the international
community for some time, seriously disrupting the work
of the United Nations in various areas and calling into
question the authority and effectiveness of the Security
Council. Such a political climate is not conducive to
the proper settlement of the Ukrainian crisis and may
lead to the failure of global governance mechanisms,
plunging the world into greater division and turmoil,
which is not in the interests of any party.
We are all in the same boat. We have a stake in
each other’s security. The Cold War mentality, the
logic of hegemony and bloc politics have long outlived
their relevance. We must substitute dialogue for
confrontation, consultation for coercion, partnership
for alliances and mutual win-win situations for zerosum games. The Security Council in particular should
shoulder its responsibilities, manage differences and
be an active force for the facilitation of peace talks,
mediation and good offices.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Nderitu for her briefing to the Security
Council. Incitement to violence is a major concern, as
it invariably leads to atrocity crimes. In the case of the
war in Ukraine, it is important that we remain alert to
such risks before the nature of the conflict becomes
even more horrible than what we are dealing with at
present. We also thank the civil society briefers for
their contributions to the Council’s discussions.
While reiterating our deep concerns about the
protraction of the war in Ukraine, as well as the
needless loss of lives and destruction of livelihoods
and properties, Ghana is equally alarmed by the
acerbic rhetoric and narratives that have accompanied
segments of the war in Ukraine. No country or leader
can claim to be unaware of the dangers of unrestrained
words spoken in anger or with hatred.
Throughout history, including during the Second
World War, in Rwanda in April 1994, in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in July 1995 or in other parts of the
world, such as Myanmar, we have often witnessed
the calamitous and tragic consequences of deliberate
actions that incite one group of people against another.
Indeed, such actions, born of one group’s false feeling
of superiority over others, has been the bane of our
24/30

21/06/2022

common human existence throughout the ages. Whether
during the eras of slavery, colonialism or apartheid, that
false feeling has been the main propeller that evil men
have used to manipulate their kind to commit atrocities
against others.
In the pursuit of its fundamental responsibility to
promote and maintain international peace and security,
the Council must therefore remain vigilant to incitement
and hate speech, which have a tendency to instigate or
intensify the commission of atrocity crimes. We must
act in unison to uphold our promise of “never again” to
people everywhere — and most pressingly to the people
of Ukraine.
The killing of tens of thousands of innocent
civilians in Bucha, Irpin, Mariupol and several other
cities, as well as the emerging evidence of mass graves
and systemic and gross violations of human rights
in Ukraine, including gender-based sexual violence
against women and girls, are intolerable acts that
should galvanize us to take serious action in order to
prevent further atrocities and seek accountability for
the atrocity crimes that are being committed.
In that regard, Ghana expresses its support for the
conduct of independent and impartial investigations
to gather evidence and establish a basis for ensuring
accountability for any atrocity acts established to
have been committed in Ukraine under the guise of
war. Accountability is a critical element of deterrence.
Universal jurisdiction for the prosecution of almost all
atrocity crimes means that none can escape justice,
regardless of the limitations that appear to exist within
institutions of international justice.
We are concerned by the intensified fighting in
Severodonetsk, which poses a humanitarian threat as
more civilians come under the barrage of crossfire and
are forced to flee their homes or shelter in bunkers, with
limited access to food, clean water and basic needs.
We reiterate the fundamental importance for the
warring sides to conduct themselves in accordance with
the requirements of international law and international
humanitarian law as it relates to the treatment of
civilians. We urge them to take due steps for the
protection of civilians, humanitarian aid workers and
civilian infrastructure. We continue to call for the
creation of, and respect for, humanitarian corridors
for the safe passage of civilians escaping from the
cities under siege and the delivery of humanitarian aid
and assistance.
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The need for a peaceful resolution is urgent and can
be attained only by following the path of dialogue and
diplomacy. In that regard, we urge greater efforts on the
part of the global community and regional partners in
support of the resumption of talks between the parties,
which have stalled since March. Ending the war now is
crucial, both for preserving the lives of the Ukrainian
people and mitigating the conflict’s wider ramifications,
which have visited economic hardships on other parts
of the world away from the theatre of war.
In conclusion, we believe that nothing justifies the
commission of atrocities. In that vein, we strongly urge
for the tempering of rhetoric and hateful narratives that
stoke an atmosphere of deep resentment and instigate
the commission of violent acts against others. Ghana
reaffirms its support for the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine and
expresses its commitment to working with all others
to find an early end to the war and restore peace and
stability in Ukraine.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Ms. Alice Nderitu, as well as the civil society
representatives, for their respective briefings.
Incitement to violence destroys peace, tolerance
and harmony. India has always believed that societies
that are based on the principles of democracy and
pluralism create an environment that enables diverse
communities to live together. The legitimate exercise
of the right to the freedom of opinion and expression
within a constitutional framework plays an important
and positive role in strengthening democracy, promoting
pluralism and combating intolerance.

S/PV.9069

Russian Federation. As we have said before, we endorse
the call by the Secretary-General for an independent
investigation into atrocities in Ukraine.
The increasing fuel prices and shortage of food
grains and fertilizers are having a disproportionate
impact, particularly on developing countries. In that
context, it is necessary for all of us to adequately
appreciate the importance of equity, affordability
and accessibility when it comes to food grains. Open
markets must not become an argument for perpetuating
inequity and promoting discrimination.
India is committed to working constructively to
mitigate the adverse impact of the conflict on food
security. We have been providing financial assistance
and supplying food grains to neighbouring countries
that are facing the consequences of the Ukraine conflict.
Let me conclude by reaffirming that the
contemporary global order was built on the Charter of
the United Nations, international law, and respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
The President: I would like to draw the attention of
speakers to paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507,
which encourages all participants in Security Council
meetings to deliver their statements in five minutes or
less, in line with the Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

There can also be no doubt that terrorism targets all
religions and cultures. We need to collectively combat
both radicalization and terrorism. The United Nations
has the responsibility to ensure that the countering of
hate speech and discrimination is not limited to a select
few religions and communities, but rather encompasses
all those affected.

Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): As I address the
members of the Security Council today, as usual, I
also recognize the representative of Putin’s regime,
occupying the permanent seat of the Soviet Union.
Putin’s Ambassador has again taken advantage of that
seat to shift responsibility for the war onto everyone but
Russia. I have already drawn attention more than once in
the Chamber to Russia’s widely used tactic of aggressive
mimicry, whereby a predator gains an advantage by
presenting itself as a victim. Such a dynamic is akin to
victim blaming, whereby a rapist blames the victim for
provoking them to commit their crime.

The Ukraine conflict has impacted not only
Europe but the entire world. Its destabilizing effect
has broader regional and global implications. India
continues to remain deeply concerned about the
worsening situation in Ukraine and reiterates its call
for the immediate cessation of violence and an end to
hostilities. We support all diplomatic efforts to end
the conflict, especially talks between Ukraine and the

Putin’s envoy follows the example of his boss,
Minister Lavrov, who uses the same tactic when
claiming that Russia has not invaded Ukraine and
that it declared a military operation because it “had
absolutely no other way of explaining to the West that
dragging Ukraine into NATO was a criminal act”. That
is indeed quite a confession, and it is now on the record.
Aggressive mimicry is a common defensive tactic of

22-3923525/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

criminals. A rather useless tactic, as Putin’s envoy will
understand once he takes another seat — on the bench
of a future tribunal for Russian war criminals.
My statement today will not be brief, owing to the
complexity of the issue. The information brought to
our attention has again proved that there is no other
option for ending this war than to bring the aggressor
to account, just as Nazis were brought to account in
Nuremberg. The materials of the Nuremberg trials
contain a thorough examination into the genesis of
Nazism and its deadly nature. I believe that future
trials will provide us with equally comprehensive
answers as to how Russia turned into an aggressive and
inhumane regime.
But let me now remind the Council of some
important milestones, including with respect to
the incitement to violence. The obsessive desire of
Russia’s leadership and army generals with killing and
destruction did not appear out of nowhere. Since the
1990s, Russian politicians and media have developed
their warmongering rhetoric and hate speech, which are
flavoured with imperial sentiments.
To paraphrase Benito Mussolini, the press of
Russia is free, freer than the press of any other country,
so long as it supports the regime. Russia’s main targets
may have changed from time to time, but its focus has
always been on democratic nations and nearly every
one of its neighbours. That was the case for Mussolini,
and it is also the case for Putin. Both dictators hoped
that eventually their ideology would spread far beyond
Europe and penetrate into America.
Unfortunately, the world overlooked that
dangerous trend, which can only encourage Russia to
consolidate its aggressive propaganda. Moreover, the
Kremlin received so much proof over 30 years of the
world’s de facto apathy towards Russia’s violations and
subsequently of its impunity for them that it was only
a matter of time before it launched a full-fledged war.
It was an event held in this very Chamber in
December 1991 that triggered the sequence of tragic
events to follow. The meeting on the last day before
Christmas Eve (see S/PV.3024) having been adjourned
by the President of the Council, Soviet Ambassador
Vorontsov, lo and behold, the following meeting (see
S/PV.3025) was opened by the very same person
but as a representative of another country — the
Russian Federation.
26/30

21/06/2022

It was a country that was at that moment absent
from the Charter of the United Nations and the list of
the Organization’s membership in general. There was
no vote in the Security Council. There was no vote in
the General Assembly. There was no formal decision of
any body — and not because of the Christmas break.
President Yeltsin simply notified the United Nations
of his decision, and someone accepted it for executive
purposes, with no public debate or vote.
In December 1994, Russia launched the war
in Chechnya. The city of Grozny was razed to the
ground — as many Ukrainian cities have been
today — and not without the participation of Akhmad
Kadyrov’s thugs. The number of casualties among
the civilian population in Chechnya reached tens of
thousands, reaching as high as 80,000 to 100,000
according to Alexander Lebed, then Secretary of
Russia’s own National Security Council. And what
happened in response to Russia’s cruelty and barbarism
in Chechnya? After taking a short face-saving pause,
the Council of Europe, which was designed as a
stronghold if not a temple of human rights, invited
Russia to become a member, which it subsequently did.
In 1991, at the behest of its, President Russia
imposed itself in the Security Council, and five years
later another Council — the Council of Europe — invited
the blood-soaked Russian regime to join its club. And
that is not all — everyone should brace themselves
for more. As if to humiliate the Helsinki Final Act, at
their meeting held in the Finnish capital in 2019 the
Ministers of the Council of Europe decided to return
Russia’s voting rights in the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Council of Europe. That was incitement to
violence — was it not? The clock had been ticking, the
imminent full-scale invasion of Ukraine was closer and
closer, and yet appeasement remained the script.
Two decades before, in 1999 at the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) summit
held in Istanbul, Russia made a commitment to withdraw
its troops from Moldova and Georgia. As always, the
Russian commitments turned out to be merely empty
promises. Today, 23 years after that summit, Russian
troops are still deployed in Transnistria, Moldova. The
world also failed to respond adequately to Russia’s
aggression against Georgia in 2008. And that time it
was not because of a Christmas break — Europe merely
went on summer holidays in August — and by the time
officials came back to their offices, including in the
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9069

OSCE, it was already a new reality for many, and they
carried on with their business.

said “[I]t is also our lot to return”, claiming “basic
values” that “form the basis of [Russian] existence”.

The attempted annexation of Crimea six years later
and the conflict in Donbas are a logical progression of
Russia’s strategies aimed at undermining international
law and the rules-based order. Those events, too, failed
to become a turning point for the world’s relations with
Russia, as did Russia’s war crimes in Syria. Instead,
intoxicated by the illusion of business as usual, the
world continued to believe that the most efficient way
to bring Russia back onto the track of normalcy was
complacency, while Minister Lavrov literally laughed
in the face of his Western colleague in Geneva when the
word “reset” in the term “reset button” was erroneously
translated as “overcharge”. Less than one year later,
Russia invaded Georgia. The Nord Stream 2 pipeline
deserves a separate chapter in this saga of addictive gas
rapprochement with the Kremlin dictator.

My question is, where will a regime proclaiming
three-century-old imperial ambitions as its basic values
stop? In identifying himself with the Russian Czar, Putin
does more than raise questions concerning his mental
state. The dictator publicly speaks of his determination
to act and behave as an eighteenth-century ruler. And
we preach to him with quotes from the United Nations
Charter. Seriously?

Those developments have inevitably led Russia to
its current standing as an aggressive, fascist State with
no limits to its criminal behaviour. One can find the
conclusions of many scholars on the matter, including
those of Timothy Snyder, a well-known historian and
professor at Yale University, who recently described the
criteria of fascism, which today’s Russia meets.

I find it preposterous that some politicians invite
Ukraine to consider calls for concessions to Moscow,
in a country whose Secretary of State, Mr. Henry
Kissinger, half a century ago advised his President that,
“if they put Jews into gas chambers in the Soviet Union,
it is not an American concern”. Today some pundits of
the same school believe that the tens of thousands of
Ukrainians killed by the dictator in Moscow are not a
concern. That is the art of diplomacy, is it not? Or is it
the art of incitement? Mr. Kissinger’s family literally
fled fascism, Nazism and most probably gas chambers
in Europe, when it was about to be invaded by Hitler,
and now he pushes us to be strangled by “Putler” and
someone dares advise us to listen to him?

It has a cult around a single leader. It has a cult of the
dead, organized around the Second World War. It also
has a myth of a past golden age of imperial greatness,
to be restored by a war of healing violence — the
murderous war on Ukraine. Fascist aesthetics are easily
traceable in the promotion of the “Z” symbol, the
organization of mass rallies, the consolidation of war
propaganda and the incitement of hatred towards
Ukraine and Ukrainians.

As Ukraine is bleeding, fighting for its right to
exist, there is no place for the dilemma of appeasement
versus accountability. Opting for appeasement would
only put the darkest times ahead of us. Russia will stop
at nothing in its invasion of Ukraine and use any pause
to make newly occupied territories its strongholds
and gather more cannon fodder to renew its attacks
on Ukraine.

The theft of Ukrainian resources from the occupied
territories and attempts to annex those territories
demonstrate that imperial and neocolonial-style
thinking is a guiding principle in the Kremlin’s policy
on the international stage. We should not be deceived
by Russia’s anti-fascist and anti-Nazi rhetoric. It is just
another manifestation of the aggressive mimicry that
has extended further, with Russia labelling Ukrainians
as neo-Nazis in order to dehumanize them and make
them a legitimate target for Russian soldiers.

It therefore came as no surprise that today’s review
in The Guardian of London of yet another bestseller by
a stupendous liar with a remarkable memory finishes
with a reminder that to his critics he will always be
the man who told Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet
that he was sympathetic with what he was trying to do.
Just one week ago, Putin claimed that the former Soviet
Union was historical Russia. What is next? Will it be a
request from Putin’s envoy to swap nameplates again
in the Chamber — this time from “Russian Federation”
to “Soviet Union”? After all, it would be in total
compliance with the Charter as it stands — since the
Soviet Union is still in it. Is it not?

Meanwhile, Putin wants more territories, comparing
himself to the eighteenth-century Russian Czar Peter.
Speaking about newly independent countries, Putin

Predators attack those who are or appear to be
weaker, and after such attacks they may develop a taste
for human blood and become serial killers. Russia’s

22-3923527/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

conversion into an aggressive fascist regime has
already been demonstrated by its inability to refrain
from attacking those it considers to be weak prey. It
must be stopped by all of us — the sooner the better.
Ukraine, which is now on the front line, has the
necessary will of its leadership, the resoluteness and the
bravery of its army and its people and unprecedented
international solidarity. If we let Putin or his successor
on the Kremlin throne regrow their chopped-back
claws soaked in the blood of Ukrainians, the next war
will be imminent — and the civilized world will pay
three times the price of what is being paid today. Let us
finish off Russian fascism now.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): I deliver this statement
on behalf of the three Baltic States — Estonia, Latvia
and my own State, Lithuania. I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely meeting. I also
thank the briefers for the information they provided on
this very important topic.
We support all the United Nations efforts to take
prompt and effective action in response to situations
in which populations are at risk of atrocities or crimes
are being committed. States have the responsibility to
address and counter incitement to violence and mitigate
the risk of atrocity crimes.
Unfortunately, today we are witnessing Russia’s
unprovoked, large-scale military aggression against
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of the democratic State of Ukraine, with
the support of the co-aggressor, Belarus. For years,
Ukraine has been among the key targets of pro-Kremlin
disinformation, which attempts to build justification
for the Russian invasion.
Furthermore, Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine has been guided by Russia’s highest
officials, along with the use by the Kremlin-owned
and Kremlin-controlled media of radical and toxic
language to describe Ukraine and Ukrainians, leading
to atrocities committed by Russian forces and their
toleration by Russian society.
High-level Russian officials and State media
commentators have repeatedly denied the existence of a
distinct Ukrainian identity. A range of false narratives
have been employed that imply that those who identify
themselves as Ukrainians threaten the unity of Russia
28/30

21/06/2022

or are Nazis, and are therefore deserving of punishment
or even elimination.
President Putin and Russian officials have been
employing so-called mirroring tactics by accusing
their victims of the very crimes they themselves are
committing. False claims have been made that Ukraine
had committed genocide or exterminated the civilian
population in Russian-backed separatist-controlled
areas, which was used as a pretext for invading Ukraine.
Russian officials and State media have repeatedly
invoked denazification as one of the main goals of the
war that Russia has been waging against Ukraine.
Russia’s authorities have not only denied the
atrocities committed by its forces but also rewarded
the soldiers suspected of mass killings in Ukraine,
enabling soldiers to commit — and Russian society
to condone — further atrocities, including mass
executions; the killing of civilians; the shelling of
residential areas, hospitals and kindergartens; the
use of prohibited weapons; the destruction of critical
infrastructure; sexual violence; the use of rape and
torture as weapons of war; and forced deportations of
civilians, including Ukrainian children, to Russia.
All those atrocities display clear signs of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. We
condemn those crimes in the strongest terms and
urge Russia to immediately and unconditionally
withdraw all its troops and military equipment from
the entire territory of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders.
Russia’s bellicose rhetoric unveils its true
imperialistic intentions. If there is no clear and strong
international response to stop it, the aggression against
Ukraine will be just the beginning. The Kremlin talks
openly about land grabs and threatens to take back
the territories of neighbouring countries. Russian
authorities are directly inciting the public by funnelling
and amplifying their propaganda through a controlled
media and extreme censorship around the war. Highly
influential political, religious and State-run media
figures are used for propaganda and incitement
to violence.
The audience of Russian propaganda is twofold:
Russian society and the global audience. The messages
to Russian society seek to increase the hatred towards
other nations, inviting and justifying violence and
aggression. The independent media, journalists and
media workers in Russia and Russian society are left
22-39235

21/06/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

in the abyss of the Russian propaganda, owing to heavy
repression and the crackdown on civil society.
Russia’s information manipulation and interference
also has global effects. Russia’s aggression has
been causing growing food insecurity in the world.
Cynically, such actions are also accompanied by a
global disinformation campaign that aims to deflect
attention from Russia’s responsibility for destabilizing
food markets and undermining global support for
Ukraine. It is important that we set the facts straight:
it is the Russian blockade of Ukrainian ports and the
Russian shelling of arable land and food storage sites
in Ukraine — and not the Western sanctions — that are
causing the food shortages.
Let me reiterate that, amid that despicable war, we
stand in solidarity with Ukraine. The Baltic countries
will continue to provide strong support to Ukraine,
including humanitarian and other material support, to
withstand Russia’s aggression.
Those who incite and commit atrocity crimes in
Ukraine must and will be held accountable. We will
continue to engage in accountability mechanisms to
address the mass atrocities being committed in Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on the Prevention of Genocide, Ms. Alice Wairimu
Nderitu, as well as the representatives of civil society
for their valuable briefings.
This is indeed a good opportunity for us to refocus
our attention on the issue of atrocity crimes in particular.
The Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes
contains explicit references to the incitement to
violence, discrimination, intolerance and hatred as
a common risk factor of atrocity crimes, as well as a
specific risk factor related to crimes against humanity,
genocide and war crimes. Sadly, looking at the situation
in Ukraine since 2014, and particularly in 2022, all
those risks have been massively present in the rhetoric
of Putin’s regime. Even more sadly, the Russian
State-orchestrated incitement led to numerous horrific
crimes committed in Ukraine, with heinous pictures of
mass killings, mass graves and other atrocity reports
coming from various places across Ukraine.

S/PV.9069

Moreover, awarding the soldiers who might be
directly responsible for international crimes committed
in Bucha and other Ukrainian villages is not only a
mockery of the innocent victims but also a striking
endorsement by Russia of the culture of impunity.
Slovakia has been gravely concerned by the
Russian war propaganda defending its unjustified and
unprovoked aggression against Ukraine under the
false pretexts of “de-Nazification” and the genocide
or extermination of the civilian population in Russiabacked separatist regions allegedly committed
by Ukraine.
Those false pretexts significantly resemble the
patterns we have seen in the past, which also included
so-called accusation in a mirror tactics and the framing
of targeted groups as an existential threat in order to
justify the atrocities and portray the war as defensive
and inevitable. What we are witnessing now in Ukraine
is similar rhetoric and, very sadly, similar conduct
by Putin’s regime, amplified by its constant denial of
Ukraine as a sovereign nation and an independent State.
That is simply unacceptable and a blatant
contradiction of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, Russia’s obligations
under article 20 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and article III of the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, if genocidal intent is proven. Needless to say,
incitement to war crimes or crimes against humanity is
equally punishable under customary international law.
In the context of the alleged genocide committed
by Ukraine advanced by Russia as a false pretext for its
invasion, Slovakia recalls the legally binding decision
of the International Court of Justice of 16 March and
strongly urges Russia to comply with the provisional
measures ordered therein.
The incitement to violence that I have just described
has since 24 February evolved into the commission of
atrocities in Ukraine on an almost daily basis. Justice
for those crimes must be served. As a neighbouring
country that has accepted hundreds of thousands of
refugees from Ukraine, among whom are potential
witnesses and victims of atrocities, Slovakia has
therefore contributed actively and in the best possible
spirit to efforts to properly investigate and prosecute
the perpetrators of the crimes committed in Ukraine at
the national, bilateral and regional levels, as well as at
the international level.

22-3923529/30

S/PV.9069

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Just to provide a few brief examples, Slovak
authorities have launched national investigations
into the crimes against humanity and war crimes
allegedly committed in Ukraine. We sent our experts
to assist Ukrainian investigation efforts. We became
part of the joint investigative team set up with the
support of the European Union Agency for Criminal
Justice Cooperation. And we joined other States in
referring the situation in Ukraine to the International
Criminal Court.
Slovakia also supports other initiatives aimed at
finding facts and investigating international crimes and

30/30

21/06/2022

human rights violations in Ukraine, as well as proper
coordination among all of them. We have been steady
in our firm stance against the culture of impunity for
such crimes in Ukraine, as well as in other parts of the
world, no matter by whom they are perpetrated, and we
will remain firm in that regard.
Last but not least, allow me to reiterate our calls for
an immediate cessation of Russian military activities
in Ukraine and the unconditional withdrawal of all
Russian troops from the whole territory of Ukraine.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

22-39235
