S/2015/561*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 July 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014)
and 2191 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the seventeenth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Council resolution 2165
(2014) and paragraph 5 of Council resolution 2191 (2014), in which the Council
requested me to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by
all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to United
Nations agencies on the ground, from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and from open sources. Data from United Nations agencies and partners on their
humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 June to 30 June
2015, when available. More recent data have been included, when available.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Widespread fighting continued among the parties during the reporting period
and further deepened the humanitarian crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Indiscriminate aerial bombings, including the use of barrel bombs, by Government
forces and indiscriminate shelling by non-State armed groups and extremist and
listed terrorist groups 1 left hundreds of civilians dead and injured and thousands
more displaced. The conduct of hostilities by all parties continued to be
characterized by widespread disregard for the rules of international humanitarian
law and the parties’ obligation to protect civilians. Fighting a ffecting civilians was
particularly severe in the governorates of Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Aleppo, Idlib,
Dar‘a, Hasakah and Homs.

__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons on 27 July 2015.
1 On 30 May 2013, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusrah Front were
designated terrorist groups by the Security Council in accordance with resolution 1267 (1999).
The two groups operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.

15-12241* (E)

270715

*1512241*

S/2015/561

4.
Government forces carried out near daily air strikes on several towns in
Rif Dimashq, including in eastern and western Ghutah, causing dozens of civilian
casualties, including women and children. For example, on 17 June, government
forces carried out attacks with mortars and ground-to-ground missiles on the town of
Duma in eastern Ghutah, reportedly killing at least 24 civilians, including 12 women
and 4 children, and wounding at least 70. On 14 June, helicopters reportedly
dropped barrel bombs on the town of Madaya, killing five civilians, including three
women and a child. Early in July, fighting between government and allie d forces
and non-State armed groups escalated significantly in and around the town of
Zabadani, including reported intense aerial bombardment with barrel bombs,
resulting in civilian casualties and damage to infrastructure. As of mid -July, roads
and entry points to Zabadani had been closed, halting the movement of goods and
people, according to local reports.
5.
In Damascus, non-State armed groups carried out numerous mortar attacks in
densely populated civilian areas. On 17 June, 9 civilians, including 6 b elonging to
the same family, were reportedly killed and at least 10 others injured as a result of
two mortar attacks on the Arnous roundabout area in the heart of a shopping area in
Damascus city. On the same day, no fewer than 25 other mortar rounds hit
neighbourhoods in Damascus, including Mezzeh 86, Maleki, Mazraa and the
Abbasiyeen roundabout, Jahidh Garden, Badawi and Assad. On 28 June, several
mortar rounds struck Sarujeh, a residential area in the old city of Damascus, killing
4 civilians and injuring some 15 others.
6.
In the governorate of Aleppo, aerial attacks against eastern Aleppo city,
controlled by non-State armed groups, caused scores of civilian casualties in June.
According to information received by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), more than 200 barrel bombs were
dropped in addition to some 248 missiles fired from aeroplanes. The attacks
reportedly killed at least 257 civilians, including 34 women and 56 children. On
8 June, for example, at least 12 civilians were killed when a government helicopter
reportedly dropped a barrel bomb on a residential building in the Tariq al -Bab
neighbourhood of Aleppo city. On the same day, another barrel bomb dropped on a
residential building in Jub al-Qubba killed a man and his three children. On 9 June,
at least four civilians were reportedly killed when a barrel bomb hit the residential
area of Dahrat Awwad village in rural Aleppo.
7.
Meanwhile, attacks perpetrated by non-State armed groups in Aleppo
continued to kill and maim civilians during the reporting period. For example, on
15 June, seven civilians, including at least two children, were reportedly killed
when a dozen mortar shells fell on the government-controlled district of Sayf
al-Dawla in Aleppo city. On 14 June, mortar attacks killed a civilian on Nile Street
in a residential area of government-controlled Aleppo city. Meanwhile, on 8 June,
mortar shells were fired on the besieged town of Zahrah, killing three children.
8.
In the governorate of Idlib, missiles fired by jets on 9 and 10 June hit the
central market in the town of Janudiyah, west of Idlib city, and a residential area of
Saraqib town, together reportedly killing more than 70 civilians, including women
and children, and injuring 120. On 11 June, at least eight civilians were reportedly
killed when government helicopters dropped barrel bombs on a residential area in
the village of Marat al-Numan. Also during the reporting period, non-State armed

2/13

15-12241

S/2015/561

groups stepped up their shelling of the government-controlled villages of Foah and
Kefraya, leading to increased protection concerns for their 20,000 civilians.
9.
Fierce fighting continued in Dar‘a governorate in June, severely affecting
civilians. On 15 and 16 June, civilians, including children, were killed when the
villages of eastern Hrak, Atman and Mseifra came under aerial bombardment.
Meanwhile, according to information received by OHCHR from local sources, the
village of Neimeh was under constant shelling and aerial attack, including, for
example, on 24 June, when two children were killed in a barrel -bomb attack. On
16 June, aerial bombing raids on the Sad neighbourhood of eastern Gharyeh town,
which struck in the vicinity of a mosque, reportedly killed at least 24 people. On
11 June, a landmine along the road linking the town of Hrak and the village of
Nahta killed five civilians. On 24 June, a child from the village of Sheikh Miskine
died from critical injuries sustained when an unexploded remnant of war was set off.
10. In the governorate of Homs, government forces reportedly intensified aerial
attacks on Rastan city, resulting in civilian deaths and injuries. According to
information received by OHCHR, Government forces dropped two bombs on Rastan
on 11 June, killing three women and two children. On 18 June, at least nine bombs
were dropped on several residential neighbourhoods in the city, killing a child and
injuring civilians. Government forces also reportedly launched aerial attacks on
Homs city, including on 13 June, when an aerial attack killed four women and three
children, according to information received by OHCHR. Meanwhile, non -State
armed groups from within Homs city launched attacks on residential areas. For
example, on 3 June, an improvised explosive device exploded inside a bu s on the
main street of the Zahrah neighbourhood, and on 4 June, rockets landed on Ba’ath
University and the Akrama neighbourhood. On 14 June, two improvised explosive
device attacks on buses in Karm Alouze and Hadara Street injured some 30 people,
according to open sources.
11. Notwithstanding the ongoing negotiations between government representatives
and non-State armed groups in Waer, forces supporting the Government recently
escalated their attacks on the district. For example, on 5 June, eight civili ans, all
from the same family, were reportedly killed in a rocket attack on the
neighbourhood. The negotiation committee inside Waer requested the implementation
of a ceasefire during Ramadan, which was allegedly rejected by the Government.
12. In Homs governorate, the situation in and around Tadmur (Palmyra), now
under the control of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), remained tense,
with ongoing aerial attacks targeting several areas, including the northern
neighbourhoods of the city, the industrial area and rural areas situated along the
road linking it with Homs city. Between 18 and 23 June, aerial attacks reportedly
killed at least 20 people, including children, and injured more than 30. Unconfirmed
reports also indicated that ISIL had planted landmines around the historical area of
the city.
13. In an audio statement released on 23 June, the ISIL spokesperson, Abu
Mohammed al-Adnani, called upon ISIL followers to escalate offensives against
Christians and Shi'ite and Sunni Muslims fighting with the coalition led by the
United States of America in Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic and Libya during
Ramadan.

15-12241

3/13

S/2015/561

14. On 25 June, some 200 ISIL fighters entered Ayn al-Arab (Kobane), using three
vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices. Reports indicated that some ISIL units
had set up sniper positions in tall buildings. According to information received by
OHCHR, more than 300 civilians were killed as a result of the attack and hundreds
of others were injured.
15. In the governorate of Hasakah, ISIL advanced into the southern areas of
Hasakah city on 25 June, capturing two districts before being repelled by forces
supporting the Government backed by Kurdish militias. Around 90,000 people were
reportedly displaced to other parts of the city and to nearb y villages as a result of
the advance and subsequent fighting. An additional 30,000 people were reportedly
displaced to the northern districts of Qamishly, Amuda, Ras al -Ain, Derbasia and
Tal Tamer.
16. Displacement continued to occur elsewhere in the Syrian Arab Republic
during the reporting period as a result of fighting and insecurity. In the governorate
of Raqqa, thousands of civilians fled as fighting escalated between non -State armed
groups and ISIL, including more than 19,000 from the Tel Abyad subd istrict and
25,700 from the Suluk subdistrict. Meanwhile, around 23 June, ISIL issued a
72-hour notice for Kurdish people living in Raqqa city to relocate to the area around
Tadmur and Sukhneh. Some 11,000 Kurds were forced to move to Tadmur, while an
additional 17,500 fled to Ain al Arab in Aleppo governorate and 15,500 to northern
Raqqa governorate. In the southern Syrian Arab Republic, the eruption of fighting in
Dar‘a governorate, including an offensive by non-State armed groups on Dar‘a city
at the end of June, resulted in the displacement of more than 42,500 people.
17. Civilian infrastructure continued to be affected during the reporting period. On
19 June, non-State armed actors in Wadi Barada, Rif Dimashq, cut the water supply
to Damascus city after the arrest of civilians from Wadi Barada, Ein Figeh, at a
government checkpoint on 11 June, in order to compel the Government to
implement the local agreement earlier reached between the sides. Allegedly, the
Government released eight detainees, prompting the resumption of some of the
water supply. Negotiations were still continuing between the sides for the full
resumption of the water supply. However, with the escalation of fighting in
Zabadani, the water supply was again reduced in Damascus followi ng additional
cuts by non-State armed groups. Meanwhile, the availability of water per capita in
the governorate of Idlib decreased significantly because a spike in fuel prices,
caused by the limited availability of fuel and increased hostilities, diminish ed the
capacity of water pumping stations.
18. In June, several cultural heritage sites in the Syrian Arab Republic were
affected by the conflict. On 9 June, the Association for the Protection of Syrian
Archaeology confirmed the bombing of the Busra citadel. On 15 June, the Marat
al-Numan museum in Idlib was hit by a barrel bomb, causing damage to mosaics
and artefacts. Moreover, ISIL destroyed two ancient Muslim mausoleums at the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization World Herit age
site of Palmyra on 20 June 2015. According to the Syrian Directorate General of
Antiquities and Museums, ISIL also placed explosives inside the temples and
monuments. On 16 June, the Association confirmed the destruction of the minaret of
the Meshatiya mosque in Aleppo.
19. Direct meetings and negotiations resumed between the Government and the
opposition in Muaddamiyah, Rif Dimashq, which led to an easing of access for

4/13

15-12241

S/2015/561

humanitarian relief to the area, with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, in particular,
able to deliver assistance in July. The main road to Muaddamiyah had been closed
by government forces since 17 February. The United Nations inter -agency convoy to
Muaddamiyah, approved by the Government on 17 June, is yet to proceed, awaiting
security clearance.
20. On 2 July, my Special Envoy for Syria completed the initial phase of the
Geneva consultations after holding more than 80 meetings with Syrian, regional and
international parties, with a view to developing recommendations on the
operationalization of the Geneva Communiqué. He then undertook a series of
meetings in New York and international capitals with a view to preparing for his
upcoming briefing to the Security Council.

B.

Human rights
21. During the reporting period, OHCHR continued to receive allegations and to
document cases of arbitrary arrests, detention, torture and death in custody inside
government detention centres. For example, a human rights lawyer detained by the
Military Security Branch with no charges since May 2013 reportedly died in
Sidnaya prison on 20 June, according to local sources.
22. On 17 June, around 650 detainees, held in Hama central prison, began a
hunger strike, following the issuance by the counter -terrorism court in Damascus in
May and June of sentences against 60 detainees on the charge of “terrorism”.
Twenty detainees were reportedly sentenced to death, 25 detainees to 25 years in
prison and 15 detainees to between 10 and 15 years in prison. According to
information collected by OHCHR, the individuals sentenced were peaceful
protesters arbitrarily detained and summarily tried in processes affording limited
judicial guarantees. The detainees halted their hunger strike on 23 June after
reportedly receiving assurances from the Syrian authorities that the sentences would
be revisited in July.
23. On 10 June, some 20 Druze civilians were reportedly shot and killed by
Nusrah Front elements in the village of Kalb Lawza in Idlib, following an
altercation that took place when a Nusrah Front commander sought to take over the
house of a pro-government Druze leader. Some members of the Druze community
attempted to stop that takeover, after which the Nusrah Front elements fired at the
crowd, leaving 20 dead, according to a number of sources. Nusrah Front leaders
reportedly described the event as being an individual act that would be investig ated.
24. On 28 June, in Dayr al-Zawr, ISIL reportedly executed a civilian and his wife
in the Jaradiq area of Mayadin town in Dayr al-Zawr city for “witchcraft”.
25. OHCHR received credible allegations of human rights abuses by the Kurdish
People’s Protection Units against residents of Tal Abyad, including displacement,
targeted killings, the looting of houses and the confiscation of private belongings.
Local sources on the ground claimed that the Units had been displacing civilians by
evicting them from their homes in Tal Abyad and preventing them from returning.
In addition, residents of the villages of Zahle and Kara al-Sharf reported that the
Units had displaced civilians and confiscated civilian property. Meanwhile, on
15 June, a young engineer from Daba village was reportedly shot and killed after
refusing to leave his home.

15-12241

5/13

S/2015/561

26. On 23 June, the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic presented its oral update to the Human Rights Council
covering the period from 15 March to 15 June. In its update, the Commission
reiterated its earlier findings that the main cause of civilian casualties, mass
displacement and destruction was the deliberate targeting of civilians,
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks, attacks on civilian and protected
objects, and the punitive imposition of sieges and blockades. While that update
focused on violations committed during the conduct of hostilities, the Commission
emphasized that mass violations concerning the treatment of civilian s and hors de
combat fighters continued to be received, including corroborated accounts of
unlawful killing, torture, sexual violence, enforced disappearances and the taking of
hostages. Centres of violence included government detention centres, prisons an d
checkpoints, ISIL-controlled territory and the northern and southern Syrian Arab
Republic, where there were recent ground attacks by anti -government armed groups,
sometimes operating in conjunction with the Nusrah Front.

C.

Humanitarian response
27. During the reporting period, some 12.2 million people required humanitarian
assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic, more than 5 million of whom were children.
Around 7.6 million people had been internally displaced and more than 4 million
people had fled the Syrian Arab Republic to neighbouring countries and North Africa .
28. United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to reach millions
of people in need in June through all modalities from within the Syrian Arab
Republic and across borders, pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
The World Food Programme (WFP) delivered food assistance to 4.1 million people
in 12 governorates. The World Health Organization (WHO) distributed medicines
and supplies for more than 4 million treatments in 10 governorates. The United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) reached more than 2.8 million people with
water, sanitation, hygiene, health care, nutrition, education and protection support.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refu gees (UNHCR)
reached almost 180,000 people in 12 governorates with core relief items and
protection services. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) supported its
partners to deliver reproductive services and services relating to gender -based
violence to 263,737 women in eight governorates. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations distributed agricultural supplies in support of
4,800 people. The International Organization for Migration reached 143,088 people
with multisector assistance. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) provided support to more than
280,000 Palestine refugees.
29. Cross-border deliveries continued during the reporting period. As at 30 June,
the United Nations and its implementing partners had sent 140 shipments — 94 from
Turkey and 46 from Jordan — to the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of
resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). They included the food assistance
equivalent for more than 3.4 million people; non-food items for some 1.4 million
people; water and sanitation supplies for more than 900,000 people; and medical
supplies for approximately 2.2 million treatments, in Aleppo, Latakia, Idlib, Dar‘a,
Quneitra and Hama governorates. In accordance with resolutions 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014), the United Nations notified the Government in advance of each

6/13

15-12241

S/2015/561

shipment, including details of content, destination district and number of
beneficiaries. The increased insecurity in the northern Syrian Arab Republic
nothwithstanding, there was no significant impact on United Nations cross -border
operations from Turkey during the reporting period. However, recent fighting in
Dar‘a governorate in the southern Syrian Arab Republic prevented all United
Nations shipments from passing through the Ramtha crossing from 24 June to 14 July.
Cross-border shipments resumed from Ramtha on 15 July.
30. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism continued its operations in Jordan
and Turkey. In June, it monitored 15 United Nations humanitar ian shipments,
confirming the humanitarian nature of each and notifying the Syrian authorities
after each shipment had crossed the border. The Mechanism continued to benefit
from excellent cooperation with the Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
31. Using the Nusaybin-Qamishly crossing, with the consent of the Governments
of Turkey and the Syrian Arab Republic, WFP completed the transportation of food
rations sufficient for more than 176,000 people in June.
32. Four joint inter-agency convoys proceeded across conflict lines in June, one of
which was only partially completed — that of 1 June, to Bloudan in Rif Dimashq
with food assistance for 5,000 people. Wheat flour was not allowed on the convoy.
Furthermore, although facilitation letters from the Ministry o f Health to move
medical supplies had been received, medical supplies for nearly 20,000 people were
removed by security forces during the loading phase. The Syrian Arab Red Crescent
subsequently attempted to deliver the medical supplies on 4 June, but was stopped
and turned back at a government checkpoint. On 4 June, an inter -agency convoy
reached Kafr Hamra and Maret al-Artiq in Aleppo governorate with assistance for
60,000 people. On 23 June, an inter-agency convoy proceeded to eastern Aleppo,
delivering food assistance for 50,000 people and medical kits sufficient for 80,000
people. An inter-agency convoy, reached Talbiseh in Homs governorate on 10 and
16 June, with food assistance for more than 92,000 people. Surgical items for more
than 7,000 people were removed from the convoys by local security forces. As part
of the convoy, food assistance was delivered to the nearby government -held areas of
Mesherfeh and Mekhram, in support of 15,500 civilians in the area.
33. In addition to inter-agency convoys, United Nations agencies also conducted
single-agency convoys across conflict lines during the reporting period. For example ,
WHO delivered medical assistance for more than 330,000 treatments to locations in
the governorates of Rif Dimashq, Homs, Aleppo, Dayr al-Zawr (via airlift) and
Hasakah. UNICEF provided water and sanitation assistance to around 50,000 people
in June in the governorate of Homs.
34. Both international and Syrian non-governmental organizations continued to
deliver multisector assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic in June, including
through the provision of ongoing services. Non-governmental organizations reached
more than 1.3 million people: some 850,000 people in Aleppo; more than 270,000 in
Idlib; some 131,000 in Dar‘a and more than 50,000 people in Hasakah governorate. 2

__________________
2 The figures are based on available data from non-governmental organization partners. They

represent a snapshot of the overall non-governmental organization response rather than a
complete picture.

15-12241

7/13

S/2015/561

D.

Humanitarian access
35. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to many of the 12.2 million people in
need of assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic remained extremely challenging in
June owing to active conflict, insecurity and shifting front lines as well as deliberate
obstructions and interference by the parties, including restrictions on movement and
burdensome administrative procedures. In addition to the above-mentioned challenges,
the level of funding for humanitarian activities continued to be outpaced by the
scale of needs. The 2015 Syria Response Plan was only 26 per cent funded as at
15 July.
36. Continued intense conflict in several governorates hindered the effective
delivery of humanitarian assistance and people’s access to essential services during
the reporting period. For example, active fighting in Dar‘a city at the end of June
hampered the delivery of assistance, including United Nations cross -border convoys
through the Ramtha crossing. Insecurity and other access constraints in June prevented
the delivery of food assistance to more than 1.2 million people in Rif Dimashq, rural
Homs and rural Hama. In Idlib, WFP was unable to reach some 60,000 civilians in
Ariha and Jisr al-Shughour, in addition to 20,000 people in the government-held
towns of Foah and Kefraya, surrounded by non-State armed groups.
37. Deliberate interference and restrictions also continued to prevent aid delivery.
WFP continued to suspend its food deliveries to 600,000 people in Dayr al-Zawr
and Raqqa, where access had been impossible since May and November 2014,
respectively, as a result of the difficulty of delivering humanitarian supplies through
ISIL-controlled areas. Similarly, WFP was unable to reach 175,000 people in ISILcontrolled areas of rural Aleppo, owing to the inability to operate safely and
independently. UNICEF continued to be unable to send water treatment supplies to
Dayr al-Zawr and Raqqa governorates owing to the difficulty of delivering
humanitarian supplies through ISIL-controlled areas. Meanwhile, in Idlib governorate,
elements affiliated with the Nusrah Front seized the supplies of an international
non-governmental organization in mid-June. It was also reported that the group
returned a large portion of the goods while negotiations continued to recover the rest .
38. No major changes in the administrative procedures required by the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic were reported in June. The current procedures
continued to delay or limit the delivery of assistance by United Nations agencies.
39. As at 30 June, 53 United Nations visa requests (requests for new visas and
renewals) remained pending: 24 within 15 working days and 29 exceeding the
15 working days limit. Since 1 January 2015, 558 visas (requests for new visas and
renewals) have been submitted, of which 471 visas have been approved, including
91 in June. A total of 33 visas have been rejected, exclusive of the four United
Nations staff who were declared persona non-grata in February. By comparison,
28 visa requests were rejected for the whole of 2014.
40. As at 30 June, 15 international non-governmental organizations had been
approved by the Government to work in the Syrian Arab Republic. Such organizations
continued to face administrative hurdles and restrictions that affected their ability to
operate. They remained restricted in their ability to partner with national humanitar ian
organizations, open sub-offices, conduct missions, join inter-agency convoys and
undertake independent needs assessments. Four international non-governmental
organization visas were granted in June, and seven remained pending approval.

8/13

15-12241

S/2015/561

41. The number of national non-governmental organizations authorized to partner
with the United Nations increased from 118 to 120 in June through 175 branches.
Two of these were added by the Government in Sweida and Rif Dimashq
governorates. Some governorates, including Rif Dimashq, Quneitra, Idlib, Dar‘a and
Raqqa, continued to have an insufficient number of national non -governmental
organizations authorized to partner with the United Nations relative to the level of
humanitarian need and response required.
42. During 2015, until the end of the reporting period, the United Nations
submitted 81 requests to the Government for inter-agency convoys (including an
airlift) to besieged, hard-to-reach and other areas located across conflict lines in the
Syrian Arab Republic, including 4 requests that received no answer from the
Government and were resubmitted by the United Nations as new requests, and
9 requests that were resubmitted because they had been put on hold. As at 15 July,
20 requests had been approved, in principle, by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, of
which 9 had been completed and 1 partially completed. Altogether, the completed
and partially completed convoys reached an estimated 500,000 people in need. The
remaining 10 approved requests were at various stages of p reparation. Of those,
2 could not proceed owing to the lack of agreement on the access route among the
United Nations, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the Government, while another 2
could not proceed owing to the lack of agreement by non -State armed groups. Fortyfive requests were awaiting government approval: 33 requests submitted on 1 July
and 12 old requests that remained valid. Three requests were put on hold owing to
the prevailing security conditions.
43. Access to people living in hard-to-reach areas remained of critical concern.
The list of hard-to-reach locations was updated to reflect recent developments in
access as well as conflict dynamics and shifting front lines and control by parties.
The overall number of people in need in 127 hard-to-reach locations (previously
131 locations) stood at approximately 4.6 million (previously 4.8 million) at the end
of the reporting period. United Nations agencies and partners reached 32 of those
locations (25 per cent) during the reporting period. United Nations agencies and
partners reached 14 locations with food assistance and agricultural support for more
than 334,000 people; 20 locations with health support for more than 200,000 medical
treatments; 11 locations with water, sanitation and hygiene for 465, 074 people; and
10 locations with core relief items for almost 135,000 people.
Besieged areas
44. Of the 4.6 million people living in hard-to-reach areas in the Syrian Arab
Republic, 422,000 remained besieged: 167,500 besieged by government forces in
eastern Ghutah and Darayya, 26,500 besieged by non -State armed groups in Nubul
and Zahrah and 228,000 besieged by ISIL in the government -controlled western
neighbourhoods of Dayr al-Zawr city.
45. In June in eastern Ghutah, some 163,500 people remained besieged by
government forces, with no United Nations assistance reaching the eastern Ghutah
area. UNFPA reached Duma through a cross line convoy with reproductive health
services for 1,365 women. On 12 July, WHO received approval from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs to deliver a second shipment of 500 dialysis sessions to Duma.
46. In Darayya, Rif Dimashq, around 4,000 people remained besieged by government
forces. People there have not been assisted by the United Nations since October 2012 .

15-12241

9/13

S/2015/561

47. In Nubul and Zahrah, approximately 26,500 people remained besieged by
non-State armed groups. No United Nations assistance reached the two areas in June .
48. In the government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Dayr al-Zawr city, some
228,000 people were besieged by ISIL. During the reporting period, 1,764 children
were reached by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent with measles and other routine
vaccinations in Dayr al-Zawr city, supported by UNICEF. WHO provided medical
assistance sufficient for approximately 18,400 people through the airlift of 46,000
medical treatments and through the provision of 289 medical treatments through a
local partner.
49. In June, the total number of people reached with health assistance represented
5 per cent of the besieged population. No other assistance, such as food, non-food or
other relief items, were delivered to besieged areas during the reporting period.
50. While they were not categorized as besieged during the reporting period,
UNRWA remained extremely concerned about the safety and humanitarian needs of
thousands of civilians still trapped in Yarmouk, and the thousands more displaced to
the surrounding areas of Yalda, Babila and Beit Sahm following events in Yarmouk
on 1 April, when armed groups assumed control of most of the area. All UNRWA
operations in Yarmouk remained suspended, with no missions possible during the
reporting period. The most recent UNRWA mission inside Yarmouk was conducted
on 28 March, and its last successful mission to the surrounding areas of Yalda,
Babila and Beit Sahm was on 7 June, when 1,200 family food parcels were
distributed. After having had regular access in May, UNRWA conducted only two
cross-line missions during the reporting period to Yalda, Babila and Beit Sahm, on
3 and 7 June, delivering food parcels to 1,200 families and providing health
consultations to 67 civilians. Two children under 5 years of age were diagnosed with
malnutrition. On 8 June, UNRWA attempted a mission to the same area, but was
turned back at a government-controlled checkpoint, with no explanation given for
the obstruction of humanitarian assistance. Several démarches by UNRWA
notwithstanding, the Syrian authorities have yet to authorize the resumption of
humanitarian activities by UNRWA in Yalda, Babila and Beit Sahm.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
51. WHO and its implementing partners dispatched medicine and medical supplies
for more than 4 million treatments to local health authorities, non -governmental
organizations and private medical facilities in 10 governorates from within the Syrian
Arab Republic. Approximately 369,000 of those treatments were delivered cross line in Aleppo, Hasakah, Dar‘a, Dayr al-Zawr and Homs governorates as well as
Rif Dimashq. WHO also airlifted 24,808 medical treatments from Damascus to
Qamishly city. UNICEF delivered eight midwifery kits, 24 obstetric kits and
17 essential drug kits providing drugs for 172,800 patients across the Aleppo, Idlib
and Lattakia governorates. Meanwhile, through the support of UNFPA and
implementing partners, 21,433 women and 864 men residing in the governorates of
Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Aleppo, Sweida, Dar‘a and Homs benefited from the
delivery of dignity kits.
52. Despite the delivery of a significant amount of medical assistance during the
reporting period, access to medical supplies and equipment continued to be
restricted to some areas as a result of insecurity and access constraints imposed by
parties to the conflict. The security deterioration in many parts of the coun try and

10/13

15-12241

S/2015/561

the additional displacement of thousands of civilians during the reporting period
hampered the availability of health services, in particular in the governorates of
Hasakah, Aleppo, Idlib, rural Hama, Dar‘a and Rif Dimashq. Furthermore, the lack
of a fuel supply into the northern Syrian Arab Republic in June reduced the
provision of health services in the parts of the northern governorates of the country
under the control of non-State armed groups, as many facilities reduced services to
essential and urgent activities only. Meanwhile, despite approval from the local
authorities, all surgical supplies were removed by security forces from two United
Nations inter-agency convoys to Talbiseh and Tir Mallah, depriving the population
of 7,254 surgical treatments.
53. WHO and health sector partners have developed a pilot one -month operational
plan for delivery to hard-to-reach and besieged areas for 1.9 million people in
14 locations in five governorates: Aleppo, Damascus, Dar‘a, Rif Dimashq and Idlib.
In support of that plan, WHO made two requests in June, both of which remained
unanswered. WHO also submitted a request to deliver the second shipment of
dialysis sessions to Duma in Rif Dimashq, which was approved on 12 July.
Separately, despite approval from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to deliver medicine
and medical supplies to curb the outbreak of myiasis in Duma in Rif Dimashq, the
shipment was still pending approval since December 2014. A reminder was sent to
the Ministry, which went unanswered.
54. The fourteenth national polio immunization campaign was carried out from
31 May to 4 June, targeting 2.9 million children under 5 years of age. Final
coverage figures showed a total of 2.3 million children vaccinated (80 per cent of
the target). Door-to-door immunization campaigns were restricted by ISIL in areas
under its control (mainly in Raqqa and Dayr al-Zawr). An estimated 463,000
children under 5 years of age could not be vaccinated in those areas. Less than
10 per cent of children were vaccinated in Dayr al-Zawr city (22,592 of 263,508).
Many districts in the governorates of Homs, Aleppo, Idlib, Dayr al -Zawr and
Rif Dimashq were also unable to implement the immunization campaign owing to
active fighting and insecurity.
55. Attacks on medical facilities, ambulances and medical personnel continued
during the reporting period. In June, Physicians for Human Rights documented
14 attacks on 13 medical facilities, of which 12 were air strikes by government
forces. Eight attacks occurred in Aleppo, three in Dar‘a and one each in Damascus,
Hasakah and Idlib governorates. In June, the organization documented the death of
nine medical personnel, of whom at least six were targeted or killed in the line of
duty. Five died from shelling and bombing, two from torture and two from shooting.
Four deaths occurred in Aleppo, two in Dar‘a and one each in Damascus, Raqqa and
Hasakah governorates.
56. Since the beginning of the conflict, Physicians for Human Rights has
documented 285 attacks on 213 separate medical facilities, disaggregated as follows:
255 facilities hit by government forces, 11 by non-State armed groups, 8 by ISIL
and the Nusrah Front, 1 by anti-ISIL coalition forces and 10 by unknown forces.
Aleppo and Idlib governorates experienced the highest numbe r of attacks, with
76 and 45 attacks, respectively. In total, the organization has documented the death
of 642 medical personnel, of whom 614 were killed by government forces, 8 by
non-State armed groups, 8 by ISIL, 1 by Kurdish forces and 11 by unknown forces.

15-12241

11/13

S/2015/561

Safety and security of staff and premises
57. On 16 June, an UNRWA school, which had not been in use for several months,
was destroyed by a large explosion in the Khan Eshieh camp, to the southwest of
Damascus. An adjacent UNRWA community centre was also damaged by debris
from the explosion.
58. On 16 June, rockets and mortars struck various neighbourhoods in Damascus
city centre, in close proximity to the Four Seasons Hotel where United Nations staff
reside. No United Nations staff were injured.
59. On 9 June, a suicide attack in Qahtaniah, between the Newroz refugee camp
and Qamishly in Hasakah governorate, occurred during a UNHCR field mission to
the camp. As a result, the United Nations Department of Safety and Security
requested the mission to return to Qamishly earlier than planned.
60. On 6 June, five mortars landed in Jaramanah city in Rif Dimashq, leaving
2 civilians dead and 15 injured. That attack directly affected the distribution of core
relief items, given that the UNHCR implementing partner, the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, had to postpone distribution to avoid any further risk to staff and
beneficiaries.
61. A total of 32 United Nations staff members, 28 of whom are UNRWA staff,
continued to be detained or missing. The total number of humanitarian workers
killed in the conflict since March 2011 is 77: 17 United Nations staff members,
45 Syrian Arab Red Crescent staff members and volunteers, 8 volunteers and staff
members of the Palestine Red Crescent Society and 7 staff members of international
non-governmental organizations. Of the 77, 10 have been killed since 1 January
2015.

III. Observations
62. There are few words left to convey the suffering being endured by Syrians,
now five years into the conflict. In addition to the ongoing civilian deaths and
injuries, the destruction of property and cultural heritage and the displacement of
tens of thousands of people, many Syrians are also facing severe water and fuel
shortages, causing increased levels of disease and hardship, in particular in hard-toreach areas.
63. The conduct of hostilities continues to be characterized by a prevailing
disrespect for the fundamental rules of international humanitarian law. All parties to
the conflict are failing to uphold their obligation to protect civilians. As in previous
months, the fight for territory and resources is being undertaken through
indiscriminate attacks on residential areas, including through the use of barrel
bombs, killing hundreds of civilians, including dozens of children, while also
leaving dangerous explosive remnants of war, which will remain a threat until they
are removed. Tens of thousands of people were forced from their homes in search of
safety in June, adding to the 11 million displaced since the start of the conflict. The
execution and torture of men, women and children shows no sign of abating.
Hospitals and medical staff continued to come under attack. What was
inconceivable five years ago has become the norm for Syrian families and
communities, and it must stop.

12/13

15-12241

S/2015/561

64. United Nations organizations and non-governmental organization partners,
both Syrian and international, continue to strive to reach those who require
assistance. Despite the extremely challenging operating environment, they have
provided assistance to millions of people every month. This has been achieved from
inside the Syrian Arab Republic across conflict lines and from across borders. There
remain, however, more than 12 million people who need assistance, and we are not
reaching enough of them. Insecurity, fighting and deliberate operational
obstructions continue to constrain the delivery of assistance, and surgical items are
still being removed from convoys.
65. I wish to highlight in particular, once again, the deplorable conditions faced by
some 4.6 million people in extremely hard-to-reach areas, including 422,000 civilians
who remain besieged by parties to the conflict. Together with many others, I have
repeatedly called for an end to the deplorable and illegal practi ce of besieging
civilians and rendering entire communities outside the range of humanitarian
assistance. Civilians must be free to move and to receive help.
66. In the coming days, I will join my Special Envoy for Syria in briefing the
Security Council regarding United Nations recommendations on the political track.
I will defer my comments on the political process until then, other than to highlight
that the contents of the present report once again bear unflinching witness to the
urgent need to find a settlement to this ruinous conflict.

15-12241

13/13
