III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

putes and respect for permanent sovereignty over natural
resources;
(c) The need for just and viable solutions of existing
problems and crises in the area on the basis of the provi­
sions of the Charter and of relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, the withdrawal of foreign forces of occu­
pation and the right of peoples under colonial or foreign
domination to self-determination and independence;
2. Welcomes any further communication to the Secre­
tary-General, from all States, of proposals, declarations
and recommendations on strengthening peace, security
and co-operation in the Mediterranean region;
3. Urges all States to co-operate with the Mediterra­
nean States in the further efforts required to reduce tension
and promote peace, security and co-operation in the region
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and with the provisions of
the Declaration on Principles of International Law con­
cerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
in accordance with the Charter;
4. Encourages once again efforts to intensify existing
forms and to promote new forms of co-operation in vari­
ous fields, particularly those aimed at reducing tension and
strengthening confidence and security in the region;
5. Renews its invitation to the Secretary-General to
give due attention to the question of peace, security and
co-operation in the Mediterranean region and, if requested
to do so, to render advice and assistance to concerted
efforts by Mediterranean countries in promoting peace,
security and co-operation in the region;
6. Invites the member States of the relevant regional
organizations to lend support and to submit to the Secre­
tary-General concrete ideas and suggestions on their
potential contribution to the strengthening of peace and
co-operation in the Mediterranean region;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the itern entitled "Strengthening of security
and co-operation in the Mediterranean region".
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/154. Review of the implementation of the Decla­
ration on the Strengthening of International
Security
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/73 H of 15 December 1983.
Profoundly concerned over the situation of the international community today in circumstances of tensions and
conflicts long continuing between nations, denoting a
marked decline in the respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic elements of international law,
Gravely concerned over the increasing manifestations of
various forms of international terrorism,
Considering that the main organ of the United Nations
which under the Charter has the essential characteristic of
rendering effective its decisions is the Security Council,
Bearing in mind that the notes by the President of the
Security Council dated 12 September 1983 132 and 28 Sep­
tember 1984, 133 although referring to the subject of collec­
tive security, indicate no concrete steps taken or to be
taken to implement the relevant provisions of the Charter,
132 S/1597 I. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Security Coun­
cil, Thirty-eighth Year, Resolutions and Decisions, /983. part II, "Considera­

tlOn of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Orgamzatton.
1982".
l33 SI 16760. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Secunty Coun­
cil, Thirty-ninth Year, Resolutions and Decisions, /984, part 11. "Considera­
tion of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization"

95

Taking due account of the need that, on the occasion of
the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, specific
endeavours should be devoted by the international com­
munity to enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations
required by the Charter,
1. Recommends that the Security Council give priority
consideration to the need for strengthening the system of
collective security provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/155. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Review of the
implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security",
Noting with concern that the provisions of the Declara­
tion on the Strengthening of International Security 134 have
not been fully implemented,
Noting further with concern that the United Nations sys­
tem of collective security has not been used effectively,
Recalling the duty of States not to intervene in the inter­
nal or external affairs of any State, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling the provisions of the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, 135
Noting the provisions of the Declaration on the Inad­
missibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal
Affairs of States, 136
Recalling the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settle­
ment of International Disputes, 137
Alarmed by increasing tensions in international relations
and the heightened confrontations that characterize the
relations between the great Powers, accompanied by the
policy of competition for spheres of influence, domination
and exploitation in more and more parts of the world, the
escalation to new levels of the arms race, particularly in
nuclear weapons and the danger of its extension into outer
space, all of which pose a grave threat to global peace and
security,
Profoundly disturbed by the increasing recourse to the
use or threat of use of force. military intervention and
interference, aggression and foreign occupation, by the
aggravation of existing crises in the world and the outbreak
of new ones, by the continued infringement of the inde­
pendence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of countries,
by the denial of the right to self-determination of peoples
under colonial and foreign occupation and by attempts to
characterize erroneously the struggles of peoples for inde­
pendence and human dignity as falling within the context
of East-West confrontation, thus denying them the right to
self-determination, to decide their own destiny and realize
their legitimate aspirations, by the persistence of colonial­
ism, racism and apartheid supported by the growing use of
I H Resolution 2734 (XXV)
I 35 R esolution 2625 (XXV). annex.
136 Resolution 36/ l 03, annex
7
1_1 Resolution 37/ 10. annex

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

96

military force, by the intensification and expansion of the
scope and frequency of manoeuvres and other military
activities conceived within the context of big-Power con­
frontation and used as means of pressure, threat and
destabilization, and by the lack of solutions to the world
economic crisis in which the deeper underlying problems
of a structural nature have been compounded by cyclical
factors and which has further aggravated the inequalities
and injustices in international economic relations,
Aware of the increasing interdependence among nations
and of the fact that in the present-day world there is no
alternati.ve to a policy of peaceful coexistence, detente and
co-operation among States on the basis of equality, irre­
spective of their economic or military power, political and
social systems or size and geographic location,
Stressing the need for the main organs of the United
Nations responsible for the maintenance of peace and
security, particularly the Security Council, to contribute
more effectively to the promotion of international peace
and security by seeking solutions to unresolved problems
and crises in the world,
Bearing in mind that the year 1985 will mark four
decades since the United Nations was established on the
conclusion of the Second World War, which had brought
untold sorrow to mankind, and should provide an occa­
sion to review the performance of the United Nations sys­
tem over the past four decades with a view to enhancing its
role and effectiveness towards the achievement of peace,
security, justice and development,
Urging all States to take effective measures during the
year of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations to
contribute towards the amelioration of international polit­
ical and economic relations in the interest of lasting world
peace and the progress of mankind,
Noting that the year 1985 will also mark the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security,
I. Reaffirms the validity of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security and calls upon all
States to contribute effectively to its implementation;
2. Urges once again all States to abide strictly, in their
international relations, by their commitment to the Char­
ter of the United Nations and, to this end:
(a) To refrain from the use or threat of use of force,
intervention, interference, aggression, foreign occupation
and colonial domination or measures of political and eco­
nomic coercion which violate the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, independence and security of other States as well
as the permanent sovereignty of peoples over their natural
resources;
(b) To refrain from supporting or encouraging any such
act for any reason whatsoever and to reject and refuse rec­
ognition of situations brought about by any such act;
3. Calls upon all States, in particular the nuclear­
weapon States and other militarily significant States, to
take immediate steps aimed at:
(a) Promoting and using effectively the system of col­
lective security as envisaged in the Charter;
(b) Halting effectively the arms race and achieving gen­
eral and complete disarmament under effective interna­
tional control and, to this end, to start serious, meaningful
and effective negotiations with a view to implementing the
recommendations and decisions contained in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly,'38 and to fulfilling the priority tasks listed in its
138 Resolution S- I 012

Programme of Action set forth in section Ill of the Final
Document;
4. Invites all States, in particular the major military
Powers and States members of military alliances, to
refrain, especially in critical situations and in crisis areas.
from actions, including military activities and
manoeuvres, conceived within the context of big-Power
confrontation and used as a means of pressure on, threat to
and destabilization of other States and regions;
5. Urges all States, in particular the permanent mem­
bers of the Security Council, to take all necessary measures
to prevent the further deterioration of the international sit­
uation and, to this end:
(a) To seek, through more effective utilization of the
means provided for in the Charter, the peaceful settlement
of disputes and the elimination of the focal points of crisis
and tension which constitute a threat to international
peace and security;
(b) To proceed without delay to a global consideration
of ways and means for bringing about a revival of the
world economy and for the restructuring of international
economic relations within the framework of the global
negotiations with a view to establishing the new interna­
tional economic order;
(c) To accelerate the economic development of devel­
oping countries, particularly the least developed ones;
(d) To implement urgently measures agreed upon to
ameliorate the critical economic situation in Africa which
is the result, inter alia, of persistent inclement climatic fac­
tors;
6. Calls upon all States, particularly the members or
the Security Council, to take appropriate and effective
measures to promote the fulfilment of the objective of the
denuclearization of Africa in order to avert the serious
danger which the nuclear capability of South Africa consti­
tutes to the African States, in particular the front-line
States, as well as to international peace and security:
7. Emphasizes the role that the United Nations has in
the maintenance of peace and security and in economic
and social development and progress for the benefit of all
mankind;
8. Reiterates that the current deterioration of the inter­
national situation requires an effective Security Council
and, to that end, emphasizes the need to examine mecha­
nisms and working methods on a continued basis in order
to enhance the authority and enforcement capacity of the
Council, in accordance with the Charter;
9. Emphasizes that the Security Council should con­
sider holding periodic meetings in specific cases to con­
sider and review outstanding problems and crises. thus
enabling the Council to play a more active role in prevent­
ing conflicts;
I 0. Reiterates the need for the Security Council, in par­
ticular its permanent members, to ensure the effective
implementation of its decisions in compliance with the rel­
evant provisions of the Charter;
11. Considers that respect for and promotion of
human rights and fundamental freedoms in their civiL
political, economic, social and cultural aspects, on the one
hand, and the strengthening of international peace and
security, on the other, mutually reinforce each other:
12. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples
under colonial domination, foreign occupation or racist
regimes and their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence, and urges Member States to increase
their support for and solidarity with them and their

II I.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committe• · ________
�

national liberation movements and to take urgent and
effective measures for the speedy completion of the imple­
mentation of the Declaration on the Granting of Indepen­
dence to Colonial Countries and Peoples 139 and for the
final elimination of colonialism. racism and apartheid:
13. Welcomes the continuation of the process within
the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-oper­
ation in Europe and expresses the hope that the Stockholm
Conference on Confidence- and Security-building Mea­
sures and Disarmament in Europe, the continent with the
greatest concentration of armaments and military forces,
will achieve significant and positive results:
14. Reiterates its call upon great Powers to abandon
policies of confrontation which have hitherto given rise to
tension and mistrust and to engage without any further
delay in genuine and constructive negotiations in good
faith, taking into account the interests of the entire inter­
national community:
15. Reaffirms that the democratization of international
relations is an imperative necessity enabling, under the
conditions of interdependence, the full development and
independence of all States as well as the attainment of gen­
uine security, peace and co-operation in the world, and
stresses its firm belief that the United Nations offers the
best framework for the promotion of these goals:
16. Invites Member States to submit their views on the
question of the implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session on the basis of the replies
received;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Review of the imple­
mentation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security".

1U2nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
39/156. Strengthening of international security:
common security
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the common interest of all nations in pro­

moting an effective approach to security. which will seek
the common security of all nations.
Firmly believing that the mind of man can prevail over
the weapons of war,
I. Notes with appreciation the relevant information on
the consultations in the Security Council. provided by the
President of the Council in his notes dated 12 September
1983 132 and 28 September 1984: 133
2. Welcomes the important considerations contained
therein;
3. Reaffirms, in particular, as the prerequisite for
peace, the need for strict compliance by all Member States
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, and with the Charter itself, as well as the
obligation of States to accept and carry out the decisions of
the Security Council;
4. Expresses its awareness of the respective functions
and specific powers of the Security Council and the other
principal organs of the United Nations:
5. Welcomes the serious, comprehensive discussions
that have already taken place:
6. Takes note, in particular, of the concentration of
discussion on specific aspects of the work of the Security
ll9R esolution 1514 (XV).

97

Council. as well as of the prevailing collegial efforts to
advance ideas with best prospects for producing agree­
ment:
7. Stresses the primary responsibility of the Security
Council, acting on behalf of the international communitv.
in the collective maintenance of peace and security:
8. Encourages the Security Council, subject to its own
priorities, to intensify its efforts in the prevention of inter­
national conflict and the peaceful settlement of disputes by
envisaging, if possible, a more systematic series of meet­
ings under the agreed five main aspects mentioned in para­
graph 2 of the note of the President of the Council dated
12 September 1983: 132
9. Welcomes further information from the Security
Council on the progress achieved, at periodic intervals, as
deemed appropriate.

102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984
39/157.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Preparation of Societies for Life in Peace
The General Assembly,
Recalling its Declaration on the Preparation of Societies

for Life in Peace, contained in resolution 33/73 of 15
December 1978,
Recalling also its resolution 36/ I 04 of 9 December
1981. in which, inter alia, it reaffirmed the lasting impor­
tance of the preparation of societies for life in peace as part
of all constructive efforts to shape relations among States
and to strengthen international peace and security, and
recognized the paramount value of positive moulding of
human consciousness for the fulfilment of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the year 1985 will mark the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the historic Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples 139 and the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of
the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations 135 and the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security, 114
Taking into consideration that the General Assembly
declared I 986 to be the International Year of Peace, 140
which will be solemnly proclaimed on 24 October I 985
and linked with the fortieth anniversary of the United
Nations,
Aware of and concerned over the current state of inter­
national relations, which calls for renewed efforts to pro­
mote confidence and create lasting guarantees for a propi­
tious climate of international relations,
Reiterating that the peoples of the United Nations arc
determined to contribute their genuine share of efforts
towards international peace and understanding,
Noting the important role and historic responsibility or
Governments, heads of State or Government as well as
other statesmen, politicians, diplomats and civic leaders
for the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security,
/:):pressing its satisfaction that notwithstanding the
unfavourable trends in international relations, there is spe­
cific evidence of some progress, although insufficient, in
both national and international efforts towards the prepa­
ration of societies for life in peace, notably in the activities
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies con14o Re,olutlon 3 7 16.
