UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/727
28 June 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 21 JUNE 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to refer to article 13, paragraph 3, of the statute of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991, which reads as follows:
"In the event of a vacancy in the Chambers, after consultation with the
Presidents of the Security Council and of the General Assembly, the
Secretary-General shall appoint a person meeting the qualifications of
paragraph 1 above, for the remainder of the term of office concerned."
In this connection, I should like to recall that Judge Gabrielle Kirk
McDonald, a national of the United States of America, has resigned as a judge of
the Chambers of the International Tribunal, effective 17 November 1999. (She
will, however, continue to sit, until their completion, on any cases to which
she has been assigned whose hearing has not been completed by that date).
The Government of the United States of America has presented the candidacy
of Ms. Patricia McGowan Wald to replace Judge McDonald. Please find her
curriculum vitae attached.
It is my view that Ms. Wald meets the qualifications which are prescribed
in article 13, paragraph 1, of the International Tribunal’s statute. I also
consider that her appointment would be well calculated to ensure adequate
representation on the Tribunal of the principal legal systems of the world, as
contemplated in article 13, paragraph 2 (c), of the Tribunal’s statute.
I should, therefore, like to proceed to consultation with you on the
appointment of Ms. Wald, in accordance with article 13, paragraph 3, of the
statute of the International Tribunal. I look forward to receiving your views
on the matter.

(Signed)

99-19025 (E)

280699

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/727
English
Page 2

/...
