S/PV.8055

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8055

th meeting
Monday, 25 September 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alemu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zambrana
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2017/783)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-29831 (E)
*1729831*

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2017/783)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
the Netherlands, Pakistan and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Guillaume Dabouis, Head of the Political Section
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/783, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Yamamoto: As we reach the third anniversary
of the National Unity Government, I see progress,
challenges that are still daunting, and new opportunities
for political engagement for peace.
First, I would like to focus on some areas where
progress on key reforms has occurred. This has
been achieved despite ongoing security challenges.
If those reforms can be consolidated and sustained,
they will significantly strengthen the foundation for
a more self-reliant Afghan State. The good working
2/31

25/09/2017

relationship between President Ashraf Ghani and Chief
Executive Abdullah Abdullah has greatly enabled the
reform process.
The efforts of the Government to address corruption
have begun to bear results after many years during which
the debilitating issue was ignored. The major effort has
been led by the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre, which
is increasingly tackling complex cases involving highlevel officials. The Centre has completed 21 cases and
14 appeals, enabling it to put a dent in the long-standing
problem of impunity for Government corruption.
On 5 October, exactly one year after the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan, senior officials will
convene in Kabul to review progress made on the
Brussels commitments. In that meeting of senior
officials, the Afghan Government will need to
demonstrate to the donors, including their taxpayers,
and to Afghan citizens that the reform and development
programmes are translating into real improvements in
the well-being of all Afghans. I was encouraged, during
the intensive preparations for the meeting, by the active
engagement of all Afghan and international partners.
International partners also need to demonstrate their
clear commitment, and I very much count on the
highest level of participation from Council members’
respective capitals.
There has also been progress on the organization of
parliamentary and district council elections scheduled
for next July. The Independent Election Commission
(IEC) has completed its assessment of polling stations,
reportedly reaching more than 90 per cent of districts.
The next step will be voter registration. These two
processes will lay the foundation for what will be the
most important electoral reforms since 2001 — the
establishment of polling station-specific voter lists and
the completion of a viable voter registry.
It is imperative that we hold the elections
according to the plan. Timely elections will enhance
the credibility of the political system and institutions.
Many stakeholders, however, remain skeptical that
credible elections will be held on time. The IEC needs
to further increase its public outreach to demonstrate
greater transparency and greater urgency in its electoral
preparations. Many Afghan politicians and citizens
across the country have told me repeatedly that the
country could not endure another election like that of
2014. The electoral commissioners and their staff have
inherited a huge responsibility, but the elections are not
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

the responsibility of the IEC alone. The independence
of the electoral management bodies must be respected,
and the Government must do everything possible to
secure the elections. The international community must
provide financial and technical support, but the IEC is
in the lead and time is passing quickly.
The announcement of the electoral date has
prompted the creation of new political coalitions,
some of which are highly critical of the Government.
Due to the fact that democracies require responsible
oppositions, that may be seen as a constructive
development. Many of these groups are crossing ethnic
lines in a way that we have not seen before and building
national coalitions. A risk, however, is that some might
orient their activities towards actions that destabilize the
constitutional order, promote ethnic and geographical
divisions, or seek to undermine the State. The need
to avoid that risk has been a constant element in the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan’s
(UNAMA) outreach to all political actors.
The security situation continues to be a major
concern. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/783)
describes the main security trends in some detail. With
the persistence of the Islamic State, also known as
Da’esh, in the east of the country, and some reports of
new Da’esh activity in the north, as well as in Kabul
itself, the situation has become more complex. The
human cost of that violence is high, disproportionately
impacting women and children.
Current Afghan security planning foresees that
Afghan forces will reach sufficient strength to reverse
recent Taliban gains by 2020. The Taliban, meanwhile,
continues to resist appeals to negotiate with the Afghan
Government. At the current rate of death due to conflict,
tens of thousands more Afghans will have been killed
by 2020.
In the midst of this human tragedy, all sides
acknowledge that there is no military solution to
the conflict. The costs, including the human cost of
the ongoing conflict, raise the urgency of the peace
process. Frankly, the efforts of the past few years have
led to little progress. We are, however, seeing renewed
interest and efforts towards political engagements for
peace. The announcement in August by the United
States Administration of a continuing, conditionsbased commitment to Afghanistan has removed some
uncertainties. Some countries of the region and key

S/PV. 8055

countries are actively seeking to foster and promote
regional engagements for peace.
We are all aware that preparations leading to a peace
process are complex and require patience and time. Such
efforts must be pragmatic and flexible, yet principled
so as to ensure an inclusive political process to define
the country’s future. That can occur only when all
relevant parties to the conflict communicate with each
other to identify the contours of a mutual settlement.
On that basis, confidence can be built and a process can
be structured. The process must allow for the strategic
interests of the countries of the region to be taken into
consideration and built on a regional consensus.
I am convinced that a political settlement is
possible. We should not let another fighting season begin
without progress towards substantive negotiations.
Opportunities will be lost, with the price paid in
thousands of Afghan lives and at tremendous financial
cost. I appeal to the countries of the region to conduct a
profound reassessment of their strategic interest and to
renew work towards a viable peace process, leading to
an Afghan-owned solution to the conflict. If requested,
the United Nations stands ready to assist all parties in
achieving that goal.
Another potential cost of the conflict is backsliding
on recent human rights gains. Violence against women
and girls remains widespread. The criminalization
of acts of violence against women, included in
the legislative decree, remains to be approved by
Parliament. The ongoing involvement of children in
armed conflict remains a major problem. On a positive
note, I welcome the Government’s formal endorsement
of the national policy on civilian casualty prevention and
mitigation. I now call on the Government to implement
the national policy through a structured action plan.
I am encouraged by Afghanistan’s candidacy for the
Human Rights Council, and hope that it will be used
to consolidate human rights progress in Afghanistan.
Allow me to turn to the Secretary-General’s
strategic review of UNAMA, carried out at the request
of the Security Council. That undertaking provided us
with a renewed opportunity to think more profoundly
about our role, especially the centrality of the search
for peace. We look forward to the Security Council’s
review of the Secretary-General’s recommendations.
Furthermore, the entire United Nations family in
Afghanistan, as requested by President Ghani, is
developing an innovative strategy to deliver its

17-298313/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

25/09/2017

development assistance as one and in full alignment
with the Government’s priorities. President Ghani
welcomed our proposal, and we are now working
ever more closely with his Office and key parts of the
Government to put things into place swiftly.

hopeful that the international community, the United
Nations and the Council, in particular, will respond
appropriately to help them achieve what has long eluded
them — their right to live normal and dignified lives, in
peace and security.

The recommendations of the strategic review will
entail significant cuts to the Mission. We will implement
our mandate with greater focus and with a streamlined
structure. In the past two months, I have visited 8 of
our 12 field offices and met Government officials, civil
society and United Nations staff. These visits made it
clear that the presence of the United Nations is seen
as a great benefit to Afghanistan and its people. I am
confident that UNAMA will remain well positioned to
deliver on its strategic tasks and serve the needs of the
Afghan people.

The time has come for the international community
to take a fresh look at its engagement in Afghanistan.
As President Ghani stated in his address to the General
Assembly last week,

In closing, I emphasize how important it is for
Afghan leaders to deliver and demonstrate concrete
achievements. Progress must be made in less than
four years to make the best use of the Warsaw and
Brussels commitments. Afghanistan must demonstrate
to its donors that it has taken not just steps, but strides
towards self-sufficiency. It is my hope that Afghanistan
will soon not be perceived as a source of global security
threats, but as a destination for trade and investment.
The President: I thank Mr. Yamamoto for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Afghanistan.

“For too long, the conflict in Afghanistan has been
viewed through the prism of civil war; but the war
is not within our soil, it is over our soil” (A/72/
PV.6).
The scourge of terrorism and violent extremism that
affects Afghanistan is the product of a long-standing
policy by a neighbouring State to keep Afghanistan
unstable. It has menaced Afghanistan for several decades
now, with its roots located in terrorist sanctuaries and
safe havens outside of my country.
A bigger picture of the security situation reveals
that our security forces are engaged in a comprehensive
fight against the elements of more than 20 internationally
recognized terrorist organizations. Thanks to the
dedicated support of our international partners, our
security forces are leading that fight more efficiently
and with great valour and courage.

I am also delighted that Ambassador Tadamichi
Yamamoto is here with us today. I thank Ambassador
Yamamoto for his briefing, but more specifically for
his dedicated efforts as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

The Taliban is suffering major setbacks in
manpower and morale and failing to hold ground over
any territory. That is why its modus operandi draws
mainly on suicide bombings and other unconventional
criminal attacks on our people, infrastructure, public
figures, mosques and international humanitarian
personnel. Such barbarity constitutes crimes against
humanity — the most recent being the massacre
committed jointly by the Taliban and Da’esh in Mirza
Olang village in Sari Pul province and the attacks on
mosques in Kabul and Herat provinces.

I am pleased to address the Security Council
for the first time as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan. This is a fitting opportunity to convey
my appreciation for the Security Council’s support and
attention to the situation in my country, since the start
of its journey towards a new Afghanistan in 2001. The
people of Afghanistan look to the Council with high
expectations as the guardian of international peace
and security. Amid all of the challenges, Afghans are

I also wish to highlight that the exaggerated claims
of Taliban control over some percentage of territory
is being used as psychological warfare. Our security
forces have the upper hand against terrorist and
extremist groups throughout the country. That trend
will continue in a positive trajectory with sustained
assistance from international partners to further
strengthen the capabilities of our national security
forces and improve service delivery for our people.

Mr. Rabbani (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
thanking Ethiopia for convening today’s debate on the
situation in Afghanistan.

4/31

17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

We in Afghanistan have long called for an
international focus that would address the fundamental
sources of insecurity in our country. We are pleased
that, as of late, there is a growing recognition of that
imperative in the international community. The new
dynamic presents an unprecedented opportunity, which
must be seized. In that regard, I can say with confidence
that the new strategy of the United States for South
Asia has generated new hope among our people across
the country. Afghans from all walks of life are looking
to the future with renewed optimism that finally the
threats of terrorism and extremism in Afghanistan and
the wider region will be tackled appropriately.
In that connection, we welcome the fact that the
new strategy recognizes the critical need to address
the lingering problem of terrorist safe havens and
sanctuaries in our region, and for more determined
efforts to end the political, logistical and financial
support enjoyed by terrorist groups. Furthermore, the
strategy’s conditions-based approach has addressed
some uncertainties by reinforcing the right message
that the international community’s engagement will
endure until Afghanistan becomes stable and secure.
We urge all partners in our region and beyond to
recognize what is at stake. We now have a chance to
fundamentally change the status quo for our common
benefit. The support of the region, in that regard,
will be of paramount importance. Collectively, we
should seize this opportunity to strengthen consensus
and partnership, in a spirit of cooperation to buttress
Afghanistan’s rightful status as an asset and platform
of cordiality for all.

S/PV. 8055

than one lost. There are various existing initiatives
in which productive talks could take place. By the
same token, we will spare no effort whatsoever in the
defence of our country, people, territorial integrity and
national sovereignty.
Ending violence means ensuring the security
and well-being of our citizens. The Government
of Afghanistan has gone to great lengths to secure
sustained and durable peace for our people. The prospect
of peace with the Taliban is dependent on genuine and
constructive regional engagement in support of an
Afghan-led process. In that regard, we believe that a
paradigm shift could profoundly impact peace efforts
with the Taliban in a positive way. A successful outcome,
modelled on the agreement being implemented with
another armed opposition group can be possible. We
believe that the international community should take
the necessary measures to achieve that aim.
Democratic institutions, values and principles
provide the foundation for all progress made over
the past 17 years in Afghanistan. We believe that a
democratic society in which people are able to express
their ideas, grievances and aspirations is not just a
privilege, but also an imperative for social stability. The
consolidation of democracy and institution-building
will remain a priority of the National Unity Government.
Our people are already anticipating the upcoming
parliamentary and district council elections next year.
The transparency, inclusivity and credibility of the
polls will be crucial for our overall political stability.

Despite being on the receiving end of provocative
actions, including continuous violations across the
Durand Line, Afghanistan has maintained a principled
position in seeking to resolve differences through
dialogue, diplomacy and peaceful means. This is
particularly true in the case of our relations with
Pakistan, which, unfortunately, has so far failed to
respond positively, at its own cost, particularly in
relation to its global reputation and standing.

In the area of reform, we are standing by our
commitment to ensuring more accountable and effective
institutions. A number of senior-level officials have
been prosecuted and held to account for violating the
rule of law. These cases have reaffirmed our promise
to root out corruption in all its forms, and enhance
public confidence in our reform commitments. This
effort will continue with priority, and we look forward
to highlighting recent achievements in this area at the
upcoming senior officials meeting in Kabul to review
reform commitments made in Brussels.

Recently, we presented Pakistan with yet another
opportunity to engage in comprehensive State-toState discourse on peace, security and prosperity. This
time around, we hope that we will see constructive
engagement instead of plausible deniability and
attempts to change the narrative. Even if embraced
late, an opportunity seized is nevertheless better

We consider the strategic review of the activities of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
to be an essential initiative for ensuring an adjusted
United Nations role that is more responsive to the
current needs of the Afghan people and better aligned
with our national priority programmes. We are pleased
that the imperative of a One United Nations model

17-298315/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

concerning the delivery of development assistance has
been recognized. We hope to have, by the end of this
year, an outcome that will enable the United Nations to
deliver on its tasks more efficiently.
Our stabilization endeavour is based on an effort
for simultaneous progress in the security, social and
development spheres. Despite our challenges, we are
making steady progress in protecting and upholding the
rights of all of our citizens, especially women, girls and
children. Our resolve in this important area is reflected
in our candidacy to the Human Rights Council. For us,
a commitment to human rights means enabling people
to live in peace and security, achieve success and meet
their aspirations. Above all, it means enabling people to
live in honour and dignity.
These are ideals to which we are firmly committed.
Our membership in the Human Rights Council will have
many benefits. It will enable us to consolidate human
rights gains at home. It will also enable us to be a voice
for victims of terrorism and the dozens of countries that
are in conflict and post-conflict situations. We kindly
urge all United Nations Member States to support
our candidacy.
In conclusion, let me convey the deep appreciation
of Afghanistan to the Security Council and the
international community for all that they have done
and continue to do in support of Afghanistan’s security
and stability. We stand at the crossroad of our shared
endeavour. As we approach the new year 2018, it is
imperative that all of us seize the opportunity before
us, brought about by the new spirit of the international
community’s engagement in my country.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
Council members who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
welcoming His Excellency Foreign Minister Salahuddin
Rabbani to the Council, and I appreciate his statement.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
Tadamichi Yamamoto for his briefing.
We are pleased to have seen some progress in
Afghanistan on electoral preparations and related
assessments, including the announcement of
parliamentary and district council elections for 7 July
2018. At the same time, Afghanistan continues to face
profound and numerous challenges. The seriousness
of the situation in Afghanistan warrants enhanced
performance by the United Nations Assistance Mission
6/31

25/09/2017

in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in support of the efforts
of the National Unity Government towards peace and
stability. The Afghan people and the world also look to
the United Nations for vital support for the country’s
development and institution-building.
With this in mind, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s strategic review as a useful guide for the
Council’s deliberations. The Council now needs to
undertake serious discussions on how to incorporate
these recommendations into UNAMA’s mandate. That
would be an excellent opportunity to adapt UNAMA’s
mandate to current realities on the ground. As the lead
country in the Council on Afghanistan, Japan looks
forward to an intensive and interactive discussion
among Council members on these and related issues.
As the Secretary-General has noted in his report
(S/2017/783), there was no major progress on the peace
process during the current reporting period. Japan
therefore takes note of the expanded role envisioned for
UNAMA as an impartial mediator for the peace process.
The United Nations can make a major contribution
in this area, but the National Unity Government and
regional actors must work to create an environment
conducive to making reconciliation possible.
We are aware of various regional and international
initiatives in support of the peace process that are
currently being discussed. We were encouraged by
bilateral discussions between the leaders of Pakistan
and Afghanistan in June to build regional confidence.
We hope that these and other initiatives will yield
substantive and positive results, with the participation
of all key countries.
Above all, the peace and reconciliation process
must be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned, putting the
interests of the Afghan people first. The strategic
review’s proposal for United Nations support to
greater unity and cohesion within the National Unity
Government is therefore particularly important. The
Secretary-General has noted some recent improvements
in achieving consensus, but much more is needed. As
Japan has noted in previous briefings, the Afghan
people urgently require their Government to overcome
factional rivalries to meet the country’s pressing
security and development neds. It is essential that
credible parliamentary and district council elections be
held as currently scheduled and under secure conditions.
In this vein, I would also like to underline the
importance of efforts to improve security in the country.
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

The Council and UNAMA have issued countless
press statements condemning the horrifying attacks
on civilians. The unfortunate reduction of diplomatic
and development actors in Afghanistan following the
31 May terrorist attack was perhaps inevitable, but it
has had a negative impact on both international efforts
and the people of Afghanistan. We look forward to
enhanced security and a restored international presence
as soon as possible.
We have much work ahead on Afghanistan. The full
implementation of resolution 2344 (2017) will be vital,
as will the continued and productive engagement of the
international community and all stakeholders. Japan
reiterates its commitment to supporting Afghanistan
and to the enhanced performance of UNAMA.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Yamamoto for his briefing. We
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/696)
on the strategic review of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and it is good to
have Foreign Minister Rabbani with us this afternoon.
It has been 16 years since the United States and the
international community took action in Afghanistan.
Despite all our efforts, the human cost of the conflict
remains staggering. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan documented over 5,200 civilian
casualties in just the first half of this year. Over 1,600
of these were fatalities, and tragically, 30 per cent of
these deaths were children.
After so many years and so much American blood
and treasure spent, it is useful to recite these statistics.
But however war-weary we are, it is the Afghan people,
of course, who pay the highest price for the conflict
there. Anti-Government forces are responsible for the
large majority of civilian casualties. Their actions are
too often indiscriminate and disproportionate. They
keep old grievances fresh and create new ones with
each passing day.
We are and we should be impatient with this war.
In his speech outlining a new strategy for the United
States in South Asia, President Trump said that his
first instinct was to pull out of Afghanistan, but after
studying the issue he concluded that the men and women
who have sacrificed so much in that conflict deserve to
have their sacrifice honoured with victory. Turning our
backs on Afghanistan would dishonour their memory
by leaving the world in an even more dangerous place
than when the conflict began.

S/PV. 8055

That is why we welcome the results of the strategic
review of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan. This is a timely moment for the United
Nations to take a step back and to ensure that its
Mission in Afghanistan is able to continue its role in
promoting peace and prosperity. United Nations support
for electoral reforms, peace and reconciliation, human
rights and women’s issues will continue to be critical in
the years ahead. We look forward to continuing to work
with Special Representative Yamamoto and his team in
support of these shared goals.
The United States new South Asia strategy is
also well timed and makes clear that, ultimately, the
United States and the United Nations share the same
overarching goal in Afghanistan — a durable political
settlement that leads to lasting peace. The United States
will continue to support the Afghan Government and
security forces in their fight against the Taliban and in
their efforts to combat Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and other extremist groups. We do
not seek a permanent military presence in Afghanistan,
but we are prepared to assist Afghan forces for as long
as it takes to ensure that terrorists are never again able
to exploit Afghanistan’s territory as a safe haven.
Our message to the Taliban and their supporters
is clear — they cannot win on the battlefield. The
only path to peace is through negotiations. They must
abandon violence, cut ties with international terrorism
and accept the Afghan constitution. We will continue to
support and encourage the immediate launch of peace
talks between the Afghan Government and the Taliban,
with no preconditions. We will provide support, but
the Unites States is committed to an Afghan-owned
political process to settle the conflict in Afghanistan.
The path towards a negotiated settlement is available.
The Taliban must choose to take that path.
Afghanistan’s neighbours can also help. A central
tenet of our new South Asia strategy is the recognition
that Afghanistan’s security and stability are tied to
the security and stability of the entire region. We call
on all regional Governments to support the Afghan
Government and to do what they can to bring the
Taliban to the negotiating table. Critically, we also call
upon Afghanistan’s neighbours and all countries of the
region to unconditionally cease their support for armed
and violent extremist groups.
Finally, we support Council representatives
travelling to Afghanistan in the coming months to assess

17-298317/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

the political and security environment there. Given
the continuing toll of the conflict and Afghanistan’s
importance to peace and security in Central Asia, it
is critical that we see this conflict through the eyes of
those living it every day. We are all impatient to end
the conflict in Afghanistan, but our impatience can be
an asset if it is informed by the suffering of the Afghan
people and tempered by the need to never again allow
terrorists a safe haven in Afghanistan.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General,
Mr.
Tadamichi
Yamamoto,
for his briefing and for all his ongoing work. I
especially welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan, Mr. Salahuddin Rabani, for attending
this afternoon’s meeting. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2017/783), which highlights
the complex situation in the country, and for his special
report (S/2017/696)on the strategic review of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Uruguay recognizes the work done by the Special
Envoy and the tireless dedication of all the staff of
the Mission.
Uruguay reaffirms its support for the Government
of Afghanistan and encourages it to pursue its efforts
to achieve a lasting peace based on the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity.
It is critical to strengthen democratic institutions to
achieve the stability of the country. In that regard, I
highlight the progress made in the electoral process and
the announcement of the legislative and district council
elections to be held in mid-July next year.
The progress made by the Afghan Government in
its programme of priority reforms, such as the fights
against corruption and impunity, are encouraging. By
the same token, the activities of the Government and its
partners to address violence against women and girls
and the increased representation of women in the High
Peace Council are all positive developments.
Nevertheless, we are concerned by the lack of
progress between the Government and the Taliban
towards a peace process. There is no military solution
to this conflict. Peace can be achieved only through
dialogue and direct negotiations. The best and most
effective way of weakening the terrorists will be through
dialogue, unity and reconciliation among Afghanis. It
is therefore essential that the maximum efforts be made
to establish talks between the Government and the
8/31

25/09/2017

Taliban. Without the firm resolve of all parties, there
can be no end to this protracted conflict.
The support of the United Nations and the
international community for the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan remains a critical element
in efforts to address the major political, economic and
security challenges facing the country in its efforts to
build a lasting peace. We wish in that regard to express
our appreciation for the Kabul Process for Peace
and Security Cooperation and the interest shown by
Afghanistan’s partners in pursuing this initiative.
Turning to UNAMA, we welcome the initiative
of cooperating with local radio stations in provinces,
such as Kandahar and Kunar, to set up platforms for
dialogue among communities in which tribal leaders,
faith leaders, provincial authorities and women will
participate in fostering dialogue and mediating between
rival groups.
Despite all the efforts made to stabilize and
secure the country, conditions remain unstable and
have deteriorated even further, with serious impact
on civilians, who are already in a difficult situation
and suffering the dire consequences of the conflict.
Uruguay condemns the terrorist attacks on mosques in
the cities of Herat and Kabul in August, resulting in the
deaths of dozens of civilians as they prayed. Uruguay
strongly condemns those and all other terrorist attacks.
Unfortunately, fighting continues and is exacting a
heavy toll in civilian casualties, particularly among
innocent women and children. Thousands of Afghans
have been forcibly displaced and to flee the violence
in their communities. According to the SecretaryGeneral’s report, humanitarian access, workers and
health facilities continue to be severely affected.
Uruguay calls on all parties to the conflict to
respect humanitarian principles, human rights and
international humanitarian law. We also reiterate our
call for full compliance with resolution 2286 (2016)
on the protection of the wounded and sick and medical
facilities and personnel. Attacks on hospitals and
medical personnel violate international humanitarian
law and may constitute war crimes. These crimes
should not remain unpunished and the perpetrators
must be held accountable for their actions. Uruguay
reiterates its appreciation to all humanitarian workers
who have been striving in extremely difficult conditions
to provide care to the Afghan people, and who continue
to fall victim to bloody attacks.
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

In conclusion, echoing Mr. Yamamoto’s simile of
a few days ago, the support of all and at every level,
through understanding and ownership, is needed to
continue weaving this intricate tapestry.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his analysis
of the evolving circumstances in Afghanistan. And,
of course, we listened carefully to the statement by
Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. We agree with
many of the views expressed in the most recent quarterly
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security (S/2017/783), and for our part would like to
make the following comments:
We are concerned about the deteriorating
military situation and increasing terrorist activity in
Afghanistan. We continue to be particularly worried
about the activities of the Afghan wing of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its attempt to
establish itself in the northern provinces. According to
our estimates, the group currently has an impressive
total of more than 7,000 fighters in the country. ISIL’s
expansionist drive represents a real threat to the security
of our friends in Central Asia and to the southern
regions of Russia. Nor can we ignore the problem of
the unidentified helicopters in northern Afghanistan
that have been observed providing assistance to ISIL
fighters. This situation must be thoroughly investigated
and any such covert activity stopped immediately.
The drug problem in Afghanistan is getting worse.
We are concerned about the continuing increase in the
acreage used for drugs and the rise in their production.
Narco-dollars now account for a considerable part of
terrorists’ income — as much as 35 or 40 per cent — in
Afghanistan. We therefore want international efforts
to combat the Afghan drug trade to be enhanced.
We believe there is good potential for strengthening
cooperation in that regard between Afghanistan and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization.
Regrettably, we have been compelled to conclude
that the protracted and major presence in Afghanistan
of military contingents from the United States and
NATO has not helped to stabilize the military and
political situation. We also have questions about their

S/PV. 8055

intention to shift the focus of their tactics to using force
to put pressure on the armed opposition and individual
countries in the region. As we know, that approach has
not had positive results in the past and has served only
to escalate the conflict.
We firmly believe that at this stage the emphasis
should be on negotiation efforts, which will enable
us to launch the national reconciliation process as
soon as possible. Needless to say, it is Kabul that
should play the principal role in that process, but the
international partners providing external support for
it should cooperate on an equal basis and take into
account the national interests of every country in the
region, without exception. Unfortunately, despite the
presence of numerous international entities in this area,
we have failed to achieve the main goal of involving
the Taliban in peace negotiations. In that context, we
should consider the Moscow format for consultations
on Afghanistan — in which almost all the interested
parties, including the Central Asian States, are
participating — as the optimal platform for substantive
talks on national reconciliation and establishing a direct
dialogue between Kabul and the Taliban. We believe
the format is fully in line with the requirements.
We continue to believe that UNAMA plays an
important role in coordinating international assistance
to Afghanistan, and we took note of the SecretaryGeneral’s special report on the strategic review of its
mandate (S/2017/696). However, we should note the
world’s growing realization of the importance of the
regional context in settling the Afghan crisis, and
therefore of the potential of well-established entities
in the area, especially the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO). We hope to see success through
the revived mechanism of the SCO Afghanistan Contact
Group, whose first meeting is scheduled for 11 October.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our sincere gratitude and
appreciation to Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Rabbani, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan, and thank him for his valuable briefing.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/696) on
the strategic review of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), conducted to
evaluate the Mission’s operations, activities and
effectiveness, shows the important role that the United
Nations plays in Afghanistan.

17-298319/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

In the light of the unprecedented increase this
year in security incidents and terrorist attacks by the
Taliban, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and other
terrorist organizations, it appears that the international
and national efforts have not been enough to eliminate
these organizations. What is needed is an integrated
strategy on the political, security, economic and social
fronts that is owned by the Afghan Government and
supported by its neighbours and international partners,
led by the United Nations. Based on the traditional ties
that connect Egypt and Afghanistan and the mutual
influence and the close links between the security and
political conditions in Central Asia and the Middle East,
we reaffirm our support to the Afghan Government, its
war on terrorism and its efforts to extend its control
and sovereignty throughout its territory. We welcome
the arrangements and preparations for conducting the
elections scheduled for the middle of next year. We
also support international and regional efforts aimed at
supporting the country’s socioeconomic development,
including the resettlement and rehabilitation of
internally displaced persons and refugees.
The drug trade continues to be the main source
of funding for the arms trade in Afghanistan, and is
therefore the most dangerous source of support for
extremist groups and terrorist organizations, whether
through money or weapons. The intertwined interests
and ties between organized criminal networks and
terrorists embody the challenges facing Afghanistan
and indeed the entire region of Central Asia. It is
therefore important to intensify and coordinate
the international and regional efforts with those of
the Afghan Government with a view to combating
drug trafficking in the context of the fight against
terrorism. In that regard, we would like to highlight
the potentially valuable role to be played by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the relevant
regional organizations.
The recommendations in the strategic review of
UNAMA, as well as the statements by Mr. Rabbani
and Mr. Yamamoto, reflect the importance of
coming up with a new vision in the search for a
comprehensive peace. Those recommendations and
approaches show the urgent need to build and sustain
peace, with the United Nations working together with
Afghanistan in the upcoming period. It is therefore
important to combine the fundamental elements of
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan — political, economic, social and
10/31

25/09/2017

institutional — with implementation geared towards
a comprehensive approach to overcome the challenges
that currently exist in Afghanistan, especially given
the problem of the country’s reliance on grants from
the international community, which constitute over
60 per cent of the Government’s budget. We believe
that the main composition of UNAMA over the next
period must be based on resources and skills that
are primarily directed towards capacity-building in
Afghan institutions to improve the State’s ability to
undertake its responsibilities, maintain security, create
job opportunities, revitalize the national economy and
offer basic services to the Afghan people. That objective
requires close coordination and cooperation among
UNAMA, the various United Nations components that
are present and the development sector in Afghanistan.
In line with what I have said here, through its
Agency of Partnership for Development to offering,
Egypt is committedto providing advanced specialized
training courses to Afghan security and police
personnel. In addition, Egypt has sent Arabic language
experts to the University of Kabul and has accorded
particular focus to the areas of justice, culture, health
care and nursing, agriculture and irrigation and the
banking sector. Egypt continues to offer humanitarian
assistance to the Afghan people. We call upon the
international community to stand behind Afghanistan
and understand that the country’s stability is the key
to stability in Southern and Central Asia. That is the
message that Egypt took great care to emphasize during
its participation last week in the meetings of senior
officials of the Heart of Asia Process, which were
held on the sidelines of the General Assembly highlevel segment.
We believe that UNAMA can play a pivotal role
in continuing to mobilize the international community
and help it focus on the priorities of establishing
and sustaining peace and eliminating the causes of
instability. Instability cannot become Afghanistan’s
inevitable destiny.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the convening of this open meeting
on Afghanistan. China also welcomes the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, at the meeting. We also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Tadamichi Yamamoto for his briefing.
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

Peace and stability in Afghanistan have a direct
bearing on the fundamental interests of the Afghan
people, as well as on regional security, stability,
development and prosperity. China applauds the
efforts of the Afghan Government in safeguarding
national stability, facilitating national reconciliation
and promoting economic development. China
underscores the important role that neighbouring and
regional countries playon the question of Afghanistan.
Afghanistan continues to face a number of political,
economic and security challenges. In order to
help Afghanistan overcome such challenges, the
international community should continue to provide
firm support in the following areas.
First, maintaining peace and stability constitutes
the basis of Afghanistan’s reconstruction and economic
development. The international community should
continue to support the capacity of the Afghan national
security forces and contribute to the country’s ability
to defend itself so that Afghanistan can effectively
respond to threats, such as terrorism, transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking. We support an
active role by the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) and other actors in helping Afghanistan fight
terrorism. The international community should step up
its coordination and cooperation in combating terrorist
elements in Afghanistan.
Secondly, political dialogue is the only viable
solution for the question of Afghanistan. Actors in
Afghanistan should put the country’s long-term interests
and their people’s welfare first and actively participate
in the reconciliation process. The international
community should continue to promote the realization
of a broad, inclusive political settlement that is Afghanled and Afghan-owned. Furthermore, the international
community should engage all Afghan parties concerned
for the early launch of peace talks. We welcome the
assistance provided by relevant regional countries and
mechanisms.
Thirdly, strengthening governance is an important
guarantee for Afghanistan’s peace and reconstruction
process. Ultimately, Afghan affairs should be handled
by the Afghan people themselves. All political actors
in Afghanistan must achieve unity and resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultations. The
international community must fully respect the right
of the Afghan people to independently choose their
political system and development path. Moreover, on the
basis of Afghanistan’s national development strategy

S/PV. 8055

and actual needs, the international community should
provide targeted assistance to the Afghan Government
to improve its capacity to govern.
Fourthly, integration into regional development
constitutes an important path towards the achievement
of peace and reconstruction in Afghanistan. The
international community must make good on its
pledges to provide assistance and support Afghanistan
in promoting economic and social development. With
its unique resources and geographical advantages,
Afghanistan enjoys great prospects for regional
cooperation efforts. Resolution 2344 (2017) and the
relevant General Assembly resolutions stipulate that
all parties must create a community of a common
future in the spirit of cooperation and principle of
win-win, and promote the economic development of
Afghanistan and regional cooperation through the Belt
and Road Initiative.
China has taken note of the Secretary-General’s
special report (S/2017/696) on the strategic review of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), officially submitted in August pursuant to
resolution 2344 (2017). We hope that, through the review,
the United Nations will be able to further optimize and
re-prioritize the tasks of the Mission in accordance
with the current situation, maximize the allocation
of resources, improve the management processes and
enhance the Mission’s ability to deal with complex
situations. China commends the work carried out by
UNAMA and hopes that the Mission will respect the
sovereignty, leading role and ownership of Afghanistan,
continue to facilitate the political reconciliation process
and promote the economic development of the country.
Furthermore, China hopes that UNAMA will play a
positive role in helping Afghanistan to restore stability,
promote national reconciliation, improve governance
and promote economic development.
China will continue to support the work of
UNAMA. China has always played a constructive
role in promoting the reconciliation process in
Afghanistan. During a recent visit to Afghanistan
and Pakistan by Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang
Yi, the three countries agreed to establish a trilateral
foreign ministers’ dialogue mechanism, support
the relaunch of the Afghanistan-Pakistan-ChinaUnited States Quadrilateral Coordination Group
and the reactivatation of the International Shanghai
Cooperation Organization Afghanistan Contact Group.
Afghanistan and Pakistan also agreed to establish a

17-2983111/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

bilateral crisis-management mechanism. China will
continue to support Afghanistan’s security capacitybuilding as well as the country’s efforts to promote
economic and social development. China stands ready
to work together with the international community for
the early realization of peace, stability and development
in Afghanistan.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Tadamichi Yamamoto for his briefing today. At the
outset, I want to express my gratitude and that of my
Government for the work that he and his team are doing
in extremely challenging circumstances. I also thank
Foreign Minister Rabbani for his intervention today.
As both Mr. Rabbani and Mr. Tadamichi made clear,
we simply cannot afford to lose sight of Afghanistan.
Despite years of progress, Afghanistan continues to
face tough security and development challenges, while
the human cost after years of fighting and violence only
continues to grow. Our work is therefore not done, and
it is clear that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) still has a vital part play.
Just as Afghanistan today is not the same as it
was 10 years ago, it is right that UNAMA changes
too, to fit the current realities on the ground. We
therefore welcome the review into how the Mission
can best support Afghanistan in a way that aligns with
the Government’s own priorities. We share much of
the analysis in the strategic review, with its focus on
streamlining the work of the Mission towards a targeted
set of outcomes. The report (S/2017/696) contains a
number of recommendations that should strengthen its
work. The key thing now is implementation.
We will continue our close work with UNAMA
on donor coordination, the rule of law, anti-corruption
efforts and support for human rights, especially
womens’ rights. We welcome the recognition of the
importance of the national civilian presence offered
by UNAMA’s network of field officers. The United
Kingdom strongly supports the continued national
presence. Those officers are an important symbol to
local communities. They will also have a role to play
in delivering successful elections in 2018 and 2019, and
can make a contribution to underpinning local peace
negotiations in the future.
The report sets out three strategic priorities
corresponding to support for political stability, peace,
and economic and social development. We believe that
12/31

25/09/2017

putting greater focus on support for an Afghan-led peace
process is the right way forward. Only by establishing
a credible peace process can Afghanistan move
forward. We all have a role to play in that, including
the United Nations. We very much hope, therefore, that
members of the Security Council can agree to adjust
the mandate of UNAMA in order to incorporate those
recommendations. That would ensure that UNAMA is
better able to focus on the critical task of supporting
the peace process. We look forward to discussing this
matter with Council members in the weeks ahead.
Before concluding I want to say a word on the
outcome of the United States-South Asia strategy
review. The United Kingdom and United States are
close partners in Afghanistan, and so we welcome the
United States long-term commitment to the people
and the Government there. Despite the challenges,
which we have heard a lot about today, we agree that
it is important that we continue to provide support on
issues such as security, development and governance.
That is crucial to building a stable Afghan State and to
reducing the terrorist threat to us all.
It is in all our interests that Afghanistan become
safer and more prosperous, that is why we announced our
own troop increase in June and confirmed development
support of up to $1 billion until 2020. We also welcomed
the restated commitment that ultimately the only way
to a political settlement will be through negotiations
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban. That
is why we encourage Foreign Minister Rabbani and his
colleagues in the Government to take this opportunity
to reach out to the Taliban to establish a credible peace
process. We owe it to the people of Afghanistan, who
have suffered so much during decades of violence, to
do all that can be done to institute a peace process. It
will be beholden on us all — within the Council, in
the United Nations system more broadly and, of course,
the Government of Afghanistan — to support such a
peace process.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We would like to align
ourselves with the statement to be made later on behalf
of the European Union. I should like to make a few
points on behalf of Sweden.
Let me begin by thanking Special Representative
Yamamoto for his excellent briefing today and for the
work done by him and his team. We also very much
appreciate the presence of Mr. Rabbani here today.
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

Impressive progress has been achieved over
the past 15 years in consolidating Afghanistan’s
democratic institutions and protecting human rights
and civil liberties for the Afghan people. At the same
time, persistent high levels of violence remain a major
concern. As highlighted by the Secretary-General, the
increase in sectarian attacks is very troubling. Civilians
in Afghanistan continue to disproportionately shoulder
the burden of the conflict. The statistics suggest that
their burden is not getting any lighter. The year 2016
saw record levels of civilian casualties in Afghanistan,
including an increase in the number of women and
children killed or injured. We have to try to stop this
together, and we call on all sides to do their utmost to
protect the civilian populations as a matter of priority.
Building peaceful and inclusive societies is not
easy. It takes patience, courage and determination
from all parties. A politically negotiated settlement to
the conflict in Afghanistan is the only way to achieve
sustainable peace. It is therefore imperative that both
sides take steps urgently to engage in dialogue to reach
a political settlement and end violence. Those with some
influence over the Taliban have a special responsibility
in that regard.
Regional tensions continue to undermine longterm stability and economic growth in Afghanistan.
Sustained and constructive engagement by countries in
the region will be essential for a long-term solution. All
stakeholders, especially neighbouring countries, must
assume their responsibilities and work together towards
a sustainable peace. The Kabul process to foster a
genuine peace and reconciliation should be supported,
including by the United Nations and all other bodies.
We fully support the Government’s efforts to put in
place a reform process to ensure strong and independent
institutions and a robust democratic process. We have
high expectations of the Government’s reform agenda
and for its delivery. The upcoming elections are one
key element of that effort. We welcome the fact that
a date for district council and parliamentary elections
has now been set. The United Nations has an important
supportive role to play, but the main ownership and
responsibility to ensure meaningful elections of course
rests with the Afghan authorities.
Since 2002, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has played an essential
role in support of the Afghan people. We welcome the
UNAMA strategic review and its recommendations,

S/PV. 8055

in particular its important emphasis on conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. That emphasis is
an acknowledgement that the conflict in Afghanistan
is not over. Despite our efforts, including the tireless
work of UNAMA and the whole of the United Nations
system, the country has not yet entered a post-conflict
phase. Therefore, a continued focus on supporting
peace efforts remains a key priority. With the new
United States strategy, there is now an opportunity for
enhanced diplomatic and political efforts.
Concrete measures must be taken to strengthen the
implementation of the national action plan on women
and peace and security. As recommended by the
Secretary-General, UNAMA has an important role to
play in supporting an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process that includes women, in line with
the Constitution. We further welcome the intention to
relocate the Senior Gender Adviser to the Office of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, as outlined
in the strategic review, and we appreciateUNAMA’s
integrated reporting on these issues.
In order to fulfil the important responsibility
of the United Nations in Afghanistan, the UNAMA
leadership and the United Nations country team should
make full use of the review and fully implement its
recommendations. They should do so in the spirit of
the One United Nations initiative and the sustaining
peace agenda by working in a coordinated fashion for
peace, development, human rights and humanitarian
assistance. Socioeconomic improvements and service
delivery throughout the country continues to be
critical to maintaining support and momentum for the
peace process.
Sweden’s support to the people of Afghanistan has
remained firm for over three decades. In line with the
Secretary-General’s approach, we have adjusted our
policy and our very concrete support to focus more
on conflict prevention and peacebuilding, including
through mediation training for Afghan women. I would
like to assure Afghanistan’s Minister for Foreign
Minister Affairs that, as the Afghan people enter
this next phase in efforts towards peace, they can
count on my country’s continued support for Stateand peacebuilding efforts towards a prosperous and
peaceful Afghanistan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join earlier
speakers in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto for his briefing. I take

17-2983113/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

this opportunity to thank him and all members and
personnel of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their dedication in carrying
out their duties under challenging circumstances. I also
thank Foreign Minister Rabbani for his substantial
briefing and wish him success in his efforts to bring
peace and stability to his country.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/686) provides realistic assessments and
important insights into the work of UNAMA and the
United Nations country team in Afghanistan. More
important, it contains constructive recommendations
that are crucial to maximizing the potential of all the
efforts and resources of the United Nations and the
international community. Kazakhstan looks forward
to the deliberations over, and eventual implementation
of, those recommendations, which would enable us to
then leverage the comparative advantages of the United
Nations and the international community to support the
reconstruction and redevelopment of Afghanistan.
On the political track, allow me to reiterate
Kazakhstan’s firm support for the reconciliation and
reintegration efforts undertaken by the Government
of Afghanistan. We also commend the Afghan
Government’s continuing commitment and efforts to
address the increasing political, economic and security
challenges faced by the country. We take those as
strong testimony of Afghanistan’s aspiration to achieve
national unity and stability, which could contribute to
regional stability.
Kazakhstan is also pleased to note the encouraging
progress made on the electoral issue and the gain in its
credibility, particularly expressed through the setting
of 7 July 2018 as the date for legislative and local
elections. We welcome their inclusive, transparent and
participatory character.
We urge the Government to swiftly implement its
progressive strategies, such as the four-year plan on
security sector reform and many others in different
dimensions, which, in our view, will further strengthen
the capacity of their national institutions.
Kazakhstan reiterates that a peaceful political
settlement is the only way to achieve sustainable peace
and stability in the country. We remain hopeful that
relevant talks will resume at the earliest convenience. It
should be an Afghan-led and -owned process.
14/31

25/09/2017

Despite some noteworthy developments, Kazakhstan
remains concerned by the fragility and volatility of the
security situation in the country. As reflected in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/783), the conflict
continued unabated throughout the country during the
reporting period. Furthermore, the significant increase
in violent incidents involving the self-proclaimed
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province
affiliates and the Taliban have resulted in further
hardship endured by the Afghan people, as well as the
loss of innocent civilian lives. Kazakhstan strongly
supports all regional and global initiatives, including
the efforts of regional organizations to bring peace and
stability to Afghanistan.
Kazakhstan commends the positive trends in the
ongoing efforts to counter narcotics in Afghanistan.
Countries in the region and regional organizations
are actively engaged in facing the challenge. We
also recognize important steps towards meeting and
eventually adopting of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime-World Health Organization
International Standards for the Treatment of Drug
Use Disorders. I am also pleased to state that, in the
intersessional period, my country hosted a Precursor
Case Meeting in Almaty in the framework of
regional cooperation on counter-narcotics, held at the
headquarters of Central Asian Regional Information
and Coordination Centre for combating the illicit
trafficking of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances
and their precursors.
Kazakhstan believes that at this stage it remains
imperative for the United Nations and the international
community to continue to lend their support,
encouragement and assistance to Afghanistan through
reconstruction and redevelopment efforts to rebuild
the country. Their political and development activities
should be in greater alignment with the priorities set
by the Afghan Government. We are heartened to hear
that the Afghan Government prioritizes the social
and economic development of Afghanistan, with the
broad involvement of international business in the
implementation of concrete economic projects. The core
of our efforts is to help Afghanistan set up its image as
an attractive partner with great potential. Our Afghani
brothers and sisters need joint projects, job creation and
the facilitation of the development of communication
and trade.
All Central Asian States are committed to
the development of long-term cooperation with
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan and intraregional connectivity in the areas
of infrastructure, transit and transport, energy and other
fields, so as to contribute to Afghanistan’s integration
into our region’s trade and economic cooperation as a
new model of relations with this brotherly country.
My country therefore proposes a new approach,
based on a security and development nexus. That
approach is based on our assumption that economic
development will create the prerequisites for a
political settlement and a solution to security issues.
We would like to stress once again that there can be
no security without development, and no development
without security.
The plight of children continues to be severely
affected by the escalation of the conflict. Afghanistan
has taken many commendable steps towards ensuring its
national security forces are child-free. The Government
is also promoting age-assessment guidelines that we
hope will be widely implemented. However, Kazakhstan
is alarmed that during the current reporting period
the conflicts in Afghanistan recorded a high number
of child casualties — with up to 50 boys reportedly
recruited by Da’esh — and welcomes the joint efforts
of UNAMA and UNICEF to address that challenge.
Attacks on schools and educational personnel is also
an alarming trend, as they prevent access to education
and a return to normalcy. In that regard, we urge the
Government to maintain its commitment to the full
implementation of its action plans and road maps to that
end, and prevent the recruitment and use of children.
Finally, Kazakhstan is pleased that UNAMA and
the Government of Afghanistan have continued to
maintain a close partnership between themselves and
with other stakeholders, which is vital to ensuring
sustainable peace and stability in the country. We
hope that these will lead to a more productive and
effective collaboration within the country, the United
Nations system and the international community. Let
me conclude by reaffirming Kazakhstan’s sincere
commitment to supporting the Afghan Government in
its effort to achieve peace, security and stability.
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): I thank Special Representative
Yamamoto for his briefing and express my appreciation
for Foreign Minister Rabbani’s presence and
his remarks.
The overall picture as presented in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/783) revives disconcerting
feelings and causes renewed concern over the situation

S/PV. 8055

in Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security. We welcome the National Unity
Government’s firm commitment and steps taken to
promote the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned inclusive
peace process that would embrace, inter alia, factions
of the Taliban demonstrating openness to negotiations.
We also welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in support of the Government’s initiatives and its
facilitation of local-level peacebuilding.
However, despite those efforts, no significant
progress has been made in fostering negotiations. We
recognize that the Independent Election Commission
announced the date of the long-awaited parliamentary
and local elections to be held in 2018, as well as
presented sound proposals to guarantee the credibility
of the electoral process through, inter alia, the use of
voter verification procedures and the introduction of
polling and results management technologies. Yet there
is still no political decision on the implementation of
those proposals.
It is praiseworthy that the Government took
into serious consideration the fact that international
financial support to Afghanistan, which is key for
securing steady improvement of the economic and
social situation in the country, depends upon the
successful implementation of the anti-corruption and
anti-drug policy. Since corruption has seeped into every
facet of the country’s life, resolute steps undertaken
by the Anti-Corruption Justice Center in tackling
such a complex problem are a welcome development.
The implementation of those steps requires powerful
impetus and, importantly, political commitment at
every level of local and central Government.
We also commend the dedicated work of the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
in promoting and monitoring human rights and the
investigation of human rights abuses. In particular,
we welcome the launch of a national inquiry on the
protection of the rights of victims of armed conflict and
terrorism. We call on the Government of Afghanistan to
cooperate fully with the Commission in that regard, as
well as in investigating abuses against women, children
and human rights defenders.
The terrorism threat remains an uphill challenge in
Afghanistan. Despite having been partially degraded by
Afghan and international military operations, it remains
increasingly diverse. Attempts by the Taliban to take

17-2983115/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

over a number of strategic areas and communication
lines and destroy critical infrastructure, as well as their
attacks on health-care facilities and their forced closure,
should be considered as acts of terror. The Taliban’s
continued influence over regional Al-Qaida affiliates,
whose fighters from the Afghanistan-Pakistan border
region have integrated into the Taliban, which has led
to an increase in its military capabilities, is extremely
worrying. Attempts by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant to expand its presence in the north of the
country are equally disturbing.
Against that backdrop, I would like to stress the need
for concerted actions by Afghanistan’s international
partners to reduce terrorism activity, facilitate the safe
return of refugees and promote the economic recovery
of the country.
Although there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Afghanistan, a military dimension is vital.
In that context, we welcome the recently announced
new strategy of the United States for Afghanistan,
as well as the commitments of other NATO member
States, which ought to contribute to increasing the
effectiveness of counter-terrorism efforts of the Afghan
national security and defence forces.

25/09/2017

General that, while the situation on the ground remains
increasingly insecure and fragile, the security of
UNAMA personnel should certainly remain a priority.
In conclusion, let me reiterate Ukraine’s strong
support for UNAMA. Its activities in Afghanistan
are vital for creating a sound foundation for peace,
security and prosperity both in the country and in the
wider region.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for
his briefing and, through him, to pay tribute again
to United Nations personnel working in difficult
conditions in Afghanistan. I also warmly welcome
the presence of Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and I thank him for
his intervention.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union. I shall
confine myself to four main points.

The United Nations plays a key role in efforts to
make Afghanistan stable and prosperous. Given the
current state of play, we need a strong UNAMA that is
able to effectively deliver its mandated responsibilities.
In that regard, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for providing us with the report (S/2017/696) on
the strategic review of UNAMA and express our support
for its swift implementation. Among the Mission’s
major tasks should be the provision of mediation
services in support of the national reconciliation
process, the promotion of reforms, good governance,
respect for human rights and the rule of law and support
for humanitarian and development projects.

First, the continued increase in the level of violence
and the resulting deterioration of the security and
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan remain a major
concern for France. As the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/783) unfortunately reminds us, and
as others have recalled here, the Afghan population
remains the first victim of the conflict and women
and children continue to pay the highest price. Afghan
forces, whose commitment and courage I commend,
are continuing with their operations and they have
been making significant progress. However, armed
confrontations and repeated terrorist attacks continue to
destabilize the country as a whole. In that regard, France
takes very seriously the establishment and proliferation
of armed and terrorist groups in Afghanistan and
in the region. France shares the determination of the
Afghan authorities and our allies to fight terrorism and
welcomes any decision that contributes to achieving that
objective, in compliance with international law, such as
the new strategy of the United States for Afghanistan
and South-East Asia. In order to succeed, that counterterrorism effort must also be supported by all countries
in the region.

The upcoming 2018-2019 election cycle, along with
the subsequent evolution of the political environment in
the country, will also require UNAMA’s special focus
on the efficiency of all of its components, especially its
field presences. Yet we fully agree with the Secretary-

The humanitarian situation, which is already
particularly fragile, has been aggravated by the
conflict and the collapse of the economy. The massive
return of refugees from Pakistan and Iran is a serious
challenge for Afghan authorities. In that regard, France

Yet, without constructive dialogue from all regional
actors and their practical engagement in eradicating
terrorists’ safe havens and depriving them of sources
of financing, especially drug trafficking, all of those
achievements will be irrelevant. Double-dealing should
no longer be tolerated.

16/31

17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

encourages the Government of Afghanistan to continue
its efforts to ensure equal treatment of all refugees
and displaced persons and welcomes the remarkable
actions taken by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
Secondly, the extremely volatile security and
humanitarian environment makes the unity of the
Afghan Government and its perseverance in reforms
more important than ever. There is no alternative
to Afghan cohesion and collective determination
to deepen and consolidate Afghan democracy. The
pursuit of ongoing reforms aimed at achieving a more
effective Government that is more capable of serving
the population must remain a priority. In particular,
that applies in particular to electoral reform, where
progress has been made. France particularly welcomes
the announcement of the holding of legislative
elections on 7 July 2018. Preparations undertaken by
the Independent Election Commission must continue,
along with the support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), in order to enable
free and transparent elections as scheduled. Reforms
in the fight against corruption and drug trafficking,
which continue to fuel the Taliban’s insurgency, must
also be pursued with determination. In terms of human
rights, the situation of women and children is still very
precarious. It is essential that the Afghan authorities
continue to mobilize efforts to fully implement their
commitments to women’s rights and the protection
of children.
Thirdly, the stabilization of Afghanistan will
require a negotiated political solution and national
reconciliation. France hopes that the peace process
can be resumed by Afghan actors as soon as possible,
with the support of countries of the region and the
international community. The sincere commitment and
unambiguous support for peace by all Afghanistan’s
neighbours is essential. We call for renewed efforts and
concrete commitments in that domain.
Against that backdrop — and this will be my fourth
point — it is reassuring that we have the support of
the United Nations and particularly of UNAMA,
which has never been stronger. France thanks the
Secretary-General and his team for their very serious
work carried out in the context of UNAMA’s strategic
review. We support the recommendations made in the
report (S/2017/696), which should make it possible
to streamline its work. The proposal to refocus the
work of the Mission is particularly welcome. Such

S/PV. 8055

refocusing will allow it to distribute its effort across
four pillars: contributing to the establishment of peace
in Afghanistan; facilitating the engagement of the
countries of the region, moderating and supporting the
dialogue between the Government and Afghan political
forces; and coordinating among international donors.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating my country’s
full support for the Afghan Government and the work
carried out by the United Nations in Afghanistan in the
quest for lasting peace and safe and dignified lives for
all people of the country.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with
the statement that will be delivered by the observer
of the European Union later this afternoon. I would
nevertheless like to make some additional remarks in
my national capacity.
First of all, we thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/696) and we strongly welcome the
strategic review. We thank Special Representative
Yamamoto for his comprehensive briefing and, like
others, we wish to express our appreciation for the
tireless efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) aimed at promoting peace
and coordinating international community assistance
in an extremely challenging environment.
Italy welcomes the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan. I thank him for his briefing. It was the
first of many, I hope.
We continue to witness an unending escalation
of the intensity of the conflict in Afghanistan and the
terrible consequences that it has brought, starting with
severe casualties, particularly among those who are
most vulnerable, such as women and children. Terrorists
remain a grave and dangerous threat to the country’s
stability, as we have seen from the devastating and
heinous attacks that have taken place in recent months.
This situation requires us to renew our collective
support for the National Unity Government’s efforts to
bring peace and stability to the country. Faced with the
relentless violence from the Taliban and from terrorist
groups, the Afghan national security and defence
forces continue to play a pivotal role in defending the
substantial progress made in Afghanistan since 2001.
We pay tribute to their courage and dedication.
Italy renews its active commitment to continuing
to train, advise and assist the Afghan security forces

17-2983117/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

in the framework of the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission. But in order for lasting peace and security to be
brought to the country, the solution must ultimately be
a political one achieved through negotiations between
the Government and armed opposition groups in the
framework of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process that respects the country’s Constitution. This
process will require the full and concrete support of
Afghanistan’s partners. We therefore welcome the new
United States strategy for the country, which confirms
the intention to work towards achieving this ultimate
outcome. We also welcome renewed United States
commitment to the broader fight against terrorism. In
that context, the role of regional actors will be crucial.
We need genuine and constructive cooperation from all
regional stakeholders in a common and resolute fight
against terrorism and in promoting the conditions for
peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Italy supports all diplomatic initiatives, such as the
Kabul process, aimed at improving cooperation. We
also share the goal of fostering a national consensus
around peace reconciliation, which will require the
active and inclusive participation of all sectors of
Afghan society, including women, whose role is of
particular significance in that regard. To that end,
we encourage the full implementation of the national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security.
Equally important in the process of achieving lasting
peace and stability in Afghanistan is for the Government
and its institutions to gain the full confidence of the
citizens of the country by exercising good governance
and by meeting the country’s development needs. This
is all the more critical given the alarming levels of
poverty and unemployment, especially among young
people. That will require the full and comprehensive
implementation of internal reform. We acknowledge
the substantial progress made in the electoral process,
but several important issues need to be resolved in
order to ensure that the upcoming elections are fully
transparent and credible. The fight against corruption
must be carried forward with steadfast determination.
We acknowledge that positive results are beginning
to emerge in that regard through the action of such
institutions as the Office of the Attorney General and
the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre.
Promoting and defending women’s rights will
continue to be a top priority, as is the full empowerment
of women within Afghani society. Further efforts are
18/31

25/09/2017

required to ensure that there is no risk of reversal in
this area.
The upcoming meeting of senior officials in Kabul
will provide an important opportunity to measure
progress against reform benchmarks in the framework
of a partnership between Afghanistan and its donors,
which was reaffirmed at the Brussels Conference last
year. The international community’s commitment to
helping to bring peace, stability and self-reliance to
Afghanistan and its people remains steadfast, and Italy
is determined to continue to play an integral part in
this process.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal would like to begin by welcoming
the participation of His Excellency Mr. Salahuddin
Rabbani, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Afghanistan, in today’s meeting, as well as his positive
contribution thereto. In addition, my delegation would
like to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and his team, for the outstanding work
they are doing in the field to help Afghans find their
way, but also with the prospect of implementing the
recommendations of the UNAMA strategic review,
decided upon by the Security Council.
Like previous speakers, the Senegalese delegation
is also concerned that the security situation in the
country remains difficult, with the intensification of
armed clashes and suicide attacks, which, according to
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/783), have
increased by 5 per cent compared to the same period
last year, resulting in a large number of casualties,
mostly women and children.
At the same time, the political atmosphere seems
increasingly tense, in particular given the announcement
of the upcoming parliamentary and local district
council elections, to be held in July 2018. To make the
situation more complicated, terrorist organizations
such as Da’esh take advantage of that environment in
order to deepen their roots in the territory by engaging
in all kinds of criminal activities, including drug
trafficking. Nonetheless, we can welcome the long but
continued improvement in the cooperation relationship
with neighbouring countries and the ongoing support
for Afghanistan from the international community,
including the United Nations and its Security Council
through UNAMA.
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

Given the sheer human cost of the conflict in
Afghanistan, Senegal strongly condemns attacks
against civilians. Let me repeat that most of the victims
of those attacks are women and children. We would like
to pay tribute to all of the health workers, humanitarian
workers and coalition soldiers who continue working
in Afghanistan, sometimes at the cost of their lives. In
that regard, the protection of women deserves special
attention. That is why Senegal is launching an appeal to
donors to enhance their support for the Afghan national
plan of action for women and peace and security.
We reaffirm the urgent need to protect schools,
hospitals and places of worship, which have been the
main targets of suicide attacks, in accordance with
international humanitarian and human rights law. I
would like to welcome the launch of a national inquiry
on the protection of the rights of victims of armed
conflict and terrorism by the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission, as well as to say that we
need to pay careful attention to their conclusions.
The difficult situation in Afghanistan raises the
key issues of security sector reform, strengthening
the operational capacities of the Afghan armed forces,
addressing the challenge of corruption, improving
military command and aligning military operations
with long-term political objectives. The work of
UNAMA is crucial in that regard, and the reform is all
the more important as the Afghan forces are facing a
reduction in the number of troops because of numerous
desertions and recruitment difficulties. In that context,
it is encouraging to note the decision taken at the most
recent meeting of NATO Defence Ministers to increase
the number of troops deployed in the Resolute Support
Mission as well as the choice made by United States
President Donald Trump to keep United States forces
in Afghanistan in the framework of the new American
strategy in the country.
As is the case in the majority of countries in
conflict, security and stability in Afghanistan will
depend upon its relations with its neighbouring
countries for a long time to come. Senegal is therefore
pleased by the continued improvement in cooperation
between Afghanistan and Pakistan, in particular
through implementing crisis-management mechanisms
for emergency communication, as well as finalizing
an agreement on carrying out operations along the
border. Also included in this positive dynamic is the
cooperation with Central Asian countries, including in
the areas of transport and communications, as well as

S/PV. 8055

with the Islamic Republic of Iran for the conclusion of
a strategic cooperation agreement.
All those positive developments will allow UNAMA
to better focus on its mandate of supporting Afghan
stakeholders so as to build together a safe and stable
Afghanistan through dialogue and political efforts,
in particular during the period of upcoming elections
for 2018. The bold reforms undertaken by the Afghan
Government lead us to remain hopeful in that regard.
Mr. Zambrana (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is grateful to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
Yamamoto for his excellent briefing, and we take this
opportunity to express our firm support to him in
carrying out the work that has been entrusted him. We
also welcome His Excellency Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and thank
him for the information he has provided.
On the political front, we acknowledge the efforts
of the Government and the people of Afghanistan in
taking the electoral process forward, which will allow
them to strengthen their democratic institutions,
and we reiterate our commitment to upholding its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
We recall the interconnected nature of the challenges
facing Afghanistan and sustainable progress in terms
of security, development and governance, which are
mutually reinforcing. We stress the Government’s
resolve to implement its four-year plan on security
sector reform aimed at increasing the capability of
Afghan security forces despite the current difficulties
involved in sustaining them.
We believe that strengthening and unifying the
security forces are key elements to combating the threat
of destabilization and, above all, the barbarity of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, whose attacks
and criminal acts we condemn in the strongest terms
possible. Unfortunately, there was evidence during
the reporting period under review of a clear increase
in the number of attacks against civilian installations,
such as schools and training centres, as well as attacks
against medical and humanitarian personnel and
medical facilities. Between January and August alone,
86 incidents were recorded, doubling the total number
of incidents reported for all of 2016, which stood at 41.
In that regard, Bolivia reiterates in the strongest terms
its condemnation of all terrorist acts as criminal and

17-2983119/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

unjustifiable, wherever, whenever and by whomever
they the are committed.
Moreover, according to the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/783), random constraints have been
placed on the deployment of a humanitarian assistance
by various parties to the conflict, and 214 incidents
have been registered since January that cost the lives of
12 aid and medical workers. In that regard, we reiterate
to the parties and those involved in the conflict that
they must allow and ensure security and safety of
civil and humanitarian installations and their staff,
while avoiding identifying them as military targets,
for whatever reason, and observing the principles of
international humanitarian law.
I would be remiss if I did not express our concern
about the high number of internally displaced persons,
which, according to the report of the Secretary-General,
increased to more than 32,000 individuals during the
period under review. That figure adds to the more than
200,000 new internally displaced persons worldwide
this year. We call for the pooling of efforts to support
the return of citizens and their sustainable reintegration
to their countries of origin. Accordingly, international
organizations must provide concrete support for
Afghan refugees and internally displaced persons so as
to facilitate their voluntary and safe return.
We commend the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) for the work that it continues to
carry in Afghanistan by providing education and
training in transit centres so as to ensure that refugees
returning to their places of origin are aware of the
presence and the danger of anti-personnel landmines,
improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants
of war. Nevertheless, the continued risk represented by
anti-personnel mines, explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices found on the ground have
been reflected in the increase in the number of victims
as compared with last year’s statistics. Consequently,
we call for the urgent implementation of resolution
2365 (2017) and for the continued support of UNMAS
in the removal of those explosive devices, which pose a
threat to the security of the civilian population.
Bolivia is grateful to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan for the work that it has carried
out in providing logistical and technical support
for the Afghanistan-led process, while supporting
democratic and governmental initiatives to bring about
a peaceful settlement to the conflict. We reiterate the
20/31

25/09/2017

crucial importance of promoting regional cooperation
as an effective way to promote security, stability and
economic and social development in Afghanistan. We
also wish to express our deep gratitude and appreciation
for the work and carried out by various United Nations
agencies throughout in providing humanitarian
assistance in such a difficult context given the high risk
involved in realizing their work.
Lastly, we convey our support for the political
dialogue under way in Kabul and reiterate that there is
no military solution to the situation. On the contrary,
that dialogue must be an inclusive process led by and
for the Afghan people.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Ethiopia.
We express our appreciation to Special
Representative Yamamoto for his comprehensive
briefing on the latest report (S/2017/783) of the
Secretary General on the situation in Afghanistan
and the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We would like
to thank the Secretary-General for the report, which
highlights the key political and security challenges
facing Afghanistan. We are pleased to have the Foreign
Minister of Afghanistan with us and to having had the
opportunity to listen to him.
We take note of the new political dynamic emerging
in the political and security sphere, particularly with
respect to the consolidation of authority within the
National Unity Government and the consensus reached
on various issues, such as on high-level appointments,
between President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah. We also recognize the progress made by the
Afghan Government on its reform agenda, particularly
in the areas of anti-corruption activities — without
understating existing complications concerning the
political situation.
Political temperatures will certainly rise during
the next several months leading up to parliamentary
and district council elections in July 2018, which were
announced by the Independent Election Commission.
It is encouraging that many opposition groups are
motivated to take part in the upcoming election. It
will be absolutely important to establish the necessary
political atmosphere for the holding of peaceful and
credible elections. One hopes that the security situation
will not be a major obstacle to achieving that goal. What
the country is facing in that area is indeed formidable.
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

As the Secretary-General has said, the lack of
progress in negotiations between the Government and
Taliban remains a serious challenge. Conditions in rural
areas cannot be overlooked, where the Taliban appears to
have ratcheted up its activities. We appreciate UNAMA’s
efforts to continue formal dialogue with the Taliban
and with three other local peace initiatives to seek a
political solution to the continued conflict. No doubt,
the long-term security and stability of Afghanistan can
be ensured only through a comprehensive and inclusive
Afghan-led, Afghan-owned political process. We agree
with the Secretary-General that a regional environment
conducive to an Afghan-led peace process is indeed
essential. The role of the countries of the region is
also very critical in creating the necessary conditions
for the fight against terrorism and the advancement
of peace efforts. In that regard, we take note of the
bilateral and multilateral engagement by the Afghan
Government with neighbours and other countries of the
region. The promotion of regional cooperation would
certainly advance peace, security and development in
Afghanistan and in the region. We also take note of the
incremental progress made with Pakistan. We hope that
it will be strengthened further.
Afghanistan faces enormous security, social and
economic challenges and, without continued inclusive
economic growth and development, sustained peace
and security cannot be achieved. That is why there is
the need to support the Government’s continued efforts
to determine its development priorities in 10 national
priority programmes for 10 sectors, as envisioned
in the Afghanistan national peace and development
framework. The efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the promotion
of peace, reconciliation, dialogue and support for the
development efforts of Afghanistan, with full respect
for the country’s sovereignty, as well as the leadership
and ownership of the Afghan Government, remains
very important.
Let me conclude by expressing support and
solidarity with the Afghan Government in its difficult
task of addressing the country’s multiple challenges
with a view to promoting peace, reconciliation and
development. I also wish to express our appreciation
to UNAMA for its continued role in support of those
endeavours, as well as for efforts in carrying out its
mandate under difficult circumstances.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.

S/PV. 8055

I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/783) and his
Special Representative Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto for
his briefing today.
Pakistan shares the universal concern regarding
the grave situation in Afghanistan. The SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights the fact that the Afghan
people continue to face a deteriorating political,
economic and security situation in their country. The
Government’s inability to control the narcotics trade
and arms smuggling is compounding the situation.
It is with deep regret that I am obliged to reject the
insinuations made by the Afghan Foreign Minister
directed at my country. The fundamental sources of
insecurity in Afghanistan lie inside the country, not
outside. The Afghan Government would therefore be
better advised to focus more seriously on its persistent
challenges and embark on a path of course correction,
rather than blaming others.
The Secretary-General’s report refers to Da’esh and
its expanding reach in Afghanistan, including in Kunar
and Nangarhar provinces. It also talks of its increased
influence in the northern and western provinces. These
are worrying signs for Afghan security and for regional
stability, particularly for Afghanistan’s immediate
neighbours. As the Afghan Government itself has
acknowledged, more than 20 terrorist organizations are
operating from its soil, including the Tehreek-e-Taliban
Pakistan, otherwise known as TTP, and Jamaat-ulAhrar (JUA). Those organizations are conducting
terrorist attacks inside my country and pose a threat to
Afghanistan’s other neighbours.
Wars and turmoil in Afghanistan over the past
four decades have afflicted and infected our region
with extremism and terrorism. Apart from the people
of Afghanistan, it is Pakistan that has borne the brunt
of it all. Terrorism, the arms and drug trade and the
influx of millions of Afghan refugees have undermined
my country’s security and retarded our economic
growth and development. Pakistan has a vital stake in
building peace and security in Afghanistan. We have
supported, and will continue to support, all regional and
international efforts to promote a peaceful settlement
to the internal conflict in Afghanistan.
For its part, Pakistan has fought a very successful
war against terrorism. Our military operations, the
largest anti-terrorism campaign anywhere in the world,

17-2983121/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

involving over 200,000 of our troops, have crushed and
eliminated terrorist groups in our frontier regions and
in our towns and cities. We have paid a heavy price. In
all, 27,000 civilians and soldiers have been martyred,
50,000 injured — many of them maimed for life.
Our economic losses over the past several years are
estimated at $120 billion.
Unfortunately, Pakistan continues to face terrorist
attacks from across the Pakistan-Afghanistan border,
which are conducted by the TTP, the JUA and Islamic
State-related groups, operating from sanctuaries
and safe havens in Afghanistan. We urge the Afghan
Government and coalition forces to take decisive action
to eliminate terrorist safe havens in Afghanistan.
Pakistan is undertaking steps to strengthen border
controls and end sponsored terrorist attacks against
my country. We expect the Afghan Government and
coalition forces to extend full cooperation in ensuring
an end to cross-border attacks from Afghanistan into
my country.
The Secretary General has affirmed the strong
international consensus that there is no military
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan. A peace process
between the Afghan Government and the Afghan
insurgency must be promoted and fully supported. An
intra-Afghan dialogue can succeed only if the Afghan
Government itself endorses the global consensus that
peace can be achieved only through negotiations and
not by the force of arms. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan can play a critical role in
forging that consensus in Kabul.
Pakistan also calls upon the Taliban to abandon
violence and agree to resume talks in one or more
negotiating forums. An agreed de-escalation of the
conflict and a negotiated settlement offers the best
chance to end the suffering of the Afghan people and to
restore peace and tranquillity within Afghanistan and
the region. However, as my Prime Minister stated in
the General Assembly last week (see A/72/PV.14), what
Pakistan is not prepared to do is to fight the Afghan war
on my country’s soil. We cannot endorse any strategy
that has repeatedly failed in the past and would only
prolong and intensify the suffering of the people of
Afghanistan, as well as further destabilize the region.
We believe that the strategy to restore peace in
Afghanistan should focus on the following three
elements. First, there must be a coordinated effort
to contain and defeat Da’esh and Al-Qaida and their
22/31

25/09/2017

associates, including the TTP, the JUA, the Eastern
Turkistan Islamic Movement and the Islamic Movement
of Uzbekistan. Secondly, Afghanistan must promote a
sustained dialogue between the Afghan Government
and the Afghan Taliban and other insurgents willing
to negotiate a peaceful settlement. Thirdly, effective
measures must be taken to prevent cross-border
attacks by terrorists and militants travelling from or
to Afghanistan.
Pakistan remains committed to extending all
possible assistance to our Afghan brothers and sisters,
including by facilitating the transit of Afghanistan’s
imports and exports through our ports, helping with
the construction of infrastructure projects through the
utilization of the $500 million commitment we made in
Brussels and by extending our assistance to the Afghan
forces in securing their country. We believe that the
meeting last week here in New York between the
Foreign Ministers of our two countries opens a window
of opportunity to work together to address both security
and economic issues to our mutual benefit.
The bonds of religion, culture, history and
geography that bind the peoples of Pakistan and
Afghanistan are strong and immutable. They will
survive the episodes of external intervention and
external manipulation. Pakistan has struggled together
with the Afghan people to uphold their freedom from
foreign occupation and intervention. We strongly
support Afghanistan’s sovereignty. We strongly oppose
its use in games of geopolitical power. While others
can afford to orchestrate a proxy war to destabilize
Afghanistan and its neighbours, for Pakistan a stable
Afghanistan is vital for its own peace, stability and for
our progress.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I align myself
with the statement to be made later by the observer of
the European Union.
I join others in thanking the Secretary-General
for his detailed and thorough report (S/2017/783). Let
me also thank Special Representative Yamamoto for
his dedicated work and Foreign Minister Rabbani, via
Ambassador Saikal, for his statement.
Let me also underline the points made by my
Italian colleague, especially that on governance, in the
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

context of our split term in the Security Council in 2017
and 2018.
I will focus on three issues during this debate:
security, our commitment and the review of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
My first point concerns the security situation in
Afghanistan and regional cooperation. We express
appreciation for the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces; they bear the brunt of keeping
Afghanistan safe and secure. The fact that the security
situation in Afghanistan is nevertheless getting worse
is worrying. We have seen an increase in human
rights violations, civilian casualties and the number of
internally displaced persons, which are all a result of
insufficient stability.
Therefore, if Afghanistan is to prosper, continued
work on stabilization is crucial in our view. Stabilization,
peace and reconciliation can only be achieved through
a political process with committed actors. Being
committed entails refraining from supporting elements
that hamper the peace process and form impediments to
stability in Afghanistan and the region. We encourage
advances in the peace process through the greater
engagement of insurgent groups in serious and direct
peace talks with the Afghan Government. Notably,
we commend President Ghani for engaging in talks,
notably with the Pakistani Government.
My second point concerns our continuing
commitment to Afghanistan. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands remains committed to supporting the
development of Afghanistan. We make an annual
financial contribution of around €60 million, which
is focused on the re-establishment of legal order and
security, in accordance with Afghanistan’s national
priorities. We urge the Afghan Government to intensify
its efforts in needed reforms and to continue to work
extensively with international and national civil
society organizations. Such organizations can help to
implement those commitments.
Furthermore, the Kingdom reiterates the
importance of the inclusion of women and youth in the
peace process, which was a point also highlighted by
the representative of Sweden. We applaud the inclusion
of an additional eight women in the High Peace Council
and the establishment of a youth consultation board.
Moreover, we welcome President Ghani’s personal
commitment to gender equality as a top priority for his
Government.

S/PV. 8055

That brings me to my third point — the strategic
review of UNAMA. We thank the Secretary-General
for his substantial report on the strategic review of
UNAMA (S/2017/696) and for his recommendations
regarding the future of the Mission. We express our
deep appreciation of the work of UNAMA and we
value the broad United Nations presence throughout
the country. A strong presence in its provinces should
be maintained. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
agrees with the Secretary-General that Afghanistan is
indeed not a post-conflict country. Therefore, the first
priority for the international community in supporting
Afghanistan remains supporting peace and stability. As
you just said in your national capacity, Sir, it should be
an Afghan-led peace process. Within that context, let
me stress the importance of further improving donor
coordination by UNAMA. A decisive plan is needed to
guide the interaction between donors, United Nations
institutions and civil society.
Let me also highlight one area in which the
Kingdom of the Netherlands has particular interest,
given our own efforts — strengthening the rule of law
in Afghanistan. The strategic review recommends the
abolishment of the rule-of-law unit within UNAMA. In
our view, that should be conducted only if rule-of-law
expertise is well integrated into the UNAMA Political
Affairs Division. As an integral part of the political
pillar of the Mission, in our view, a focus on the impact
of rule-of-law projects must be guaranteed.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has been a long-term partner of Afghanistan — a
partner for peace, justice and development. We remain
committed to supporting Afghanistan in a decade of
ever-increasing Afghan ownership and leadership. In
that spirit of partnership, the Afghan people can count
on us to stand by their side. During our membership of
the Council in 2018, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
will continue to support Afghanistan with that same
vision, commitment and partnership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
address the Security Council. Canada thanks the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto, for his insightful briefing.
Canada fully endorses the statement of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, but I would add some

17-2983123/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

additional points. I wish to start by addressing certain
key aspects of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) strategic review.
First and foremost, the review highlighted that
Afghanistan, as noted by the representative of the
Netherlands, is not a post-conflict country. Rather, it is
a country in conflict, with few signs of abating. There is
also spreading extremism throughout the region, which
is supported by criminal networks and income from
opium production. In 2017, fighting in Afghanistan has
intensified, taking an unacceptable toll on the civilian
population. The strategic review also found that
population growth and urbanization are contributing
to a growing number of unemployed youth, who may
be at risk of radicalization. It also found that poverty
is increasing and corruption continues to undermine
public confidence in the Government. Although there
has been significant progress in Afghan women’s rights,
women remain unequal partners compared to men.
In the light of those challenges, Canada supports
the implementation of several recommendations of
the strategic review that will contribute to the peace
process. For their part, the Afghan Government and the
armed opposition, including the Taliban, must engage
in peace negotiations. Regional and international actors
must also support the common interest in regional
stability and the creation of conditions for peace. We
also need to continue support for essential services
to Afghans, leading to self-reliance and sustainable
peace. To support public confidence, it is vital that
the parliamentary elections in 2018 and presidential
elections in 2019 go forward as planned.
(spoke in English)
Canada fully supports an Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process. It is my hope that the Kabul
peace process will bear fruit and that Afghanistan will
soon be free of the level of violence we have seen of late
in the country. Furthermore, women’s participation in
the peace and reconciliation process is essential. The
strategic review states that it is essential to continue to
prioritize the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
the promotion of gender quality and the elimination of
violence against women.
Canada commends the decision to move the
post of Senior Gender Adviser to the Office of the
Special Representative. We hope that this move will
support the meaningful participation of women in
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and political
24/31

25/09/2017

processes, as well as improve the representation of
women in governance structures. If peace, security and
development are to take root and endure in Afghanistan,
women must join men at the centre of decision-making
at all levels of Afghan politics, society and economy.
Finally, I must reiterate Canada’s deep concern
over the continuing deterioration of security in
Afghanistan, especially the increase in civilian and
aid worker casualties reported so far in 2017. We
are dismayed by that trend. Civilian displacement,
increased vulnerability and high civilian casualties
are unacceptable. We are particularly concerned about
the impact of instability and insecurity of women and
children. We look to Afghanistan’s neighbours and
partners to continue working with the Government of
Afghanistan to increase regional stability and decrease
violence within the country.
We also want to encourage UNAMA, the
Government of Afghanistan, its neighbours and
the international community to work even more
closely together to ensure the development of basic
infrastructure and access to energy. That would make
a real difference to the people of Afghanistan, the
stability of the region and its security. Canada stands
with the Afghan people, especially Afghan women and
girls, as they strive for a more secure, prosperous and
peaceful future.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Germany.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative,
Mr. Yamamoto, for his comprehensive briefing, and
both him and his staff for their tireless efforts.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
Afghanistan continues to require our joint
and dedicated attention. Germany remains fully
committed to its support of the Afghan people, without
artificial timelines.
Long-term stability in the region can be achieved
only through a comprehensive peace and reconciliation
process. We agree with the conclusions outlined in
the report (S/2017/696) on the strategic review of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), which underscore that the Mission must
prioritize political stability and the creation of an
environment conducive to reaching an Afghan-owned
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

peace agreement. Sustainable solutions can be attained
only by bringing together all instruments of conflict
resolution and prevention in a coherent political strategy.
That is in line with the sustaining peace approach and
the Secretary-General’s current reform efforts, which
Germany strongly supports. It has to come together in a
coherent, well-coordinated way.
Achieving durable peace is the only way to end the
suffering of the Afghan people. When citing the sad
statistics of civilian casualties, we must not forget that
behind every statistic lies a personal tragedy. Even
more needs to be done to protect the most vulnerable
in Afghan society. We expect that the national policy
on civilian casualty prevention and mitigation will be
implemented quickly.
We condemn the suicide attacks on Shia mosques in
Herat on 1 August and Kabul on 25 August, which were
carried out right before the holy Islamic feast of Eid
al-Adha and left over 110 people dead. Those attacks
clearly aim to cause division along social, ethnic and
religious lines within Afghan society, and we call on all
Afghan citizens not to give in to such provocations but
to stand united to face terrorist threats.
The
Independent
Election
Commission’s
announcement to schedule the overdue parliamentary
and district council elections for 7 July 2018 is a
very important step. The holding of transparent, fair
and credible elections is an indispensable component
for a peaceful and stable future in Afghanistan.
Conflicts need to be resolved in Parliament, not on the
battleground. But that can be achieved only when there
is trust in the electoral system. Germany stands ready
to assist Afghanistan in that process and encourages
the National Unity Government to proceed with
outstanding electoral reforms.
Let me conclude by reiterating Germany’s full
support for the crucial role played by UNAMA and
United Nations agencies working in Afghanistan. We
welcome the results of the strategic review, which seek
to optimize the structure of UNAMA and strengthen
the Mission even further. We recommend swift
implementation. Germany welcomes the decision to
retain the UNAMA field presence in Afghanistan, as it
is one of the most visible manifestations of UNAMA’s
and our joint commitment to the Afghan people.
Following the withdrawal of the Police Advisory Unit,
the Rule of Law Unit and the Military Advisory Unit,

S/PV. 8055

Germany trusts that the important tasks of those units
will be fully integrated into UNAMA’s core activities.
As Chair of the International Contact Group on
Afghanistan, Germany especially commends UNAMA’s
efforts to help strengthen cohesion among international
and regional stakeholders in Afghanistan. Germany
remains committed to supporting Afghanistan, in close
cooperation with the Afghan Government and our
international partners, and commends efforts to foster
regional and international cooperation in support of
peace under the umbrella of the so-called Kabul process.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): We too thank Special
Representative Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing and
His Excellency Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, for his statement.
We would also like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
the situation in Afghanistan (S/2017/783) and his report
(S/2017/696) on the strategic review of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
We commend the role played by UNAMA in
standing with the Afghan people and in coordinating
the efforts of international stakeholders. We will
continue to support UNAMA’s activities and efforts in
that regard.
The achievements of the past 15 years in
Afghanistan need to be consolidated. Therefore, the
continued support of the international community
during the transformation decade is crucial. The
international community reiterated its support to
Afghanistan in the NATO Warsaw Summit and in the
Brussels Conference last year. It is vital to live up to the
commitments made towards Afghanistan.
The deteriorating security situation and the
presence of Da’esh in the country continue to be a source
of concern. We applaud the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces for their determined stance against
terrorism. We acknowledge the sacrifices they have
made. Turkey will continue to support the Government
of Afghanistan in its fight against terrorism and in
its efforts to bring peace, security and stability to
the country.
We attach importance to the functioning of the
National Unity Government. Unity among every

17-2983125/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

segment of the Afghan society is the key to the success
of our endeavours to achieve peace, security and
stability in Afghanistan. Further fragmentation of the
Afghan society would be detrimental both to the efforts
of the Afghan Government and the interests of the
international community.
We are pleased to see that the United States new
strategy for Afghanistan clearly demonstrates that
Afghanistan will not be alone in its fight against
terrorism. We are also pleased to note that the new
strategy includes prospects for a political settlement,
which might include Taliban elements.
Increased cooperation among the countries of the
region is imperative for Afghanistan’s success. We
firmly believe that such cooperation can be secured only
through dialogue and stronger engagement. In fact, it is
the region itself that has the greatest role, interest and
responsibility in establishing and sustaining a secure,
prosperous and peaceful Afghanistan.
Turkey will maintain its contributions to the
security and development of Afghanistan, as well
as its support to the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace efforts. Our support to the Afghan Government’s
security and development efforts will continue,
including through multilateral platforms, such as the
Heart of Asia — Istanbul Process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express my appreciation to Ethiopia for
convening today’s debate, the Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan for his statement, and Mr. Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing on the
Secretary-General’s most recent report, as contained in
document S/2017/783.
As the Secretary-General observed during his
first visit to Kabul, peace and security remain the
challenges to establishing stability and to ensuring
sustained development in Afghanistan. According to
the Secretary-General’s most recent report, the conflict
has continued unabated throughout the country. More
than 16,290 security-related incidents were recorded
during the first eight months of the year, representing
a 3 per cent increase against the same period in 2016
and yet another unfortunate highest total ever recorded
26/31

25/09/2017

since 2001. More than a decade after its invasion,
Afghanistan, the region and the world are not any safer.
I must reiterate once again that deteriorating security in
Afghanistan has deeper roots and cannot be addressed
solely through military build-up, as some suggest.
The Taliban and the self-proclaimed Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant — Khorasan Province continue
their heinous attacks on the civilian population. They
are reinforcing, recruiting and undertaking complex
attacks, such as the attacks on a Shia mosque in Herat
on 1 and 25 August that killed over 90 and 28 people,
respectively or the August attack in Sari Pul province
in which at least 36 people were killed. Like in Herat,
the majority of the documented casualties were Shia.
The proliferation of terrorist groups in the Afghan
territory necessitates a concerted international effort
on counter-terrorism. The world needs to deal with
this increasing threat in a comprehensive manner. The
international community needs to sustain its support
for the Afghan National Unity Government and to
help the Government in its fight against terrorism
and extremism, as well as in its efforts to address the
complex security, political, economic and development
challenges it faces.
Our support for the Afghan National Unity
Government is unrelenting. We welcome any
achievement on the path towards an Afghan-owned
and Afghan-led peace process, leading to lasting and
comprehensive peace in the country and the region.
Iran is indeed very eager to see a peaceful and
prosperous Afghanistan as its neighbour; security in
Afghanistan directly and indirectly affects security in
our borders and the region. It was in that context that
Iran welcomed and participated in both the Moscow and
the Kabul peace conferences this year, and continues
its participation in the meetings of the Heart of Asia
process as an active member.
Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and a major pathway towards
consolidating peace and economic development
and stability in the region. The Trilateral Chabahar
agreement between Iran, India and Afghanistan and
the Khaf-Herat railway project are two major transit
projects under way. We are confident that these
projects have the capacity to change the regional
economic perspectives of Afghanistan. Such regional
infrastructure initiatives can serve as an important
path towards development and stability in Afghanistan.
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

We also continue our active role through mechanisms
such as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process. During
the reporting period, we restarted negotiations on
our bilateral comprehensive strategic cooperation
agreement with the Afghan Government, which aims
to improve cooperation in the areas of security, the
economy, refugees, culture and education. The first
meeting of five technical committees was convened in
Tehran to discuss all issues.
On anti-narcotics efforts, we see any increase in
narcotics as a reflection of the prevailing insecurity and
poverty. Iran is a frontline country in the war against
narcotics, we have offered alternative cultivation
and alternative livelihood plans to dissuade Afghan
farmers from cultivating opium. Stronger international
cooperation and support, and the commitment of
donors, the Afghan authorities and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime are essential to deterring
the menace of narcotics as a social health challenge and,
more importantly, as a major source of income for the
recruitment of extremist and terrorist groups. In that
regard, we underline the positive impact of strengthened
regional cooperation and joint responses to countering
illicit drugs and transnational organized crime.
Iran has hosted hundreds of Afghan refugees
for more than three decades. They have access to
mostly subsidized services that are equally available
to Iranians, including basic commodities and public
services. This year too, 100,000 Afghan children,
regardless of their or their parent’s legal status, were
able to enrol in our schools. By the decree issued
today by the Supreme Leader, no Afghan child in Iran,
not even an illegal immigrant, should be deprived of
education, and schools must enrol them.
We also continue to participate in the work of
Tripartite Commission in order to plan for the voluntary,
safe, dignified and gradual repatriation of Afghan
refugees. Success in voluntary repatriation will depend
first and foremost on providing for the reasonable needs
of repatriated refugees in Afghanistan, and underscores
the need for more international support. Stronger
coordinated approach between the Government, donors
and the United Nations and an overall strategy for
addressing the combined needs of the displaced and
returnees are crucial in making the repatriation of
Afghan refugees more successful.
We support UNAMA and United Nations
agencies in their efforts to provide development and

S/PV. 8055

reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
a genuine commitment of the United Nations to a
sustained partnership with Afghanistan. We need
to utilize the UNAMA mandate and its good offices
to strengthen national institutions and capacities in
priority areas, as requested by the Government.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate on the situation in Afghanistan
and for providing us with an opportunity on an issue that
forms a very important part of the peace and security
debate in the Security Council. We thank Ambassador
Yamamoto for his reflections on the current situation.
We were happy to hear the Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan address the Council earlier today. We
welcomed Mr. Rabbani in Delhi earlier this month for
the second meeting of the India-Afghanistan Strategic
Partnership Council. For India, strategic partnership
and friendship with Afghanistan are an article of faith.
Ours is not just another relationship or engagement, but
a spiritual and. civilizational connect. As a friend of
Afghanistan, India supports Minister Rabbani’s appeal
to the international community to support his country
in strengthening the gains made by the Afghan people
over the past 15 years.
On its part, India has just launched a new
development partnership with Afghanistan. We will
begin implementing high-impact projects all across
Afghanistan using the fresh development assistance
of $1 billion announced last year. We will focus on
building infrastructure for socioeconomic development,
enhancing the capacities and capabilities of institutions
of governance, and promoting the skills and capacities
of human resources. We welcome and support the
announcement by Minister Rabbani of Afghanistan’s
candidature for the Human Rights Council elections to
be later this year. The worst violations of human rights
are caused by terrorism, and the people of Afghanistan
have endured that for too long.
We have taken note of the report (S/2017/696) of
the Secretary-General on the strategic review of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We have also noted the reflections of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
and welcome his findings, especially those on the
political aspect of the Mission in Afghanistan. Further,
we welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General

17-2983127/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

to address the shortcomings in the functioning of
UNAMA, which remains the biggest special political
mission of the United Nations in any country. We hope
that it will strengthen the supportive role of the United
Nations so as to enhance its performance in all areas
of its mandate. This work must be implemented with
regular consultations with the Afghan Government. We
look forward to consulting with relevant actors in that
process and to assisting in it whenever required.
While undertaking our collective efforts here at
the United Nations or at other multilateral settings,
we must be mindful to support the strengthening of
Afghanistan’s sovereignty and stability, which are the
two things that anti-Government terrorist elements are
trying to undermine from their safe havens across the
borders of Afghanistan. What Afghanistan needs is not
prescriptions but support for its efforts. The people of
Afghanistan should decide what they need and what
they want to do. Whether they relate to Afghanistan’s
political and military engagement with its partners
or to the differences in its political establishment,
the solutions and the approach must be driven by the
Afghans and by Afghans alone.
The situation in Afghanistan has remained
particularly painful and disturbing, with the security
situation worsening and visible signs of that the gains
made by the international community and Afghan
people are being undermined. The incessant attacks on
hospitals, schools, funerals, international development
agencies and diplomatic missions are a matter of
serious concern. The multiple crises that have been
inflicted on Afghanistan have made Afghan territory
attractive for criminal and terrorist groups, which are
well connected to international terror and criminal
networks. These groups are stealing the resources of
Afghanistan, which ought to belong to the people of
the country. The international community’s first and
foremost duty is to ensure that the forces of terrorism
and extremism do not find sanctuaries and safe havens
anywhere and at any level. We must not differentiate
between good and bad terrorists, or play one group off
against the other. The Taliban, the Haqqani Network,
Al-Qaida, Da’esh, Lashkar-e-Taiba, Jaish-e-Mohammed
and others of their ilk are all terrorist organizations,
many of them proscribed by the United Nations. They
should be treated like terrorist organizations, with no
justifications offered for their activities.
We support Afghanistan’s determination to
overcome its security challenges, and the willingness
28/31

25/09/2017

of many in the international community to effectively
deal with the issue of safe havens enjoyed by the
terrorist organizations that pose a threat to the region
and beyond. For its part, the Security Council must
act on the funds that the terrorists in Afghanistan are
generating through their illicit activities. In that regard,
we would like the Council to consider how the sanctions
regime established under resolution 1988 (2011) can be
utilized also to leverage progress in the peace process.
These are significant instruments and must be utilized
to their full capacity.
We once again thank you, Mr. President, for your
efforts and look forward to more such opportunities to
be able to help our Afghan friends in their endeavour to
find peace and stability in their land.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms.
Wilson:
(Australia)
welcomes
the
recommendations of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) strategic review,
on which I will focus my comments today. The review
points the way to making the United Nations effort
in Afghanistan more strategic, agile, coherent and
focused. The international community has spent much
of 2017 reflecting on the effectiveness of its approaches
in Afghanistan and made some significant adjustments
to emphasise the primacy of getting to peace.
While noting the implementation challenges,
Australia supports proposals to restructure the
work of the United Nations Mission under political,
development and human rights pillars to better enable
UNAMA to pursue its ultimate goals of sustainable
peace and self-reliance in Afghanistan. Australia calls
on the wider United Nations family in Afghanistan to
work constructively and coherently towards enabling
and participating in that vision.
Australia supports an Afghan-owned and Afghanled peace process. We encourage Afghanistan to
continue its efforts, with support from the United
Nations, to build the conditions conducive to peace,
including political consensus and inclusion.
Regional countries have a crucial role to play in
supporting any peace settlement, the benefits of which
will ultimately accrue not just to Afghanistan but to
its neighbours as well. The review’s observation that
the international consensus that drove early success is
fraying should move us to renew our commitment to
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

securing peace in and for the region. We encourage our
friends in the region to prioritize long-term strategic
stability over short-term tactical advantage.
Australia commends the proposal to retain a
significant UNAMA field presence. We emphasize the
importance of field offices for outreach, programme
implementation and visibility, particularly on human
rights concerns and early warning, including of
emerging humanitarian needs. More broadly, we
support a more prominent role for the United Nations
in strengthening donor coordination to better align
assistance with Afghanistan’s priorities and improve
oversight, coordination and coherence.
Australia welcomes bringing the Senior Gender
Adviser under the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, thereby reflecting the centrality
of reaching for gender equality across all lines of
effort. Supporting women’s empowerment has been
a core mission of the Australian aid programme in
Afghanistan since 2002. Our ending violence against
women programme supports services for women
affected by violence, access to justice, community
attitude changes and advocates for women’s rights.
Earlier this year, our Prime Minister announced the
$30 million women and girls empowerment package, to
fund phase 2 and continue to support Afghan children,
predominantly girls in rural and remote areas, to access
basic education.
As per the review, Australia recognizes the
significant work of United Nations agencies and their
staff in Afghanistan and thanks them for their close
cooperation as development and diplomatic partners
with reach into parts of the country and access to diverse
stakeholders critical for Afghanistan’s future. We
encourage all United Nations agencies in Afghanistan
to work together cooperatively to fully implement the
UNAMA review.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Dabouis (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
28 member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

S/PV. 8055

I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/783), as well as Special Representative
Yamamoto for his briefing. I would also like to thank
and Minister Rabbani for his statement.
(spoke in English)
As stated on several occasions, the EU strongly
acknowledges the crucial role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and all the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people, encouraging peace and reconciliation,
monitoring and promoting human rights and in
coordinating the international community’s assistance.
The European Union remains fully committed to
supporting an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process.
Such a process must include all Afghan men and women
and must preserve Afghanistan’s unity, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the equal rights of all Afghans
under the Constitution.
The EU supports the Kabul process on peace and
security and other international efforts to establish a
genuine Afghan peace and reconciliation process. The
Kabul process can also encourage further discussions
between Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries
to increase regional cooperation. We encourage the
Afghan Government to engage in a political process
with the Taliban and other Afghan opposition groups
to reach a lasting political settlement. We also welcome
all initiatives to create a conducive environment for
such a process and call on all parties to engage in
constructive solutions.
On 24 July the joint communiqué adoped on elements
for an EU strategy in Afghanistan set our vision on how
the European Union can support Afghanistan. It focuses
on four priority areas critical to achieving progress in
Afghanistan, namely, promoting peace, stability and
regional security; reinforcing democracy, the rule of
law and human rights and promoting good governance
and women’s empowerment; supporting economic and
human development; andaddressing challenges related
to migration.
The joint communiqué follows the Conference
on Afghanistan held in Brussels in October 2016,
the signing of a new EU-Afghanistan cooperation
agreement on partnership and development in February
201 and the appointment of a Special Envoy to
Afghanistan in June this year. Next month, the Foreign
Ministers are expected to adopt the actions proposed
in the joint communiqué. In that context, let me also

17-2983129/31

S/PV.8055

The situation in Afghanistan

refer to the new United States strategy on Afghanistan
and South Asia. As in the past, the European Union
will continue to work together with the United States
and the international community in support of lasting
peace, security and stability in Afghanistan.
Ensuring respect for human rights and the holding
of democratic elections continue to be a focus of all
EU actions in the country. An EU-Afghanistan highlevel meeting on human rights took place in Kabul
on 14 August, with more than 80 participants. The
meeting highlighted next steps to be taken by the
Afghan authorities to advance on the protection of
human rights. Human rights will from now on be part
of the structured dialogue between the European Union
and Afghanistan under the Cooperation Agreement on
Partnership and Development.
With regard to elections, the EU and its member
States welcomed the announcement by the Independent
Election Commission of the date for the parliamentary
elections in Afghanistan, to be held on 7 July 2018.
Joint efforts will now be deployed to make these
elections possible on that date in a democratic,
inclusive, transparent and credible manner. There is
still a lot to be done; in particular, key decisions on
electoral reforms have to be taken and implemented
by the Afghan authorities in a timely manner. The EU
and its member States remain committed to supporting
the Afghan electoral process. Recently, the EU adopted
a €3.5-million project to strengthen Afghanistan’s
electoral institutions, which complements the existing
and future European Union electoral assistance
in Afghanistan.
Joint State-building and development efforts in
Afghanistan need to build on reinforced regional
cooperation to address both the common threats
of terrorism and common sustainable development
challenges. In this regard, the EU strongly supports
such regional forums as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process and the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan to facilitate cooperation
among all regional actors.
Migration continued to be a very important subject
in our discussions with the Afghan authorities. The
EU-Afghanistan Joint Way Forward on migration
issues, complemented by bilateral EU member States
arrangements with Afghanistan on migration, is
producing good results and we need to continue to
jointly pursue and enhance its implementation. Our
30/31

25/09/2017

comprehensive dialogue with Afghanistan includes
addressing the root causes of irregular migration and
forced displacement and ensuring the sustainable
reintegration of the returnees. Assistance in this field
was strengthened in the past two years with measures to
facilitate the sustainable reintegration of returnees and
internally displaced persons, socioeconomic cohesion
in host and return communities, and the strengthening
of the Government’s capacity for migration management
and fight against human trafficking and smuggling.
Since last year, approximately €200 million have been
made available to help Afghanistan tackle the challenges
related to migration and forced displacement, including
with regard to the regional dimension of the situation of
Afghan refugees.
In July, UNAMA reported that the number of
civilians killed and injured in the Afghanistan conflict
during the first six months of 2017 persisted at the
same record high levels as last year. Extreme harm to
civilians continued amid a worsening toll from suicide
attacks and a greater impact on women and children.
We call on all parties to do their utmost to protect the
civilian population, especially women and children.
We also need to continue to protect the vital role
of humanitarian agencies and respect their impartiality
and humanitarian space in addressing the most urgent
needs of the most vulnerable. In view of the threat
posed by the many mines and improvised explosive
devices to the population, the European Union also
encourages Afghanistan to maintain their current
demining rhythm.
(spoke in French)
To conclude, the European Union continues to
consider UNAMA as a key partner in achieving lasting
peace in Afghanistan. UNAMA has an invaluable role
to play in ensuring the broadest possible international
support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process.
The European Union will continue to support these
efforts with all means at its disposal. In that regard, and
as already announced, I note that the newly appointed
Special Envoy of the European Union to Afghanistan,
Mr. Roland Kobia, has taken up his post. His main task
will be to promote the regional consensus for peace and
to advance the European Union’s contribution to the
security, stability and development of Afghanistan and
the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
17-29831

25/09/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium aligns itself with the statement just
made by the observer of the European Union. On my
part, I would like to highlight the following points.
It is now more crucial than ever to ensure that
conditions are conducive to stability and dialogue, and
we welcome the efforts made by the Afghan Government
to that end. Furthermore, we believe that the regional
actors should demonstrate their commitment to peace
in Afghanistan and translate these commitments into
concrete action.
We welcome the recommendations of the strategic
review, which once again underscore the coordination of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) between the various international donors
and the Afghan Government. Belgium will closely
follow the way in which this recommendation is
implemented in practice.
Belgium hopes that the legislative elections will take
place as planned in an acceptable security environment
and with a satisfactory rate of participation, particularly
with regard to women as both voters and candidates.
It is important to ensure that the work carried
out by UNAMA takes into account the developing
commitments of international partners. The ultimate
goal of such partnerships should always be peace and
stabilization in Afghanistan, which are the necessary
preconditions for the well-being of the Afghan people.
Lastly, I would like to touch on the situation of
children in Afghanistan. Three armed groups, as well
as the Afghan National Police, are listed as having
recruited children. The detention of children is also of
concern. As for the Taliban, they are guilty of carrying
out attacks on schools and medical facilities. We call
on all parties to respect international humanitarian law
and encourage the Government to intensify its fight
against impunity in the case of violation.
To conclude, I reiterate Belgium’s support
for Afghanistan and its Government, as well as
for UNAMA.
The President: The representative of Afghanistan
has asked make a further statement. I now give him
the floor.

S/PV. 8055

Mr. Rabbani (Afghanistan): What we heard earlier
today from the representative of Pakistan was but
another attempt to divert international attention from
its open and explicit support for terrorism and violent
extremism. All of us here today are well aware of the
security dynamics in Afghanistan and in the region,
and I should therefore not have to go into great detail
about Pakistan’s long-term and long-standing use
of terror and violent extremism as an instrument of
foreign policy.
The main factor for insecurity in Afghanistan
therefore relates directly to the export of violent proxy
groups into Afghanistan from within Pakistan. As we
stated last week before the General Assembly (see
A/72/PV.6), these facts have been verified by various
members of the international coalition present in
Afghanistan. It is on this basis that Afghanistan has
called on the Security Council to take specific action in
defence of the Charter of the United Nations.
With all that Afghanistan and Pakistan have in
common, as beautifully outlined by the representative
of Pakistan, we are keen to see genuine and
comprehensive State-to-State discourse on peace,
security and prosperity. We hope to see constructive
engagement rather than a continuation of the all-toofamiliar plausible deniability and various attempts to
change the narrative through fake and distorted images,
facts and figures. This kind of behaviour will bear no
fruit for peace. The policy of deception has no future.
Pakistan should instead seize the opportunity to reverse
course and choose the path of adhering to the Charter
of the United Nations.
The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Usman (Pakistan): We regret that the Afghan
Permanent Representative has yet again chosen to
criticize Pakistan for its internal problems. We reject
such insinuations. Pakistan will not assume the role
of scapegoat for the failures of other countries. We
call upon the Afghan Government to work with the
Government of Pakistan in the same spirit of the recent
meeting held for our two Foreign Ministers in order to
address security and economic challenges in a mutually
beneficial manner.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

17-2983131/31
