___________________
3

adopted on reports of the First Committee
··--···-·· ... _____
- - - - - - - - - - - -Resolutions
-------·-···-··-···--··-----· ·-··--·-- - - - Affirming the need for strengthening furth~r the system of collective security unoer the authority of the
United Nations,
Finding that to this end further steps could be ta~en
by States and by the United Nations in accordance with
the Charter and in conformity with the "Uniting for
peace" resolution ( 377 A ( V) ) and with resolution 503

(VI),
1. Takes note of the second report of the Collective
Measures Committee and expresses appreciation of the
constructive work done by the Committee during the
past year, particularly in the economic. iield, including
the preparation of lists of an~s, _ammumt10n and 1m1:lements of war and of strateg,.c items for considerat1011
by the Security Council or the General A;sembly in
the application of a selective embargo ;
2. Requests the Collective Measures Committee to
continue its work until the ninth session of. the General
Assembly, as directed in paragraph 4 be!ow, for. the
maintenance and strengthening of the Umted Nat10ns
collective security system ;
3. Recommends to States Members, and invites
States not Members of the United Nations:
(a) To give careful consideration to the reports of
the Collective Measures Committee;
( b) To continue and intensify their efforts to carry
out the recommendations of the "Uniting for pcacf.'"
resolution and of resolution 503 ( Vl) ;
( c) To keep the Collective Measures Com1:1itte_e cu~rently informed of the progress they are makmg m tlus
respect;
4. Directs the Collective Measures Committee :
(a) To pursue such studies as it may deem desiraule
to strengthen the capability of the United Nations to
maintain peace, taking account of the "Uniting for
peace" resolution, resolution 503 (VI) and the present
resolution ;
( b) To continue the examination of information received from States pursuant to the "Uniting for peace''
resolution, resolution 503 (VI) and the present resolution;
( c) In the light of its studies, to suggest to the
Security Council and to the General Assembly such
specific ways and means as it may deem appropriate to
encourage further preparatory action by States;
( d) To report to the Security Council and to the
General Assembly not later than the ninth session of
the Assembly.
415th plenary meeting,
17 March 1953.

704 (VII). Regulation, limitation and balanced
reduction of all armed forces and all armaments: report of the Disarmament Commission
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that:
Under the Charter of the United Nations all States
are bound to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace
and security, and justice, are not endangered, and to

refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the territorial mlegrity or political independence of any State, or in an)'. other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the Umted Nat10ns,
The aim ol d. sy~tern -of world-wide disarmament is
to prevent war anJ. release the world's human and economic resources for the pur;_1oscs of peace,
1. Takes note of the report.; of the Disarmament
Commission ;
.2. Reaffirms General A,,,;cmbly rcsoiuti.on 502 (VI)
of 11 January 1952 and requests the Disarmament Com-·
mission to continue its work ior the d1.evdoi.,mc.nt by
the United Nations of comprehensive and ,.o-orJinated
plans J_.lroviding for:
(a) The regulation,, limitatiun and balanceJ i:eduction of all armed forces and armaments;
lb) 'fhe elimiuatic.n anri prohibition of all major
w_eapons, including bacteriological, adaptable to mass
destruction;
( c) The effective international control of atomic
energy to ensure the prohibition of atomic weapons and
the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes only;
The whole programme to be carried out under effective
international control in such a way that no State
would have cause to fear that its security was en-dangered;

J. Requests the Cotmmssion to report to the General
Assembly and to the Security Council no later than 1
September 1953, and hopes that all the members of the
Commission will co-operate in efforts to produce constr:.1ctive proposals likely to facilitate its task.
424th plenary meeting,
8 April 1<;"53.

705 (VII). The Korean question
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its unswerving determination to spare no
efforts likely to create conditions favourable to the attainment of the purposes of peace and conciliation embodied in th•' Charter of the United Nations,
No,ing, iollowing the United Nations Command
initiative for the exchange of sick and wounded prisoners
oi war, the communication 5 by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China dated 31 March 1953 to
the President of the General Assembly, and the exchange of communications6 between the United Nations
Command and the Commanders of the Chinese People's
V oluntecrs and the Korean People's Army in regard
thereto,
Confident that a just and honourable armistice in
Korea will powerfully contribute to alleviate the present
international tension,
1. N ates with deep satisfaction that an agrefment
has been signed in Korea 011 the exchange of sick and
wounded prisoners of war ;
'See Official Records of the Disarmament Commissi011, 195:?,
Special Supplement No. 1.
5 See document A/2378.
11 See

document A/2390.

.....

4

General Assembly--Seventh Session

2. Expresses the hope that the exchange of sick and
wounded prisoners of war will be speedily completed
and that the further negotiations at Panmunjom will
result in achieving an early armistice in Korea, consistent with the United Nations principles and objectives;
3. Decides to recess the present session upon completion of the current agenda items, and requests the
President of the General Assembly to reconvene the
present session to resume consideration of the Korean
question (a) upon notification by the Unified Command
to the Security Council of the signing of an armistice
agreement in Korea; or ( b) when, in the view of a
majority of Members, other developments in Korea require consideration of this question.
427th plenary meeting,
18 April 1953.

706 (VII). Question of impartial investigation of
charges of use by United Nations Forces of
bacteriological warfare

The General Assembly,
Noting that accusations have been made by certain
governments and authorities charging the use of bacteriological warfare by United Nat10ns Forces, and that
the Unified Command has repeatedly denied such
charges,

Recalling that when the charges were first made the
Unified Command had requested that an impartial investigation be made of them,
Noting that the Central People's Government of the
People's :Republic of China and the North Korean
authorities have so far refused to accept an offer by
the International Committee of the Red Cross to carry
out an investigation,
Noting that the draft resolution 7 submitted ir> the
Security Council by the Government of the United
States of America proposing an investigation of these
charges by the International Committee of the Red
Cross failed to carry because of the negative vote of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Desiring to serve the interests of truth,
1. Resolves that, after the President of the General'
Assembly has received an indication from all the governments and authorities concerned of their acceptance
of the investigation proposed in the present resolution,
a Commission, composed of Brazil, Egypt, Pakistan,
Sweden and Uruguay, shall be set up and shall carry
out immediately an investigation of the charges that
have been made ;
2. Calls upon the governments and authorities concerned to enable the Commission to 1ravel freely
throughout such areas of North and South Korea, the
Chinese mainland and Ja pan as the Commission may
deem necessary in the performance of its task and to
allow the Commission freedom of access to such persons, places and relevant documents as it considers
necessarv for the fulfilment of its task and to allow it
to examme any witness, including prisoners of war.
under such safeguards and conditions as the Commis7 See document

S/2671.

sion shall determine: all prisoners of war who are
alleged to have made confessions regarding the use
uf bacteriological warfare shall, prior to examination
by the Commission, be taken to a neutral area and remain under the responsibility and custody of the Commission until the end of the Korean hostilities;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to transmit the present resolution immediately to the
governments and authorities concerned, requesting them
to indicate their acceptance of the investigation proposed in the present resolution;
4. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to report to the General Assembly at the earliest practicable date on the results of his efforts;
5. Directs the Commission, •.vhen set up, to enlist the
aid of such scientists of international reputation, especially epidemiologists, and such other experts as it may
select;
6. Directs the Commission, after acceptance of the
investigation proposed in the present resolution by all
the governments and autho, "ties concerned, to report
to the Members of the Gene:-al A.;sembly through the
Secretary-General as soon possible and no later than
I Septemter 1953;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish the
Commission with the necessary staff and facilities.
428th plenary meeting,
23 April 1953.

707 (VII). Complaint by the Union of Burma regarding aggression against it by the Government of the Republic of China

The General Assembly,
Having examined the complaint6 by the delegation
of the Union of Burma regarding the presence, hostile
activities and depredations of foreign forces in the ter-ritory of the Union of Burma,
Considering that these facts constitute a violation of
the territory and sovereignty of the Union of Burma,
Afjirming that any assistance given to these forces
which enables them to remain in the territory of the
Union of Burma or to continue their hostile acts against
a Member State is contrary to the Charter of the
United Nations,
Considering that the refusal of these forces to submit
to disarmament or interment is contrary to international
law and usage,
1. Dej1lores this situation and condemns the presence
of these forces in Burma and their hostile acts against
that country;
2. Dcrlares that these .foreign forces must be dis;irmed and either agree to internment or leave the territory of the Union of Burma forthwith;
3. Requests all States to respect the territorial integrity and political independence of the Union of
Burma in accordance with the principles of the Charter;
4. Recommends that the negotiations now in progress
through the good offices of certain Member States
8 See document

A/'2375.
