S/2016/794

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 September 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 13 September 2016 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to article 13 quinquies of the statute of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991 concerning the appointment of an ad hoc judge of the
Tribunal.
Article 13 quinquies provides the following:
If there is no permanent judge currently serving at the International Tribunal
available for assignment to the Appeals Chamber, and all pract ical alternatives
having been explored, the Secretary-General may, at the request of the
President of the International Tribunal and after consultation with the
President of the Security Council, appoint a former judge of the International
Tribunal or of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda who is also a
judge of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, as a
judge of the International Tribunal, to be assigned on an ad hoc and temporary
basis to the Appeals Chamber, notwithstanding article 12, paragraph 3, and
article 14, paragraph 3, of the Statute. The terms and conditions of service of a
judge appointed pursuant to this paragraph for each day on which he or she
exercises functions for the Appeals Chamber shall be those of a judge ad hoc
of the International Court of Justice.
By a letter dated 7 September 2016, the President of the Tribunal, Judge
Carmel Agius, requested that Judge Burton Hall (Bahamas) should be appointed as a
judge of the Tribunal pursuant to article 13 quinquies, so that he might be assigned
to interlocutory appeals from the Mladić trial on an ad hoc and temporary basis (see
annex).
Judge Hall is a former permanent judge of the Tribunal and the presiding judge
in the Stanišić and Simatović case before the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. He would serve in the Tribunal and the Mechanism
simultaneously, consistent with article 7 of the transitional arrangements set out in
annex 2 to Security Council resolution 1966 (2010), which allows a judge of the
Tribunal to hold the office of judge of the Mechanism.
Article 12 (3) of the statute of the Tribunal provides that the Appeals Chamber
shall, for each appeal, be composed of five of its members. In the absence of a new
judge, it would not be possible for the Tribunal to compose an appellate bench of
five appellate judges for any interlocutory appeals that may be filed in the Mladić
16-16180 (E)

200916

*1616180*

S/2016/794

trial. This is because there are only seven permanent judges remaining at the
Tribunal, of whom three are assigned to that trial.
I note that the President of the Mechanism has been consulted on this matter
and that he agrees with the request.
In accordance with article 13 quinquies of the statute of the Tribunal, I look
forward to receiving your views on the appointment of Judge Burton Hall as a judge
of the Tribunal, to be assigned to the Appeals Chamber on an ad hoc and temporary
basis.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/3

16-16180

S/2016/794

Annex
I have the honour to address you once more in relation to the composition of
the Appeals Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
First of all, I wish to express my gratitude for the prompt action of the
Security Council in addressing the request contained in my letter dated 29 July 2016
(S/2016/693, annex). In particular, I welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2306 (2016) on 6 September 2016 and take note of the amendment adding article 13
quinquies to the statute of the Tribunal.
Article 13 quinquies provides the legal basis for the appointment of an ad hoc
judge of the Appeals Chamber. I recall that the number of permanent judges
available to sit on any interlocutory appeals in the Mladić proceedings is currently
insufficient and that all practical solutions have been explored. Furthermore, as
previously set out, the accused recently filed before the Trial Chamber several
requests for leave to appeal. If the Trial Chamber grants such leave, the accused has
a maximum of seven days in which to file an interlocutory appeal. It is therefore
crucial that an ad hoc judge be appointed as soon as possible.
In the light of the above, and in accordance with article 13 quinquies, I hereby
request the appointment of Judge Burton Hall (Bahamas) to the Appeals Chamber of
the Tribunal to allow his immediate assignment to any and all upcoming
interlocutory appeals in the Mladić case, on an ad hoc and temporary basis.
As required under article 13 quinquies, Judge Hall is a former judge of the
Tribunal who is also a judge of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. In addition, given that he is currently presiding over trial pro ceedings at
the Mechanism, he is now located in The Hague. Furthermore, he has indicated his
availability to work on interlocutory appeals in the Mladić case, should any arise. In
my view, therefore, Judge Hall’s appointment would be efficient in terms of both
time and cost.
Lastly, I can confirm that I have again consulted the Bureau on this matter and
that all judges of the Tribunal are fully apprised of the adoption of article 13
quinquies and of the present request. In addition, I have consulted the P resident of
the Mechanism, who is in agreement with Judge Hall’s appointment.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
President of the Security Council at your earliest convenience.
(Signed) Judge Carmel Agius
President

16-16180

3/3
