S/2009/697

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 August 2010
English
Original: French

Letter dated 11 December 2009 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
The Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Atoki Ileka, in his capacity as Chairman of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), wrote to me on 28 April 2008 to reiterate the call of the
heads of State and Government of ECCAS for the establishment of a United Nations
Office for Central Africa, modelled on the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA). The leaders of the ECCAS countries have on several occasions
emphasized that the presence of such an office would facilitate coordination among
ECCAS, the United Nations system and other regional organizations. They have
also affirmed that that presence would help to define and implement a
comprehensive and integrated approach to the challenges related to peace, security
and development in Central Africa, as highlighted by the President of the Security
Council in his statement of 31 October 2002 (S/PRST/2002/31). In that statement,
the Security Council emphasized that capacities in the subregion of Central Africa in
the area of conflict prevention and the maintenance of peace and security, as well as
economic integration, should be strengthened.
As you know, in my report on the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, I recommended the establishment of regional offices of the
Secretariat. Those United Nations offices would be mandated to work closely with
regional organizations, in particular the African Union, in the maintenance of
international peace and security (see S/2008/186). In that connection, I am pleased
to inform the members of the Security Council of my intention to establish a
Regional Office for Central Africa, having consulted with and received the consent
of States members of ECCAS. The Office will have the following core functions:
(a) Cooperating with ECCAS, the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community (CAEMC), the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), the Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries (CEPGL) and
other key partners and assisting them, as appropriate, in their promotion of peace
and stability in the broader Central African subregion;
(b) Carrying out good offices roles and special assignments in countries of
the subregion, on behalf of the Secretary-General, including in the areas of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding efforts;
(c) Strengthening the Department of Political Affairs’ capacity to advise the
Secretary-General on matters relating to peace and security in the region;

10-50002 (E) 310810 310810

*1050002*

S/2009/697

(d) Enhancing linkages in the work of the United Nations and other partners
in the subregion, with a view to promoting an integrated subregional approach and
facilitating coordination and information exchange, with due regard to specific
mandates of United Nations organizations as well as peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding support offices;
(e)

Reporting to Headquarters on developments of subregional significance.

I intend to establish the United Nations Office for Central Africa in Libreville,
Gabon. It would be led by a Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
would be at the level of Under-Secretary-General, supported by international and
local staff.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2

10-50002
