,

TWENTY-EIGHTH

17
NEW

YEAR

st

MEETING:

17 JULY

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

Expression

of thanks to the retiring

Adoption

173 1) .......................................
President ...............................

of the agenda ...................................................

Admission of new Members:
Application
of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas for admission to membership in
the United Nations:
Telegram dated 10 July 1973 from the Prime Minister of ,the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas to the Secretary-General (S/10966)
. .
.. . , , . .

S/PV.1731

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed
combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates
United Nations document.

of capital letters
a reference to a

Documents of the Security Council (symbdl S/ . . . ) are normally published
in quar,terly Supplements of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of
the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively
to
resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-FIRST

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 17 July 1973, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. K. JAMIESON
(United Kingdom
Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

of

Representative of the Soviet Union, who was President
of the Security Council in June. I should also like
to express the hope that in July the Security Council
will be able to deal successfully with the responsible
tasks facing it.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America and
Yugoslavia.

Provisional

1. Adoption
2.

agenda

3. Finally, I should like on my own behalf to take
this opportunity to congratulate you, a colleague and
long-time associate at the United Nations, on the fact
that you are presiding over the Security Council, thus
breaking with what is,, perhaps, a somewhat unjust
tradition in conformity with which only permanent
representatives have presided over the Security Council.
I think this is the first time that the honour of occupying
this chair has fallen to a deputy permanent representative, and I accordingly congratulate him.

(S/Agenda/l7311

of the agenda.

Admission of new Members:
Application of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas for admission to membership ill the United
Nations :
Telegram dated 10 July 1973 from the Prime
Minister of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas
to the Secretary-General (S/10966).

4. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
the Soviet Union for his remarks. In fact it is not a
precedent, but we will talk about that outside the
Council.

Adoption
Expression

of thanks

to the retiring

President

of the agenda

The agenda wag adopted.

The PRESIDENT:
Before we proceed to the
business of this meeting of the Council, it falls to my
lot to exercise the traditional privilege of congratulating the outgoing President of the Security Council.
Equally in accordance with tradition-British
tradition
this time-1
shall be brief, especially since my Permanent Representative, who will be returning later
this week to occupy his rightful place in this chair,
may wish to say more. In the meantime, however, on
behalf of ,the Council I should like, through our friend
Ambassador
Issraelyan,, to thank the representative
of the USSR for his conduct of our business last
month. I think that we can all agree that we had a
very busy month in June and that Ambassador Malik
played a full and skilful part in our proceedings,
both as President and as representative of the Soviet
Union, and both in our formal meetings and in our
informal
consultations. I hope that those thanks will
be passed on to Ambassador Malik.
1.

Admission

of new Members

Application
of the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas for admission to membership
in the United
Nations :
Telegram dated 10 July 1973 from the Prime
Minister
of the Commonwealth
of the Baha.
maa to the Secretary=General
(S/10966)

5. The PRESIDENT:
The application for membership in the United Nations submitted on 10 July 1973
by the Commonwealth of the Bahamas is before the
Council iu document S/10966.
6. Rule 59 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council provides that, unless the Council
decides otherwise, the President shall refer applications for membership to the Committee on the Admission of New Members. Accordingly, I propose to
ask the Committee to study the apphcation for the
admission of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas and
to report thereon to the Security Council as soon as
possible. Since no member of the Security Council
has asked to speak at this stage, I consider that the
Council is in agreement with this intention.

Mr. ISSRAELYAN
(Union of Soviet Socialist
2.
Republics)
(translated from Russian) : I may perhaps
be breaking with tradition by taking the floor just
before you move on to the discussion of the second
item on the agenda, but I should like, on behalf of
the Soviet delegation, to thank you for your kind
words addressed to Ambassador Malik, the Permaneqt
1

It wac;so decided.
7. As a result of prior informal
consultations,
a
meeting of the Committee
on the Admission of New
Members haS been arranged to begin immediately.
8.

Before

we adjourn,

I think

it would be useful

to announce that we have consulted informally among
members of the Security Council, and an understanding
has been reached that the Council should meet again
tomorrow, 18 July, to consider the report of be
Committee on the Admission of New Members.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.
i

Printed in U.S.A.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

82236-Auyst

1973-2,050
