United Nations

S/PV.6610

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6610th meeting
Tuesday, 13 September 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Kumar
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Laher
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-third progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2011/497)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-49483 (E)

*1149483*

S/PV.6610

All year, Liberians have been preparing for
presidential and legislative elections. Liberia’s now 29
political parties have been organizing themselves for
the vote, negotiating alliances and nominating their
candidates. Sixteen presidential candidates have been
presented, including the incumbent, and over 800
legislative candidates are competing for the 88 House
and Senate seats being contested.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-third progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2011/497)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Liberia to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Toga Gayewea McIntosh, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Royal Highness Prince Zeid
Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein, Chair of the Liberia
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Jordan, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/497, which contains the twentythird progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia.
I now give the floor to Ms. Løj.
Ms. Løj: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to present the
twenty-third progress report (S/2011/497) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL). In doing so, allow me to extend my
appreciation to the members of the Security Council
for their support for the work of the Mission. Council
members will already have had a chance to read the
report itself, so I will focus my brief remarks on events
and developments since it was issued last month.

2

The National Elections Commission has also
been hard at work. On 23 August, Liberians voted in a
national referendum to consider four proposed
amendments to their Constitution. In general, the
referendum went well, with no serious security
incidents. With UNMIL back-up, the National
Elections Commission put in place and successfully
implemented an early deployment plan for material
distribution, and the voting and counting processes
largely went smoothly. Aside from some procedural
issues, a printing error on the ballot, and relatively low
voter turnout at 34 per cent, the referendum was
technically a generally well-conducted electoral event.
Liberians were free to express themselves through the
ballot box.
Three of the proposed amendments were
elections related and, had they passed, would have
applied to this year’s electoral process. On 31 August,
however, the National Elections Commission
announced that all four propositions had failed,
including the proposals to move the elections from
October to November, out of the rainy season, and to
change the electoral system to simple majority for
legislative seats. Therefore, election day will remain
11 October, and the National Elections Commission
will face the exceptionally challenging task of
organizing numerous run-off elections shortly
thereafter. The Commission is in discussions with
political parties and other stakeholders about the
implications of the referendum results for the election
process, and a case has been filed with the Supreme
Court to discount the invalid votes. If this petition is
successful, it would mean that the simple majority
proposition would pass.
The referendum was a critical rehearsal for the
National Elections Commission, as well as for UNMIL.
Analysing what was done well and what could have
been done better will be important for the coming
elections. UNMIL’s role continues to be focused on
coordinating international assistance, filling critical
logistics gaps, and employing the Mission’s good

11-49483

S/PV.6610

offices to ensure an environment conducive to peaceful
elections. In this context, I have continued to engage
with political parties to encourage them to reach
consensus on modalities of the process. The Mission
has also drawn up an elections security plan with
national
partners,
including
contingencies.
Furthermore, inter-mission cooperation arrangements
have been discussed with a view to seeking
reinforcement from our sister mission in Côte d’Ivoire
so that, should the electoral environment begin to
threaten public order, we will not be caught unawares.
This is especially important given the tendency for
elections in post-conflict countries to lead to violence.
The Secretary-General’s suggestion in this regard will
shortly be forwarded to the Council for its
consideration.
These elections come at a critical time for the
subregion, as they follow the Ivorian crisis. That crisis
has caused an increase in security and humanitarian
concerns along Liberia’s borders. The movement of
suspected Ivorian fighters and Liberians alleged to
have participated in the Ivorian conflict poses a threat
to both Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia in the border areas,
and authorities continue to make arrests in connection
with a major weapons cache discovered in June near
the border. Liberia still hosts over 170,000 refugees,
and Ivoirians continue to cross the border in fear of
reprisal attacks at home. A revised Emergency
Humanitarian Action Plan was launched on 30 August,
requesting $166 million to cover humanitarian needs
through the end of this year. Securing this assistance is
critical not just to covering the needs of refugees, but
also to addressing the needs of host communities that
have shared their meagre resources over the past nine
months.
Given increased border challenges, UNMIL has
worked closely with the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire to strengthen our inter-mission
cooperation, including increased coordination of
border patrolling, information-sharing and joint tasking
of air assets to ensure that inaccessible areas along our
700-kilometre common border are monitored as closely
as possible. Within their limited capacity, Liberian
security institutions have stepped up their operations
along the border, and cooperation between the Ivorian
and Liberian security institutions has gradually
increased. But these operations have reminded all of us
that Liberia’s security agencies will not be fully and
independently operational until mobility, communications

11-49483

and other equipment
sustainable.

needs

are

available

and

Planning for the elections and addressing
developments along the border with Côte d’Ivoire have
consumed the planning and operational capacity of
Liberia’s security institutions. Planning for the
handover of security responsibilities from UNMIL to
national institutions has continued, but the challenges
of the past few months have slowed the process. The
work of the joint transition planning working group
will have to gain momentum again after the elections.
We expect that it will provide a picture of the
outstanding financial and technical gaps, as well as the
progress made, in advance of the technical assessment
mission in early 2012.
But planning for transition is just the first step.
The Government and the international community will
have to continue to build the capacity of the security
sector to prepare for the actual handover of security
responsibilities. After lengthy consultations, the
National Security Reform and Intelligence Bill was
finally enacted in August. The adoption of the
legislation is an important step towards rationalizing
Liberia’s security agencies, and towards a more
structured and affordable security sector.
The Government’s prioritization of security
sector reform, rule of law and national reconciliation
for the engagement pf the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) is consistent with the need to consolidate critical
gains in these areas and to better prepare the country
for the UNMIL transition. The completion of the first
of five planned regional justice and security hubs, in
Gbarnga, is expected by the end of this year. It will
begin some functions even before that with the
deployment of 70 police support officers before the
elections. The hubs will be a critical step in effectively
decentralizing rule of law and security agencies and
increasing access to justice and security in distant parts
of the country. I am sure that the Chairman of the PBC
country configuration for Liberia will go into greater
detail about the work of the PBC in Liberia. Let me
just underline the importance of donors responding
positively to the need for assistance in establishing
these hubs.
Elections have not been Liberia’s only focus over
the past few months. The country has continued to
recover economically, with a number of new economic
concessions approved and international investment

3

S/PV.6610

continuing to increase. A number of pieces of
important legislation have been adopted, and the 20112012 national budget is almost eight times bigger than
it was six years ago. While economic recovery and
development are crucial to attaining long-term
sustainable peace, in the coming months all eyes will
be focused on Liberia’s elections and the country’s
ability to pull off a national event of that magnitude.
Liberia has had eight years of unbroken peace.
This is something Liberians can be proud of,
considering that it represents the longest unbroken
peace in three decades. The elections provide an
opportunity to consolidate the peace that Liberian
citizens cherish so much. To do so, it is critical that
voters can take to the polls and express their voices
free of intimidation or fear. It is equally important that
the election results be respected as the basis for true
reconciliation and representation, rather than discord
and division.
All Liberians — political leaders, candidates,
opinion leaders, civil society organizations and the
general population — have a duty and responsibility to
ensure that the gains made thus far are consolidated
and that peace becomes truly irreversible. I am
confident that Liberians will demonstrate to each other
and, indeed, to the international community that they
are committed to the road to sustainable peace, that
they have made good use of the space the international
community and the Mission have given them, and that
they are conscious of the investment made over the
past eight years.
I cannot underline strongly enough the
importance that these elections be free, fair and
peaceful. They are the second elections since the end of
the conflict, but they are the first being organized and
run by Liberians. However, if the elections are
successful, it does not mean that the work is finished.
Liberians will still require considerable assistance and
support in rebuilding their lives and their country. This
process will have to continue to be a joint undertaking
between Liberians and the international community.
Much progress has been achieved, and I trust all
Liberians and international partners alike will continue
to stay the course and ensure that this progress is truly
irreversible.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Løj
for her briefing.

4

I now give the floor to His Highness Prince Zeid
Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein.
Prince Zeid Raad Zeid Al-Hussein (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express our joy at
seeing you, Sir, preside over the Council and your
brotherly nation lead the work of the Council this
month. We are confident of your wisdom and your
talents, and we are sure that we will be able to achieve
our objectives.
(spoke in English)
It has been almost a year since I assumed my role
as Chairman of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and, after three
visits there and countless discussions here, as well as
in Washington, D.C., and in Brussels, and numerous
meetings attended via video teleconference with
colleagues in Monrovia, I wish to share my thoughts
about the prospects for a non-return to the sort of
violence that has marked so much of Liberia’s recent
history.
In other words, given what we know about the
state of the State of Liberia now and the security and
justice needs that remain extant, what are the prospects
that Liberia will survive peacefully and flourish once
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has
departed? Or, ultimately, will the time and effort
invested by the United Nations peacekeepers, currently
led by a remarkable and talented Special
Representative of the Secretary-General operating
according to mandates established by the Council, be
in the end for something or for nothing?
To answer bluntly, I believe that if we as
Governments had the same confidence the world of the
private sector possesses, given the latter’s recent
preparedness to invest in the range of $16 billion in
Liberia over the next two decades or so — with almost
two-thirds of the investing companies coming from
eight countries presently represented on the Security
Council — then Liberia will succeed, and it will
succeed very well.
The Liberians have the talent and the desire to
retire their country from war, not temporarily this time,
but permanently. The true question for Liberia, it
would seem to me, lies not entirely with them, but to
some extent with us. Do we, as the representatives of
Governments, acting individually or collectively here

11-49483

S/PV.6610

at the United Nations, have the same confidence in
Liberia that is shown by the private sector globally?
The test will come soon enough in the form of
money, of course. The Peacebuilding Fund (PBF),
whose top donor is also a member of the Council, will
finance the first of the justice and security hubs in its
entirety — that located in Gbarnga. We expect to have
the entire compound ready, with buildings completed
by the end of the year, and we are working with
specific partners in the international community to
explore the possibility of having key technical
personnel trained to be able to provide a creditable
service out of the hub to the peoples of Bong, Lofa and
Nimba.
The four other hubs and their specific locations
are just being finalized now. They will be financed by
the PBF at the level of $2 million each — roughly half
their cost — with the PBC mobilizing funds outside of
the PBF to foot the balance. This money must be found
soon if our endeavours in Liberia are to prove
successful.
And that is not all. The Liberia Peacebuilding
Programme contains a number of other important
projects of a critical nature to the judiciary, the police
and national reconciliation, agreed to by all the
partners — the Liberian Government, the donor
community and the United Nations — and, after some
painstaking negotiations, now has a total value of
almost $72 million. Once the Government has finalized
the levels of expenditure on security and justice, and
knowing how much we will expect from the
Peacebuilding Fund — an initial contribution of close
to $21 million — we expect to have to raise
approximately $30 to $50 million. Some part of this
may be offset by donor allocations already approved to
some of the very sectors covered by the Liberia
Peacebuilding Programme.
The early signs from exploratory contacts with
some Member States are not promising, however,
where the PBC slice is concerned. The remaining
money for the hubs and indeed the Peacebuilding
Programme may indeed be hard to come by.
Yet, in the meantime, it was clear to all members
of the PBC delegation visiting Liberia from 12 to
17 June — and here I am very grateful to my
colleagues from the United States, the United
Kingdom, Nigeria and the Ukraine for their
commitment — that the Liberian National Police,

11-49483

notwithstanding some very notable improvements in
training and infrastructure, will not be ready any time
soon to cope with either a possible increase in the
levels of organized crime or any sudden spasms of
widespread violence unless it is more robustly
supported. And, once again, we face this rather bizarre
situation of having sufficient money to pay for our
peacekeepers, but once our peacekeepers are
withdrawn, not even a small percentage of what was
previously spent on them can then be redirected to the
National Police as they assume virtually all the security
tasks hitherto carried out by the United Nations.
To present this point perhaps more graphically,
there is something remarkable happening to common
sense when we, the PBC, weave our way through the
middle of Liberia, from one police station to another,
in a 13-vehicle United Nations convoy carrying us, the
delegation, senior Liberian officials, our colleagues
from UNMIL and our security, only to discover time
and again that each police station visited had barely
enough fuel, if any, to keep even one vehicle on the
road.
The deficit separating what the United Nations
can accomplish in such critical areas as transportation
and what it would hope the Liberian National Police
will soon accomplish in all areas, including not only
transportation but in stemming the growth of
transnational organized crime, remains numbing. That
we must therefore invest more in them directly and
urgently is all the more obvious to those who spend
time in Liberia.
Naturally, not everything needed in the three
areas falling within the PBC’s portfolio — rule of law,
security sector reform and national reconciliation —
ought to come in the form of money. Liberia’s
judiciary, for example, requires a court management
system, with oversight to ensure the efficient conduct
of trials, and the Liberians are attempting
commendably to do this on their own. But here the
Member States could do much to help them simply by
providing some advice.
Similarly, while funding from the international
community was used over the past two years to finance
platforms for dialogue, falling under the general rubric
of national reconciliation, following the PBC’s
discussions in June with the senior leadership in
Liberia, including with Her Excellency the
President — and prompted by the acute observations of

5

S/PV.6610

Ambassador Marjon Kamara — it was agreed this
would end, for now at least, until a clearer strategy had
been formulated.
Yet these examples of the nimble approach
adopted by the PBC in addressing Liberia’s needs do
not vitiate the urgent need for financial support in other
equally important areas. More to the point, if the
investment by us, collectively, both in time and in
money, could be intensified significantly in the several
months following the upcoming elections, particularly
where the hubs and the Liberian National Police are
concerned, we — and, more importantly, they, the
Liberians — will be successful. I have no doubt about
this.
Should we not be able to pull together the
resources and resolve to do this decisively, including
by urging the Liberian authorities to devote more
funding to their justice and security sectors, the
Council will have had, in UNMIL, a successful
peacekeeping operation, yes, but one that would likely
depart a still very crippled country. The possible,
maybe even probable, onset of widespread organized
crime and the ensuing violence it would bring would
overwhelm Liberia soon enough. In such a scenario,
we would all, but especially the people of Liberia,
bitterly lament the end of UNMIL — a terrible
outcome in view of the extraordinary services rendered
by the tens of thousands of United Nations
peacekeepers who have lived with, and have worked
for, the Liberian people. I sincerely hope that this will
not come to be. It can be avoided.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Toga Gayewea McIntosh, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia.
Mr. McIntosh (Liberia): It is an honour to be
here and to participate in this very important review of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/497) on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), including
the comprehensive update provided by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, our sister Her
Excellency Ms. Ellen Margerethe Løj. I must thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to make a few
remarks.
Let me begin by commending members of the
Council for remaining engaged in a strong and positive
manner with the Liberian situation. We are grateful and
deeply indebted to the troop- and police-contributing
countries, international civil servants, agencies of the

6

United Nations system and international partners for
the continuous support to Liberia during these difficult
years. Our special appreciation and gratitude go to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
her staff for the demonstration of strong leadership and
commitment.
As we were told a few minutes ago, there have
now been eight years of unbroken peace in Liberia.
The country has moved progressively from an
environment once characterized by violence, chaos and
heavy indebtedness and lacking every semblance of
social progress to a stage where growth and
development can now be pursued. These positive
developments
substantiate
the
outstanding
contributions that UNMIL has made since 2003.
UNMIL’s achievements have ranged from
keeping the peace to building the capacity of State
institutions. It has played a key role in the coordination
of international assistance and in filling critical
logistical and infrastructural gaps. UNMIL has
provided basic and specialized training to more than
4,000 police officers, including at least 700 women.
These are but a few of the important benefits of
UNMIL’s presence.
Nurturing the fragile peace and ensuring that
Liberia does not return to conflict remain major
challenges. Capacity gaps still exist in many areas. The
capacities of national security institutions still need to
be
strengthened.
The
Liberia
Peacebuilding
Programme, approved under the Liberian configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, is supporting this
critical effort by establishing regional justice and
security hubs. The first of these has been established in
Gbarnga, one of our country’s central cities. Four
others are to follow in the other provinces.
I must use this public forum to commend the
strong commitment of the Chair of that configuration,
Prince Zeid, for his strong commitment to the
achievement of this noble objective. All of this requires
urgent attention and concrete actions as UNMIL
strategizes its drawdown approach.
Today, Liberia is at a critical juncture. On
11 October, precisely 28 days from today, Liberians
will go to the polls to elect their President and
legislative representatives. It will also be a test of the
will and determination of the Liberian people to
conduct themselves in a peaceful manner, void of
election violence and any action that undermines the

11-49483

S/PV.6610

hard-earned peace. The process leading to this
important national event has so far been generally
peaceful.
We are pleased to report that UNMIL has been a
significant partner in the process, providing security,
dialoguing with political parties and other stakeholders
and assisting the National Elections Commission in
providing logistical preparedness and delivering
electoral materials. This partnership between UNMIL
and the Government of Liberia is vital. It is vital for
ensuring that elections are free and fair, transparent and
credible. The Government is unreservedly committed
to this objective and hereby invites the international
community to join in observing the process.
As has been rightly emphasized by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, planning for
the elections and addressing developments along our
borders with Côte d’Ivoire remain daunting challenges.
The recent mini-summit of heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States, held in Abuja just a few days ago,
commended the role that is being played by the United
Nations missions to stabilize the security situations in
Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia. They urged the United
Nations to intensify joint UNMIL-United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire monitoring and control of
the common border zone between the two countries.

11-49483

They also called for the creation of the requisite
environment for the conduct of peaceful, free, fair and
credible elections. We are heartened that the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
has
underscored the same sentiments.
The anticipated United Nations assessment
mission to Liberia in early 2012 will be critical for
Liberia. It will judge Liberia’s readiness and ability to
build on the gains made over the years using its own
security capacity. The assessment mission will also be
critical to the Security Council, as it will determine the
nature and scope of its future engagement in Liberia.
It is our view that an orderly and well-paced
drawdown schedule will serve the mutual interests of
both the Council and Liberia. That is why we humbly
embrace and support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to this body for a 12-month extension
of UNMIL’s mandate. The Government and people of
Liberia are appreciative of the general support and
endorsement that all the members of the Council will
give to the Secretary-General’s recommendation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

7
