General Auembly-Se1'enteenth Se11ion

42

1847 (XVII). Continuation of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1700 (XVI) of 19 December 1961,
Considering that, by resolution 1654 (XVI)_ of 27
November 1961, it established the Special Co~m1ttee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of t?e
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Coloma!
Countries and Peoples,
Considering further that, in paragraph 8 of resolution
1654 (XVI), the General Assembly requested_ the Co11;mittee on Information from Non-Self-Governmg Territories to assist the Special Committee in its work,
Keeping in mind the principles and purposes contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1%0 entitled "Declaration on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples",
Recognizing that the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories continues to play a useful role in the attainment of the principles set forth in
Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations and
in the implementation of the mandates incumbent upon
the Special Committee,
1. Decides to continue the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories on the same basis
as that established by resolution 1700 (XVI), particularly paragraphs 2 to 5 of that resolution ;9
2. Decides, in the light of the rapid progress required
for the accession of Non-Self-Governing Territories to
independence, to review the situation at its eighteenth
session with a view to taking a decision on the further
continuation of the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories.
1198th plenary meeting,
19 December 1962.

1848 (XVII). Dissemination of information in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories on the Declaration on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1695 (XVI) of 19 December
1961,
Reiterating the view that it is essential that the peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories should be widely
acquainted with the Declar3:tion on the granting c:f ind~pendence to colonial countries and peoples contamed m
its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
1. N ates with satisfaction the information contained
in the Secretarv-General's report on this snbject 10 to the
effect that a ri'umber of leaflets, wallsheets and radio
talks on the aforesaid Declaration have been disseminated in many local languages of the Non-Self-Governing Territories as well as in the languages of the
Administering Members;
2. Notes with appreciation that, in accordance with
resolution 1695 (XVI), certain Administering lVf embers
9 See

note on item 55, p. 44.
Scvl'ntccnth Session ..,Jnnexcs, agenda items 49, SO,
51, 52,
and 55, document A/5244 ancl Acld.l.

have extended to the Secretary-General their co-operation in the circulation and dissemination of the Declaration in many Territories;
3. Notes with regret that the Government of Portugal has not extended such co-operation_ and in:7ites ~t
to co-operate with the Secretary-General m the d1ssem1nation of the Declaration in the Territories under its
administration ;
4. Invites all the other Administering Members to
continue to co-operate with the Secretary-Gen~ral ~n the
circulation and dissemination of the Declaration m all
Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration;
5. Further invites the Administering Members to
include the Declaration in the curricula of all educational
institutions in all Non-Self-Governing Territories;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts towards large-scale circulation and dissemination
of the Declaration through all the appropriate media of
mass communication in all the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and to prepare a report on further progress on
this subject for the General Assembly at its eighteenth
session.
1198th plenary mcrting,
19 December 1962.

1849 (XVII). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples,
Recognizing the importance of rendering assistance to
colonial countries and peoples in the field of general and
specialized education,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories
under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22
November 1954, 11
Expressing regret that, despite the increased interest
among inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in such offers, a number of the scholarships offered
by Member States remain unutilized,
Further expressing regret that in several instances
students who have been granted scholarships have not
been accorded facilities to leave the Non-Self-Governing
Territories in order to take advantage of such scholarships,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on offers of study and training facilities under resolution
845 (IX);
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1696 (XVI) of 19 December 1961;
3. Urges Member States to continue to offer scholarships;
4. Requests the Member States offering scholarships
to take into account the necessity of furnishing complete
information abont the scholarships offered and, whenever

10 Ibid

53'

11 Jbid., document A/5242 and Add.I.
