VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the framework of the development plans of developing
countries;
10. Requests the Commission on Social Development
at its twenty-eighth session to give high priority to the examination and discussion of the 1982 Report on the World
Social Situation and to submit its views and observations
to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session through
the Economic and Social Council;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the 1982
Report on the World Social Situation to other United
Nations bodies concerned with operational activities and to
the regional commissions for their consideration;
12. Invites Member States to convey to the SecretaryGeneral their comments on the 1982 Report on the World
Social Situation so as to facilitate the preparation of the
1985 report;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to issue the 1985
report on the world social situation, taking into consideration
the provisions of the present resolution and including an
analysis of the implementation of the Declaration on Social
Progress and Development in the light of the goals and
objectives of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade, and taking into
account the comments of delegations on this question made
during the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly
and to be expressed during the thirty-eighth session as well
as the comments received by the Secretary-General from
Member States and the observations made by the Commission for Social Development, through the Economic and
Social Council;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General, in preparing
the 1985 report on the world social situation, to take into
account the recommendations made in section II of General
Assembly resolution 34/152 and to report thereon periodically to the Economic and Social Council;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General, when presenting the 1985 report on the world social situation, to
submit an analysis of the co-ordination between the United
Nations and the specialized agencies in the collection of
social statistics and the preparation of reports on social issues;
16. Invites the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to co-operate fully with the
Secretary-General in the preparation of future reports by
making available all relevant information pertaining to their
respective areas of competence;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements for the wide dissemination of all future
reports;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "World social
situation".
90th plenary meeting
3 December /982

37/SS.

Popular participation in its various forms as an
important factor in development and in the
realization of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/152 of 17 December 1979,
Recalling also the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, contained in General Assembly resolution
2542 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969, in which, inter alia.
it was emphasized that all peoples and all human beings
have the right to live in dignity and freedom and to enjoy
the fruits of social progress and should, on their part, contribute to it,

189

Bearing in mind that social progress and development are
founded on respect for the dignity and value of the human
person and should ensure the promotion of human rights
and social justice,
Stressing the importance of the adoption of measures to
ensure the effective participation, as appropriate, of all elements of society in the preparation and implementation of
national economic and social development policies and of
the mobilization of public opinion and the dissemination of
relevant information in support of the principles and objectives of social progress and development,
Recognizing that popular participation, including the participation of workers in management and workers' selfmanagement in countries where they exist, constitutes an
important factor of socio-economic development as well as
of respect for human rights and dignity of the human person,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General5 2
on the International Seminar on Popular Participation, held
at Ljubljana, Yugoslavia, from 17 to 25 May I 982,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General;
2. Invites Member States to take into consideration in
their development policies and programmes the recommendations of the International Seminar on Popular Participation, keeping in view their specific economic and social
conditions;
3. Calls upon the organs and organizations of the United
Nations system to promote, as appropriate, popular participation in the execution of their programmes to the extent
and in the form appropriate to the nature of their work;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit his report
on the Seminar to Member States and the relevant United
Nations bodies for their consideration;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to consider at its thirty-ninth session the question of popular participation in its various forms as an important factor in
development and in the realization of human rights, taking
into account, inter alia, the results of the deliberations of
the Seminar, as contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, and to submit to the General Assembly, through
the Economic and Social Council, appropriate suggestions
for the more complete realization of human rights;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
comprehensive progress report on the implementation of the
present resolution, taking account of the suggestions made
in the Commission on Human Rights, and to submit his
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session, under the item relating to the world
social situation, a subitem entitled "Popular participation
in its various forms as an important factor in development
and in the realization of human rights" in order to review
the progress made in this field.
90th plenary meeting
3 December /982

37/56.

International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 36/ 128 of 14 December 1981, in
which it underlined the importance of the contributions of
the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women to the work of all United Nations
" A/37/442.

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

190

bodies, agencies and institutions involved in the advancement of women,
Also recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/27 of 4 May 1982, in which the Council, inter alia,
took note with satisfaction of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on developments relating to the organizational aspects of the Institute 53 and the report of the Board of Trustees
of the Institute on its second session54 and expressed its
satisfaction with the approved programme and activities of
the Institute for 1982-83,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the progress made in
the implementation of the programme of work of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women;
2. Endorses the network concept to be developed in
stages with the organizations of the United Nations system
and regional and national institutions as a mode of operation
for the implementation of the programme of the Institute;
3. Reiterates the need for the Institute to carry out research and training which lead particularly to a better understanding of the role of women in development, more
effective methods for enhancing the role of women in development and an increase in activities for the fuller participation of women in development, especially in the field
of technical co-operation;
4. Reaffirms that the research and trammg activities of
the Institute should aim at strengthening the links between
issues affecting women and mainstream development activities at all levels;
5. Calls upon the regional commissions, the specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system to continue to co-operate with the Institute
and to ensure its participation in the activities relevant to
women in development;
6. Stresses the need for all Member States to consider
contributing financially to the United Nations Trust Fund
for the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women or co-operating in other ways with
the Institute in order to assure its regular and effective
financing so as to facilitate the implementation of its
programme;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the programme activities of the Institute;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled "International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women".

90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/57.

Integration of women in development55

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraphs 190 to 196 of the World Plan of
Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year, 56 in which the relevant agencies
of the United Nations and intergovernmental, interregional
and regional bodies were called upon to scrutinize all ex isting plans and projects with a view to extending their
53 E/1982/33.
54 E/1982/11.

"See also sect. X.B.4, decision 47/449.
56
Repon of the World Conference of the International Women's Year.
Mexico City, 19 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV. I), chap. II, sect. A.

sphere of activities to include women and to develop new
and innovative projects to include women,
Bearing in mind that development is one of the themes
of the United Nations Decade for Women,
Recalling paragraphs 233 and 234 of the Programme of
Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade
for Women, 57 in which it was recommended that numerous
actions should be taken in the areas of technical co-operation, training and advisory services,
Also recalling paragraph 51 of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Natio~s Dev~l«?pm~nt
Decade, 58 which stated that full and effective part1c1pattot1
by the entire population at all stages of the development
process should be ensured,
Looking ahead to the world conference on women t~ be
held in 1985, at which the achievements of the Umted
Nations Decade for Women and the need to continue such
achievements beyond the end of the Decade will be reviewed
and appraised,
Convinced of the importance of integrating women fully
into all areas of development, both as participants and as
beneficiaries,
A ware that greater co-ordination and knowledge of activities in this area within the specialized agencies of the
United Nations and the regional commissions and by Member States and non-governmental organizations would facilitate an exchange of experiences and concepts and be
beneficial to all,
Expressing its appreciation to those organizations which
have made regular reports on the implementation of the
objectives of the World Plan of Action and the Programme
of Action,
l. Calls upon the Secretary-General to encourage specialized agencies and regional commissions which have not
yet done so to develop a comprehensive policy regarding
the concerns of women, both as participants and as beneficiaries, in technical co-operation and development activities and to develop a strategy to ensure that women are an
integral part of these activities;
2. Urges those organizations to take every appropriate
action within existing resources to monitor the implementation of the above-mentioned policies and strategies and to
help disseminate this information upon request to Member
States and other interested parties;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out all the
activities called for in the present resolution within existing
resources and to submit a progress report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session for its consideration,
bearin_g in mind Assembly resolution 36/127 of 14 Decem6er 1981 entiffed-''Consideration within the United Nations
of questions concerning the role of women in development".
90th plenary meeting
3 December 1982

37/58.

United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (SVI) of l May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New In" Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, I 4-30 July 1980
(United Nations puhlication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap.
I. sect. A.
'"Resolution 35156. annex.
