th
MEETING: 5 SEPTEMBER 1968

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1447) , , , . . . . , . , . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda , . , , , , . , . . , , , . , . . . . , , . . , , . . . . , . . , . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Israel addressed to the Presid.ent of the Security Council (S/8794) . . . . . . I .

1

S/PV. 1447

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-SEVENTH MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 5 September 1968, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. G. IGNATIEFF

to the Secretary-General on 4 September 1968, reached the
following conclusion:

(Canada).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

“During the inquiry of 27 August, the United Nations
military observers asked to see the bodies of the two
Israeli soldiers reported to have been killed during the
incident, but they were told that the bodies had been
removed from the area for burial that very day. The
observers could not, therefore, verify that two Israeli
soldiers had been killed.” [S/793O/Add. 76.1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/14471

1. Adoption of the agenda.

Again, as I emphasized yesterday, in view of the conclusion
of General Odd Bull I need not dwell at all on refuting the
Israeli allegations.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 2 September 1968 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/8794).

5. Yesterday I stressedtwo points in my statement. First,
my Government denies categorically any involvement of
the United Arab Republic armed forces in the alleged
incident on the east bank of the Suez Canal on 26 August
1968. Secondly, my Government continues scrupulously to
observe the cease-fire in conformity with the Security
Council resolutions. Today I restate this position with the
hope of sparing the Council the need to listen to questions
similar to the two posed yesterday.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East

6. The concern shown yesterday by Mr. Tekoah about the
success of Mr. Jarring’s mission is really surprising. It is
puzzling, indeed, that the Israeli representative is raising
this point when his authorities have, up till now, refused to
accept and implement resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. How could they claim that they are co-operating
with Mr. Jarring when they continue to refuse the basis for
his mission? I shall refrain from further comment on it and
just confine myself to quote official documents of the
Security Council.

Letter dated 2 September 1966 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/6794)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1446th meeting I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Israel and the United Arab Republic to participate, without
vote, in the discussion.
A; the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel)
and Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic) took places
at the Council table.

7. In a letter dated 19 March 1968 [S/8479], my
Government declared the following: “The United Arab
Republic on its part has informed Mr. Jarring of its
readiness to implement the Security Council resolution
adopted on 22 November 1967.”

2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its examination of the question before it. I call on
the representative of the United Arab Republic.

8. Again, on 9 May 1968, in a letter addressed to
Mr. Jarring by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, my Govemment affirmed its acceptance of and readinessto implement
the same resolution. That position we still maintain, and I
am happy to declare, on behalf of my Government, that we
shall continue to co-operate with Mr. Jarring with a view to
finding a settlement in conformity with the aforementioned
resolution.

3. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): In his intervention yesterday Mr. Tekoah stated: “Two Israeli soldiers
were killed and the third wasdragged acrossthe canal. This
is fully corroborated by General Bull’s report.” [144&h
meeting, para. 12.1

4. I wonder on what basis the Israeli representative made
such a categorical statement. General Odd Bull, Chief of
Staff of UNTSO, in the additional information submitted

9. Having reiterated my Government’s position regarding
the Security Council’s resolution of 22 November 1967, I
1

should like to add that it is high time that Israel should be
called upon to abide by and implement that resolution,

15. Moreover, we agreed that special concern must be
directed to the soldier who was reported to be wounded.
The representatives of the United Arab Republic have
denied knowledge of him. But quite apart from all
accusations and counter-accusations and all other issues
involved, I trust that every effort will be made to satisfy the
Council thst if the soldier has indeed been wounded and is
in Arab hands he will be given due treatment and promptly
returned.

10. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Since last week
when we first heard news of the encounter on the Suez
Canal, and since we read the reports of General Bull, and
since we heard the statements of the representatives of
Israel and the United Arab Republic yesterday, we have all
been endeavouring to form a judgement on what took place
on the evening of 26 August 1968 and what action the
Council should now take.

16. We have been called to the Council to deal with this
one event, the attack on the Israeli patrol. It is perhaps well
that we should today concentrate on that single encounter
and make our conclusion on it known in a simple and clear
resolution. We do not seek to widen the debate today,
Nevertheless, we cannot consider this or any other manifestation of violence in the Middle East in isolation. We in the
Council cannot be content to be mere referees in a bloody
contest, still less passive observels of a drift to greater
disasters. Every time that we meet to discuss the situation
in the Middle East it is essential for us to remind ourselves
of certain wider considerations. What are the factors which
we must constantly remember and what are the aims which
we must put top of our priorities?

11. Let me say first that we warmly welcome the decision
of the Israeli Government to bring this matter to the
Council. We have throughout condemned violence and
reprisal. We are convinced that the road of violence cannot
lead to a peaceful and secure settlement. On the contrary, it
can lead only to more violence and suffering and to more
hate and hopelessness. So the decision of the Israeli
Government to come to the Council is, we strongly believe,
the right course.
12. In the matter beiore us we have the advantage of
reports from General Bull. That is indeed an advantage.
When over past months we have had to deal with violence
elsewhere, we have had sometimes to attempt to sift the
facts from the accounts of both sides without the benefit of
impartial investigation and report. That has greatly increased our difficulties. But here we have reports, reports
on which we can rely because we know that General Bull
and the United Nations observers under his direction are
fair and accurate and cautious in their reports. We have full
confidence in General Bull and the devoted and experienced observers who work under his direction.

17. Fiat, in the Middle East issue, unlike other great
unresolved problems of the world, we know in advance
what the solution must be. We are agreed on the principles
of a final seitlement. We have unanimously approved them.
Far from doubting or denying those principles we increasingly rcalize that on no other basis can peace be
established.
18. Second, both sides have accepted those principles and
purposes and openly so declared. We remember that on
1 May 1968 Mr. Tcknah in this Council assured us that his
Government accepted the Security Council resolution
(242 (1967)] of 22 November 1967. Arab declarations
have been clear in their unreserved acceptance of the
principles and purposes of the resolution. They have been
today again confirmed by the representative of the United
Arab Republic.

13. I go on from that to say that we must accept the
finding that the patrol was mined and that .physic,Z
evidence indicated that the patrol was ambushed, and I
think it is right that we should deplore this event-.indeed
we should deplore and condemn any such acts of violence.
We do so in accordance with the p,olicy towards violence
which we have consistently followed in this Council. At the
same time it should be said that it was unfortunate in this
instance that no report was made to the United Nations
authorities until the morning after the event. There is no
doubt that had an immediate report been made the
evidence before us now would have been much more full
and much more valuable to us.

19. Third, we all know that there is no other salvation
than that on which we agreed last November. The only
alternative is that of prolonged conflict and escalating chaos
leadine to mounting, untold suffering.
20. Fourth, we realize too that violence of the kind we
have iepeatedly had to consider in the Council and which
we consider again today cannot make any contribution to a
settlement. On the contrary it can only prolong the agony
and delay and jeopardize a just peace.

14. On the other hand we cannot accept the contention of
the United Arab Republic that it has neither knowledge nor
responsibility in the matter. It is the clear and positive
responsibility of the United Arab Republic to maintain the
cease-fire which was required by the Council and accepted
by all concerned. It is well that Ambassador Gohar of the
United Arab Republic assured General Bull of the continued and unqualified adhetence of the United Arab
Republic to the cease-fire and to the agreed practice!
arrangements to give effect to it on the canal. That was a
valuable and most welcome assurance. The intention of the
United Arab Republic scrupulously to respect the cease-fire
has been further confirmed by the representative of the
United Arab Republic here this afternoon.

21. Fifth, it follows that what above all else we need to do
is to concentrate on the substance of the principles and
purposes to which we have all subscribed. We need to do SO
through the medium of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. How can the agreed principles and
purposes be implemented without further delay and without further bloodshed and without further suffering?
22. It is well for all of us to remind ourselves today that
the desperately urgentt riced is for the parties to devote their
2

i’

effort not to scoring points in a barren debate, still less on
the bitterness that follows bloodshed, but 011a new, urgent
effort to prepare practical proposals for a final and just
settlement. That is the overriding need. It is the duty of the
parties to co-operate with Mr. G.unnar Jailing to that end.

fhcy are carried out across the line, now be brought to
an end.

29. The question of a missingsoldier has been raised
during our debate yesterday with force. General Bull’s
report has this to say: “On the down slope of the sand
embankmentnear the canaledgethe military observerssaw
somemarks in the sandleadingto the bollard. Thesemarks
could have been made by a body draggedin the sand”
[ibid.]. It is our hope that all efforts will be exercisedto
explore to the full this human aspect with a view to
obtaininga satisfactorysolution.

23. All of us can make a contribution by giving all possible
support to Mr. Jarring. The time has come, so I suggest, to
abandon dispute, to move on from discussion on ploccdure
to achievement of a settlement, to give effect to the
principles and purposes we have agreed together. That, I
believe, is the only real and lasting answer to the violence
and conflict of which we have yet another example before
us in this Council today.

30. Let me, in conclusion,restate our conviction that all
efforts must now be concentrated on facilitating and
assistingthe missionof the Special Representativeof the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jarring. In a communique issued
yesterday from the Nordic Foreign Ministers meeting in
Stockholm, there wasembodiedan appkalfrom the Foreign
Ministers of the five Nordic countries to the parties to the
conflict to give their full co-operation in order to ensure
that Mr. Jarring’s mission leads to results conducive to
peace.It is in this way only that they and we canbest serve
the causeof peacein the Middle East to the benefit of all
the peoplesin the area.

24. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to say that my df?le~dtion is happy fully to
associate itself with the highly deserved tribute that you
paid to the Ambassador of Brazil who presided with such
distinction over our Council last month. I also wish,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the Presidency, to
assure you of our full trust in your leadership and to say
that we are looking forward to co-operating wholeheartedly
with you.
2.5. As to the matter under discussion, may I say that the
views of my Government with respect to violations of the
cease-fire have been stated over and over again. We deplore
all violations. We regret the loss of life, the human
suffering, and the material damage thay almost invariably
involve. We also, however, strongly deplore the repeated
violations because they can only make progress towards
peace more difficult,

31. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Denmark for the remarksandgood wisheshe hasaddressed
to the Chair.
32. Mr. BALL (United States of America): Let me first
join the other voices already heard in this Council to
expressthe gratitude and admiration of my delegationfor
the skill, perception andsensitivity with which Ambassador
de Aratijo Castro, asPresidentof the Council, directed the
Council’s affairs during his term. It was by no meansan
uneventful term. On the contrary, it wasa time of trial and
great difficulty for the Council, a time when the Council
surely neededthe wisdomand objectivity and authority of
a strong and wise President,whom it was fortunate in
havingin the personof AmbassadordeAracjo Castro.

26. It is indeed our considered opinion that all parties to
the cease-fire have a mutual interest in living up to their
undertaking to maintain and abide with the cease-fire, to
avoid and to prevent all violations. It is their duey to assure
that climate of calm that is best conducive to further the
aims of our resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.
27. It was with particular regret that my Government
learned about the incident under discussion and acquainted
itself with the report of the United Nations military
observers. We particularly regret it also because that area
has been relatively spared of the incidents of the nature
now under discussion, to the credit of the parties concerned. Without goin’g into the details of the report dated
29 August 1968 that General Bull has presented to us, a
report that speaks for itself, I wish to recall its conclusion:
namely, that the United Nations milit.ary observers have
found that an Israeli patrol was mined and that “physical
evidence indicated that the patrol was arnbushed”
[S/7930/A&l. 74, pura. 51.

33. What the Council is consideringtoday is something
that in a more perfect world it shouldnot have to dealwith
at all. It is not a massivethreat to the peace,but onemore
detestableact of killing involving only a handful of people.
Kthout in any way undervaluinga singlehuman life, one
canstill deplore the fact that the Council, which symbolizes
and embodiesthe higher aspirationsof mankind, should
have to devote its time and deflect its energiesto dealing
not with the larger considerationsof peace and war but
only with incidents of the senseless
and brutal violence
which is one of the symptomsof conflict.
34. .This is not the kind of situation that the Council can
deal with very efficiently, for we arenot a court of law nor
are W(Tequipped by ourselvesto make findings of fact. In
the caseof the Middle East, the ascertainingof facts is the
responsibility of General Bull and his mission. Yet the
Council must act on what it has before it, and in the
presentcasethat can be summaljzedasfollows. First, there
is a clear statementby the Governmentof Israel describing
an attack by a presumablywell-trained force consistingof
approximately thirty men, an attack that allegedlyoccurred

28. This delegation has welcomed ihe fact &at the Israeli
Government has chosen to bring this matter before the
Security Council, and it is our hope that this debate and its
outcome will help towards putting an end to l.he vicious
circle of attack and counter-attack, thereby putting the
Security Council in the centre, but at the same time alSO
underlining the obligation on the parties to prevent all
violations of the cease-fire. We must indeed insist that all
violent acts, whatever form they take, by whatever force
3

the requirements of the cease-fire which it asserts it
continues to support. Moreover, I feel it incumbent on this
Council to express its position unambiguously in an
appropriate resolution. A few weeks ago, when faced with
an air attack launched by the Government of Israel against
Jordan, several of the Governments which addressed this
Council admonished us that we should not be even-handed.
They contended that since Israeli forces were still in control
of Arab territories, we should condone any terrorist
activities against Israel. This was not, however, what this
Council contemplated when it established a cease-firein
June 1967, nor wasit what it contemplated in adopting the
resolution [242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. What this
Council did have in mind was that all parties should observe
the cease-fire while at the same time seeking a permanent
settlement of the conflict that could result in the retire.
ment of the Israeli forces from occupied territories.

in an uninhabited area on the east bank of the Suez Canal.
This force mined the track of an Israeli patrol and
ambushed that patrol. As a result, two Israeli soldiers were
killed and a third, dragged acrossthe canal, has disappeared,
Second, there is a quantity of physical evidence found by
the United Nations military observers under General Bull
that is consistent in every respect with the Israeli allegations. Third, there is a qualified denial by the representative
of the Government of the United Arab Republic of the
complicity of his Government in this incident. All he has
said is that no United Arab Republic forces took part in the
action and that the United Arab Republic authorities have
no knowledge of the missing soldier.
35. We can only conclude that, while the proof is not
complete and comprehensive, not conclusive by itself, the
Council certainly has before it a more substantial volume of
completely impartial evidence than it has had on certain
previous occasions when it has not hesitated to pronounce
its judgement,

41. My Government must, therefore, insist that the
Council treat the violations of the cease-fire evenhandedly
and not pursue a double standard that would call into
question both our integrity and our objectivity, and that
would erode that quality of fairness which is the quintessential spirit of the Charter for if we do not deal on a basis
of impartiality, we will only inflame and exacerbate an
already highly dangerous situation.

36. Taking account of these three elements-the allegations of the Israeli Government, the substantial circumstantial support for those allegations provided by General Bull’s
investigation, and the limited denial by the Government of
the United Arab Republic-given this volume of evidence,
the Council is entirely justified, it seemsto me, in accepting
the Israeli statement, substantially confirmed by General
Bull, while at the same time taking account of the
unsupported, limited denial of the United Arab Republic.

42. The Security Council has repeatedly taken a strong
line, and quite properly, against acts of military reprisals;
but if we persistently condemn acts of terror and violence
against one side to a dispute while ignoring them against the
other side, we shall not only promote terror but destroy the
alternative to reprisal. We shall discourage resort to the
Council and invite resort to force, and we shall, by our
inaction and our lack of objectivity, our lack of impartiality, provide encouragement to that force. We face,
therefore, a problem which is a test not merely of our
fairness, but also of our realism and responsibility.

37. I do not see.how we can, under those circumstances
accept the contention that the Israeli complaint is without
foundation, or that the United Arab Republic has no
responsibility for this incident. On the contrary, the
evidence clearly points to the fact that this was a wholly
unprovoked attack by a substantial number of armed men
under circumstances where there is a compelling inference,
if not of instigation or encouragement, at least of acquiescence by the Government of the United Arab Republic.

43. For what we are confronted with here is not merely an
isolated act of violence, but a principle-a principle which,
if we are to give credibility and effectiveness to the work of
the Council, we can ignore only at our peril.

38. Three or four weeks ago, during discussionsbefore the
Security Council, allegations were made by the representative of Jordan, supported by representatives of other Arab
States, that the Jordanian Government had no responsibility for acts of terror in those areas of the country
occupied by Israeli forces. My Government refused at that
time to accept that disclaimer of responsibility. On the
contrary, it is elementary that every Government is
responsible for the control of its own population, And that
responsibility is not limited merely to the action of its
official armed forces.

44. Meanwhile, we should seek an honourable disposition
of this incident; and as we do so, let us not overlook the
conditions that created it. For so long as the present
unnatural situation persists in the Middle East, where there
is neither peace nor war, no one can be happy or secure.
There will continue to be mayhem, killing and kidnapping,
if not open and systematic combat by regular armed forces,
then terror and violence by stealth and surprise, ambush
and trickery; in such outrageous incidents the innocent will
perish along with the guilty.

39. If this be the case for the west bank of the Jordan,
which is a heavily populated area, it is far more the casefor
the east bank of the Suez Canal, which is a great empty
space and where it is highly unlikely that any terrorist act
could have occurred that did not originate from the other
side of the canal, clearly within the responsibility of the
Government of the United Arab Republic.

45. During the life of the United Nations, disputes
between the Arab States and Israel have occupied more
time of the Council than any other set of problems. Since
the General Armistice Agreements of 1949, about 165
meetings have been consumed by consideration of alleged
violations of their provisions. And in a little more than a
year, since the June 1967 war, the Council has devoted
twenty-three meetings to the consideration of alleged
violations of the cease-fire which was established at that

40. My Government, therefore, strongly deplores this
incident and feels that the Government of the United Arab
Republic should be held strictly accountable for observing
4

Instead, he has spoken at considerable length here about
some incident which allegedly took place on 26 August on
the territory of the United Arab Republic occupied by
Israeli troops, and has attempted to lay the responsibility
for the incident upon the United Arab Republic.

time. Most of these meetings have been held at the instance
of Arab States, a few at the instance of Israel; in some
cases,complaints and cross-complaints have been filed.
46. The sum total of all this is a sad, discouraging
commentary on the inability of men and nations to live
together at peace unless there is an adequate will to do so
on both sides. That will, in the case of the nations and
peoples of the Middle East, will clearly manifest itself only
when both sides finally determine that they can no longer
afford the exorbitant cost of sustained hatred and bellig
erence: cost in lives, cost in money, cost in economic
development, cost in the achievement of their national
purposes, and cost in the fulfilment of the promise of their
gifted peoples. Then, and only then, will the nations on
both sides of this quarrel face reality, break free from the
self-created procedural shells in which they have encased
themselves in order to avoid the hard and agonizing
decisions of peace. Then and only then will they get on
with the kind of negotiation and accommodation that is
essential to permanent and lasting harmony in the area.

51. Naturally the question arises: why wasit necessaryfor
Israel to bring this pettifogging complaint against the
United Arab Republic before the Security Council? There
also arises a more general question: was it really proper to
call a special meeting of the Security Council in this
connexion? The groundlessness of the claims put forward
by the Israeli representative and of the so-called charges
against the Uriited Arab Republic is quite obvious, and the
Security Council cannot take them seriously. The supplemental information from General Bull is further confirmation of the lack of grounds for discussingthis question.
52. The absurdity of Israel’s “charges” against the United
Arab Republic has been shown with the utmost clarity in
the statements of the representative of the United Arab
Republic, Mr. El Kony, and there is no need for us now to
dwell in detail on the factual aspect of this matter. The fact
alone that the report of the Secretary-General, submitted to
the Council on the basis of information received from the
Chief of Staff of the United Nations military observers,
does not once mention the United Arab Republic as the
side against which any claims could be made in connexion
with this incident, shows that there are simply no grounds
whatever for this so-called complaint of Israel against the
United Arab Republic.

47. We are very fortunate in having as the representative
of the Secretary-General Mr. Gunnar Jarring. We are very
fortunate in having a man of such skill, such diligence, such
dedication. I can only commend to both sides to this
conflict that they utilize the instrumentality which has
been provided in the person of Mr. Jarring to start that kind
of dialogue, and continue it with great goodwill, which WI
lead in the long run to a peaceful solution to this extremely
troublesome problem.
48. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

53. It suffices to point out the fact, which was also
mentioned by Mr. El Kony in his statement yesterday, that
the Israeli authorities did not request the Chief of Staff of
the United Nations observer corps to investigate the
incident till the following day. The question arises: what
were those authorities busy with for so long a time?
Perhaps they were making up their minds about the most
convincing and lifelike way of passing off their own
handiwork as an operation which they are now trying to
ascribe to the United Arab Republic?

(translated from Russian): The Security Council has been

convened again for the umpteenth time-the twenty-third
time according to the calculations of the United States
representative, Ambassador Ball-in order to consider the
situation in the Middle East. This time, however, the
meeting of the Council has been called in unusual circumstances. The Council has been convened to consider a
complaint by Israel against the United Arab Republic, in
other words, to consider a complaint by Israel against a
country against which it has itself committed armed
aggression and whose territory it has seized a considerable
portion of which it continues to hold by force and occupy
with its troops.

54. The following fact also cannot fail to give rise to grave
doubts: the officer of the Israeli patrol, a second lieutenant,
who, as stated in the report, was in the immediate vicinity
of the site of this incident and who, according to the
assertion of the Israeli side, wasan eye-witnessof it, calmly
watched what was happening without attempting to give
any assistance or support to his fellow-countrymen, the
Israeli soldiers. Why did he not open fire against those who
allegedly were making an attack on those soldiers? Who is
this brave officer? Is he a coward, or a false witness
specially prepared for this provocative venture?

49. Since Israel, on its own initiative, has come to the
Security Council and decided to have recouxxe to the
authority of this body, one might have expected that the
representative of Israel would first of all inform the Council
of his Government’s intention to take account of the
previous decisions of the Council which require that Israel
cease acts of aggression against the Arab States and
announce its agreement with the well-known resolution of
the Security Council of 22 November 1967 [242 (1967)J
regarding a political settlement in the Middle East, and that
he would announce Israel’s readiness to implement its
provisions, including, of course, the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from the occupied Arab territories. The Security
Council has long been awaiting such an announcement and
such actions on the part of the Government of Israel.

55. Another even more striking fact which justifies the
most serious doubts about the reliability and likelihood of
the assertions of the Israeli side with regard to the so-called
incident bf 26 August is the additional information from
the Chief of Staff of the United Nations military observers,
contained in the Secretary-General’s report, which WAS
circulated yesterday as an official document of the Security
Council. In that additional information, we find some very
surprising things. It turns out that, during the investigation,

50. Unfortunately, the Security Council has not heard
anything of the kind from the Israeli representative.
5

the Israeli side refused to give the United Nations observers
an opportunity to see the bodies of the two Israeli soldiers
who, according to the Israeli version, had allegedly been
killed in the course of the incident. The report states: “the
observers could not, therefore, verify that two Israeli
soldiers had been killed” [S/793O/Add. 761.
56, Mr. Ball did not mention this in his statement here. He
referred only to the first report. But what about the second
report? He called this incident a “detestable act of killing”.
But perhaps there wasnot even any killing, since the bodies
were not shown to the United Nations observers for
inspection. How is this fact to be explained?
57. All these obvious facts, which are now generally
known, give every justification for thinking that the Israeli
“complaint” brought before the Security Council against
the United Arab Republic is nothing more than a premeditated fabrication by means of which the Israeli leaders
count on misleading world public opinion.

further acts of aggression against Arab countries ad
violations of cease-fire decisions.
62. The’ Security Council, as is well known, has repeatedly
considered these viola@ons by Israel, and in its decisions hB
condemned Israel as an aggressorfor these military actions,
committed under the pretext of retaliation. However, even
if we assume for a moment that the incident of 26 August
1968 on the east bank of the Suez Canal occupied by IsmeL
troops was not a deliberate fabrication, but actually took
place as a result of actions by the Arab freedom fighters,*,
the members of any resistance movement against the forces
of occupation, then it may be asked: what has the United
Arab Republic to do with this? How can the United Arab
Republic bear responsibility for what is happening in a
territory occupied and controlled by Israeli armed forces?
63. We certainly cannot agree with the statement here of
the representative of the United States to the effect tl~
the Arab countries are responsible for what happens in the
territories occupied by Israeli armed forces. Hearing tile
interpretation of his statement, it was my understanding
that he stressed the fact that the Arab countries beat
responsibility for what is happening in the territories seized
from the Arabs by the Israeli armed forces. We certainly
cannot agree with that. All responsibility for those terrilo.
ries lies with those countries which have bccupied other
peoples’ territories. If we were to proceed along the line
suggested for the Security Council by the United States
representative, we could go very far in that direction, and
WCwould thereby be justifying further the constant actsof
aggression on the part of Israel against the Arab countries.

58. In his statement, the United Kingdom representative
even called for the return of the vanished soldier. But why
does he regard it as inconceivable that if there were no
bodies, perhaps there wasno third soldier either?
59. The whole history of the consideration in the United
Nations of the question of Israeli aggression against the
Arab countries showsthat in Israel there are”past masters of
the art of distorting the facts. We need only remind the
Council of the well-known fact that in June 1967, in
launching a military attack, prepared and planned beforehand, against Arab countries-the United Arab Republic,
Syria and Jordan-the Israeli side, in order to cover up this
act of aggression, brought a “complaint” against the Arab
countries before the Security Council, cynically asserting
that it wasthe latter which had attacked Israel. The falsity
and provocative character of that political manoeuvre were
completely exposed at the time.

64. By its seizure of Arab lands and by its terroristic
policy against the Arab population in thae territories,
Israel is itself arousing the anger and hatred of tlhs
population. By holding on to the lands seized from tile
Arabs, by expelling and enslaving the Arab population, by
taking homes and property from the indigenous inhabitants
and by destroying with bulldozers entire residential quarters in the Arab towns and villages, the Israeli authorities
cannot expect, in response to such actions, to obtain
obedience and submission. No, in the seized Arab territories
there is flaring up spontaneously and irresistibly the flame
of a liberation struggle by the Arabs against the Israeli
aggressors. This flame cannot be extinguished by any
punitive measures, by any manoeuvres in the Security
Council or by any support which anyone in this Council
may give to those who resort to such manoeuvres.

60. The Security Council is als.6aware that Israel’s present
“complaint” to the Security Council against the United
Arab Republic was also preceded by considerable military
preparations on the part of the Israeli military command,
including the concentration of Israeli troops near areas of
the cease-fire with Jordan. This was officially reported in
recent letters of the Jordanian mission addressed to the
President of the Security Council and circulated as official
documents of the Council.
61. The additional information from the Chief of Staff of
the United Nations military observes submitted to the
Security Council in the Secretary-General’s report compels
one to reflect in earnest on all these so-called facts, A
comparison of these facts, which are now known to the
Security Council, gives rise to the following question: did
not Israel devise this clumsy complaint against the United
Arab Republic in order to carry out afterwards a routine
military action against the Arab countries under the pretext
of “retaliation”? The Security Council is well awareof the
repeated acts of military aggression committed by Israel
against Arab countries in recent months under the pretext
of so-called <‘retaliation”. For Israel, this has become a
favourite pretext for the perpetration of ever-increasing

65. All this should have been understood long ago by
Israel and by its “doves” and “hawks’‘-by the “doves”, if
there are any in Tel-Aviv-and they should realize that the
continuation by Israel of its aggressivepolicy towards the
Arab countries is not only completely hopeless and can
bring neither honour nor glory to Israel and its leaders, b#
what is more, it is also fraught with the gravest and Inal
dangerous consequences for the future destiny of the Israeli
people itself.
66. Consequently, even if the incident of 26 August in the
Arab territory occupied by Israeli troops were the handi*
work of Arab national avengers,then even so, Israel neither
had nor has any grounds for coming here to the Security
6

Council, levelling accusations at the United Arab Republic
and taking up the Council’s time. Even if this so’rt of action
by Israel is a complaint, it is only against Israel’s own
adventurous policy, and cannot fail to be, turned against
Israel itself.

the restoration of peace and in a peaceful political
settlement in the Middle East. While the Arab States have
clearly and definitely declared their readinessto accept and
implement fully that resolution of the Security Council
-and this has been confirmed again today in the statement
by the representative of the United Arab Republic, Mr. El
Kony-Israel stubbornly refuses to accept and implement
that resolution. Thus the Government of Israel is in practice
paralysing the mission of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, Mr. Jarring, the purpose of which is to
promote the implementation of that Security Council
resolution.

67. The Israeli representative in his statement yesterday
dared even in the Security Council to make threats and lay
down conditions and nearly gave the Security Council an
ultimatum to the effect that some kind of decision should
be taken in support of the aggressor’sdemands and that if
not, Israel would look after its affairs itself. The Soviet
delegation deems it necessary to draw the Security Council’s attention to these threats on the part of the representative of Israel. The Israeli aggressorsare obviously losing all
senseof proportion if they think that they will be allowed
to dictate their own conditions to the Security Council.
‘6s. No one should have any doubt that the provocative
attitude of Israel and the continuance of its aggressive
policy towards the Arab States can only end in the most
lamentable way for Israel. It will not be helped in this
unseemly affair by those who sympathize with it and give it
their patronage and support. It is common knowledge that
the Israeli Government was counting upon such patronage
and support when it launched its aggression against the
Arab States. It is also counting upon them now in
undertaking here in the Security Council its hypocritical
and crafty manoeuvre.
69. This policy of patronage was reflected today also in
the statements by the representatives of the United
Kingdom and the United States of America. It is precisely
this policy and attitude of those who give their patronage
and support to Israel, that makes it difficult to bring about
a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, and encourages
the aggressorto commit further acts of aggression and to
flout the decisions of the Security Council.

73. The responsibility for the situation which has arisen
with regard to the implementation of that important
Security Council resolution lies not only with the ruling
circles of Israel but also with those Western countries by
relying on whose patronage and support Israel continues to
sabotage the implementation of the resolution, arrogantly
flouts the will and decisions of the Security Council and
defies the whole United Nations.
74. In this connexion, we cannot fail to note that Israel in
point of fact takes, in regard to the United Nations and the
implementation of its decisions, the same attitude as that
taken by the racist regime of South Africa in regard to the
liberation of the illegally occupied Territory of South West
Africa, now known as Namibia in accordance with the
decision of the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly. Accordingly, the Israel extremists and the South
African racists, having occupied someone else’s territory,
take an identical attitude; both are flouting the decisions of
the United Nations and the decisions of the Security
Council, and are defying the whole organization.
75. The Soviet Union’s position in regard to a settlement
in the Middle East is well-known. It is not dictated by any
contingent considerations but stems from a policy of
principle in support of the Arab countries and peoples in
their just and legitimate endeavour to liquidate the consequences of Israeli aggression by peaceful political means.
The Security Council is well aware, as I have already
pointed out, that the Arab States recognize the Security
Council resolution of 22 November 1967 and are ready to
seek ways and means of achieving a political settlement in
the Middle East on the basis of that resolution, Israel, for
its part, still stubbornly refuses to implement that resolution and is deliberately putting forward demands, which are
unrealistic in the present circumstances, for the purpose of
covering up its policy of aggression and expansion and its
reluctance to carry out the Security Council resolution.

70. But the ruling circles in Israel should not take it for
granted that such assistance and patronage can really
guarantee Israel’s impunity in carrying out its aggressiveand
expansionist aims and plans in the Middle East. They may
make a sad miscalculation. All the peace-loving countries
and peoples of the world, all those who cherish peace,
international security, freedom and the independence of
peoples are on the side of the Arab States and their peoples,
who are defending their just cause, freedom and independence,
71. The Security Council would be wise not to give Israel
and those who aid and abet it an opportunity to make use
of the Council’s authority for purposes which have nothing
to do with the interests of the maintenance of peace in the
Middle East. The Security Council must categorically reject
the hypocritically contrived “complaint” of the aggressor
against the victim of the aggression.

76. Relying on the support of certain Western countries
and primarily-it must be said straight out-on that of the
United States of America, Israel is persisting in its negative
and deliberately obstructive attitude. In fact, it is flouting
the decisions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, It is attempting to strengthen its position in the
territories it has occupied in the Middle East. By its
provocative activities and its constant acts of military
aggression against the Arab countries, Israel is continuing to
aggravate the situation and to increase tension in the Middle
East.

72. The attention of the Council should now be drawn to
another genuinely important and urgent question, the
implementation of the Security Council’s resolution of 22
November 1967. The situation with regard to the implementation of that resolution cannot fail to arouse the
legitimate alarm of all those who are sincerely interested in
7

77. In these specific and obvious circumstances, the Soviet
Union is fully determined together with other peace-loving
States, to secure the cessation of Israeli aggressionagainst
the Arab States, to liquidate all its consequencesand to
bring about a political settlement in the Middle East on the
basis of the Security Council resolution of 22 November
1967 and the return of the territories seized from the Arab
States as a result of the 1967 aggression to their rightful
owners.

83. To Ambassador Malik an explanation of this kind may
seem not just a flight of fancy, as it seems to me, But
everyone here tends to speak against the background and
practices of his own Government, and he develops his em
hypotheses and his own explanations, with the benefit of
his own experience.
84. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative oflsnrl
in exercise of his right of reply.
85. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. Presiderrt, the parllamrn.
tary disabilities which encumber the Security Council inits
actions on the Middle East are known. The world still waik
in what is perhaps ever more hesitant hope to hear tlrstthr
Security Council condemns the murder of Israelis m,j 1
cannot countenance Arab violations of the cease-fire.

78. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of the
United States to speak in the exercise of his right of reply.
79. Mr. BALL (United States of America): I wish to
exercise my right of reply only to correct one misapprehension under which the Soviet representative appears to be
labouring with regard to the position of the United States.
He has suggested-and he indulged the presumption that it
might be through a failure of precise interpretation-that
what I was saying was that the United Arab Republic or
any of the Arab States should be held responsible for events
which took place on the territory which is presently being
occupied by the Government of Israel, by the forces of
Israel.

86. However, Egypt’s reaction to the Israeli complain1
before the Council has introduced an element which canaD
be left unchallenged: derision of Israel’s resort to the
Security Council, ridicule of Israel’s attempt to gain the
Council’s support in preventing Arab acts of aggression,
mockery of Israel’s dead and wounded, disparagementof
Israel’s rights under the cease-fire. Egypt has tried to tun
facts into farce and comes to the Council in a frame01
mind which borders on the irresponsible, The military
attack on Israeli forces on 26 August is fiction, the United
Arab Republic tells the Council. If it is not fiction, Egypiir
not concerned with it; and in any event it is good to kill
Israelis because they have succeeded in repelling Egyptian
aggression and dislodging Egyptian armies from territorjc
which served them as basesfor aggression.

80. That was not at all what I was seeking to say, and I
think that I should like the record to be quite clear on this.
What I suggested wasthat it seemed only elementary to my
Government that every government was responsible for
events which resulted from the actions of its citizens which
were mounted from its territory. When we considered the
dispute which arose three or four weeks ago as a result of
the act of reprisal taken by the Israeli Government against
Jordan, I advanced the view at that time that to the extent
that there were acts of terror mounted from Jordanian
territory against occupied territory there wassome responsibility for the Jordanian Government in that regard and
that is precisely what I said in this case.In fact I said that
the situation here was a fortion’ the situation on the west
bank of Jordan since that was a heavily populated area
whereasin this case,the east bank of the Suez Canal-and I
quote from my own statement today: “is a great empty
space . . . where it is highly unlikely that any terrorist act
could have occurred that did not originate from the other
side of the canal” [see para. 39 above].

87. This is a highly cynical and irresponsible postrlc
which cannot but raise the question of Egypt’s attihrde
toward serious discussion in the Council of the needto
avert the deterioration of the cease-fire.
88. In a responsible discussion, how can the fact that the
United Nations military observers made an inquiry into tie
attack in daylight and not in the darkness of the night
become reason for Egypt to throw aspersions on their
findings? How can the fact that, in accordance with Jewish
religious law, the bodies of the killed soldiers were not left
lying in the desert be used as a motive to snicker at the pain
of the bereaved? How can footprints leading from the
canal to hastily dug positions on the canal’s embankment,
signs of a body dragged back to the canal, the professiona
military nature of the attack, be dismissed so lightly in haI1
jest? How can the usual smokescreen of unknown r&n
and saboteurs be put up again to justify violations of tht
cease-fire? Was not the.cease-fire to terminate all rnilitaiy
activities? Were not the arrangements of 27 July and21
August 1967 [see Sf8053/AddJ and Add.21 to,prolnbitd
movement of boats and all military activity on the canal?

81. The statement of the Israeli Government and the
evidence that is adduced by the efforts of General Bull
which is completely consistent with-although it does not
fully corroborate it in every detail-the statement of the
Israeli Government, strongly suggest that this force came
from the United Arab Republic and therefore that the
United Arab Republic wasin effect the launching pad for
this attack. The point that I was making wasthat in those
circumstances it was my view that the United Arab
Republic had some responsibility for this type of attack.

89. It is regrettable that Egypt’s attempt to preventa
serious, responsible consideration of the obligation 10
maintain the cease-fire has found support in one statement
made in the Council today. It seems that it is necessary
10
recall that relations between Israel and the Arab Statesare
now regulated by the cease-fire established by the Secu@
Council. The cease-fire is not Israel’s choice. kd is
prepared at any time to conclude peace with Egypt mdlo

82. In so far as concerns the ‘other explanation which
Ambassador Malik has put forward-that this was all a
matter of invented evidence and that this was a pure
concoction on the part of the Israeli Government-let me
say that there is absolutely no evidence to support this
whatever, that I do not believe it, but even more so I would
not have imagined it.
8

establish secure and recognized boundaries. However, as
long as Egypt refusesto abandon the Khartoum decision, as
long as Egypt rejects peace with Israel, the cease-fireis the
only basis for relations between the two countries. To
pursue warfare, under whatever guise, whether by regular or
irregular forces, whether by raid, terror or sabotage, is
contrary to the cease-fire. Support for such warfare
contributes to an international crime and those who give
such support share responsibility for the lack of progress
toward peace.

value. Hence he apparently paid no attention to the
supplemental information which has now been made
available to the Security Council and which wasdistributed
as an official document yesterday. The references of the
Israeli representative to religious rituals are unconvincing,
since too much time elapsed between the moment when the
incident occurred, according to the Israeli version, and the
moment when that incident was reported to the United
Nations observers. If the United Nations observershad been
notified immediately, then there can be no doubt that they
would have hastened to the spot where the incident
occurred and would have been able to inspect the bodies
before the Israeli side proceeded with the religious rituals.
But apparently that did not enter into the plans of the
Israeli side. Therefore, referencesto religious rituals are of
no help here.

90. I listened in particular wonderment to the statement
of the one representative whose views on what constitutes
aggression and what does not, what is true and false, have
been amply demonstrated in recent weeks. So also has his
Government’s attitude towards the rights of States and
nations. The unholy alliance which his Government main.
tains with the Arab States under the banner of anti-Jewish
hatred and anti-Israeli aggression has been a primary factor
in the aggravation of the conflict in the Middle East. His
comments about the evidence included in the report of
General Bull reminds one of the statements made by his
predecessor in the post, who used to claim to the horrified
amusement of all that Israelis were blowing themselves up
on mines, killing their own citizens and attacking their own
villages. Those comments are a reflection only on those
who make them.

97. I should like once again to draw the attention of the
United States representative to the official report from
General Bull which showsthat the United Nations observers
were not allowed to inspect the bodies. If one takes on
trust everything said by Israel, one must also take on trust
what is contained in the documents, and not select only
those documents which are convenient for the American
side.
98. AS for the remark of the Israeli representative to the
effect that the Soviet press allegedly published fictions
concerning Israel’s military preparations, that do& not
correspond to the facts. Not the Soviet press,but official
documents available to the Security Council confirm the
fact that before the dispatch of the complaint against the
United Arab Republic, Israel began to prepare a large-scale
attack against Jordan.

91. The Soviet representative has resorted to the old
tactic: when facts fail, you employ fantasy. Thus, in fact,
the Soviet press has recently initiated a campaign, reflected
in his statement, alleging Israeli preparations for military
action. The world has not failed to notice that these reports
began to appear in the Soviet press at a time when real, not
fictional, military movements were taking place in another
part of the world. Soviet allegations are as unfounded today
as they were in the spring of 1967 when the Soviet
Government ignored findings by United Nations observers
that there were no Israeli troop concentrations and the
Soviet Ambassador in Israel refused an invitation to
confirm this by a personal visit to the areas in question.
One cannot but wonder what is the purpose behind the
Soviet allegations now.

99. I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Security Council to document S/8787, dated 28 August
1968, which contains a letter to the President of the
Security Council from Mr. El-Farra, the Permanent
Representative of Jordan:
“On instructions from my Government, and further to
my letter of 26 August 1968 [S/8773] in which I drew
your attention to the deteriorating situation resulting
from new Israeli grave violations of the cease-fire,I have
the honour to advise you that information received by
the Government of Jordan shows that Israel is now
contemplating and preparing for a large-scale attack
against Jordan.”

92. Last year, as President Nasser later revealed, these
allegations were the immediate cause for the warlike acts by
the Egyptian Government in Tiran and Sinai.
93. Israel has turned to the Security Council with one
purpose in mind: to find in it support for strengthening the
fabric of the cease-fire established by the Security Council.
We hope that we shall find this support and that a
deterioration of the situation will thus be averted.

This is an official document and I draw the Israeli
representative’s attention to it. This document was mentioned by the Soviet press. It was entitled to do SO.
Therefore the Israeli representative’s assertion that the
Soviet press invented something can only be regarded as a
slander, which I emphatically repudiate. The Jordanian
representative’s letter states further:

94. The PRESIDENT: I recognize the representative of
the Soviet Union, who wishes to speak in ‘exercise of his
right of reply.
95. Mr. MALIK

“My Government conveyed this information to the
Secretary-General through the United Nations machinery
in the area. Today, His Excellency assured me that the
information was relayed to Israel with an expression of
concern and with the hope that nothing of this kind
would take place.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian): I have asked to speak in exercise

of my right of reply to the United States representative.
96. In his statement he confirmed the long-established
American practice of taking any Israeli statement at face
9

letters to you from the Permanent Representative of
Israel to the United Nations.

“My Government would like to emphasize that the
situation is still fraught with danger, especially since
information about the Israeli contemplated attack against
Jordan has been ascertained day after day without any
Israeli pronouncement to the contrary.”

“Such propaganda campaigns about alleged troop concentrations or imminent invasions heighten tension in the
area, and are particularly disturbing in the light of past
experience.”

100. That is a document with concrete facts. It was to the
documents in question that the Soviet press referred. Thus
the Soviet press did not invent anything.
101. The PRESIDENT: I recognize the representative of
Israel in right of reply.

103. In the past I have already had occasion to suggest
respectfully to the representative of the USSR not to rely
at all times and entirely on Arab sources. I should like to
repeat this very respectful advice to him today.

102. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I shall be very brief indeed. I
was hoping that the Soviet representative, in his particular
care for evidence and truth, would not limit himself to
reading the Jordanian document, but would also refer to
the Israeli letter dated 3C August 1968 sent in reply to the
Jordanian letter. The Israeli letter, contained in document
S/8793, states:

104. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. If no other representatives wish to
take the floor at this stage, I should like to suggest to the
members that we adjourn in order to give members of the
Council a further opportunity to undertake consultations
with one another on what should be done with regard to
the matter now on the agenda.

“I am instructed by my Government to reject the
malicious allegations contained in the letter addressed to
you by the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the
United Nations on 28 August 1968 [S/8787/.

105. As a result of informal discussions, I understand that
there is general agreement that members should agree to
hold themselves available to resume consideration of this
item promptly in the light of those consultations. As I hear
no objection, I shall take it that it is so decided.

“The unfounded story and the public emphasis given to
it is doubtless designed to divert attention from the
continued attacks from Jordanian territory across the
cease-fire lines, carried out by regular and irregular armed
forces. Particulars of these attacks are contained in recent

It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.5 p.m.

10
Litho in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

35729-October

1972-2,050
