VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Thlrd Commlttee

of children as a means of combining parenthood with economic, political, social, cultural and other activities and
thus to provide assistance to women in integrating fully
into their societies;
6. Decides to consider the question of the role of
women in society at its forty-first session under an item
entitled "Forward-looking strategies for the advanc.ement
of women to the year 2000".
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985

40/102. Participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation
The General Assembly,
Confirming the noble goal enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations to maintain peac.e and security in the
world and the determination of the States Members of the
United Nations expressed therein to save present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Reca//ing that the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements ofthe United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peac.e, held at
Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985, in adopting the Nairobi
Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women, 51 underlined the importanc.e of the participation
of women in promoting intemational peac.e and co-operation,
Convinced that the Intemational Year of Peace, proclaimed for the year 1986 by the General Assembly in its
resolution 40/3 of 24 October 1985, could give new
impulses for safeguarding international peac.e and security,
Reaffirming its resolution 37/63 of 3 Dec.ember 1982, by
which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Participation
ofWomen in Promoting International Peace and Co-operation,
Recal/ing its resolution 39/ 124 of 14 Dec.ember 1984, in
which it requested the Commission on the Status of
Women to consider what measures might be necessary in
order to implement the Declaration,
Wishing to encourage the active participation of women
in promoting intemational peace and security and cooperation,
Convinced that increased efforts are required to eliminate still existing forms of discrimination against women
in every field of human endeavour,
Conscious of the need to implement the provisions of
the Declaration,
1. Pledges its determination to encourage the full participation of women in the economic, social, cultural, civil
and political affairs of society and in the endeavour to promote intemational peac.e and co-operation;
2. Appeals to all Govemments to take the necessary
measures for putting into practice the principies and provisions ofthe Declaration on the Participation of Women in
Promoting lntemational Peace and Co-operation;
3. Invites ali Governments to give wide publicity to the
Declaration and its implementation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
adequate steps to ensure that publicity is given to the Declaration;
5. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization
and other appropriate bodies within the United Nations
9S PJl983/7 and Corr. l and 2.
96 Report of the World Conference to Rev,ew and Appra1se rhe Ach1evements o(the Unired Nations Decadefor Wnmen: Equa/ir_v. Development and

221

system to consider adequate measures to implement the
Declaration;
6. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
to consider measures which may be necessary to implement the Declaration in the context of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women
for the period up to the year 2000;
7. Decides to consider the further implementation of
the Declaration at its forty-first session, as a sub-item of an
ítem entitled "Forward-looking strategies for the advancement of women to the year 2000".
116th p/enary meeting
13 December 1985

40/103. Prevention of prostitution
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Rapporteur
on the subject of the suppression of the traffic in persons
and of the exploitation of the prostitution of others, prepared in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/20 of 4 May 1982, 95
Recalling its resolution 38/ 107 of 16 December 1983
and Economic and Social Council resolution 1983/30 of
26 May 1983, as well as the report of the World Conferenc.e to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peac.e, 96
Considering that the suppression of the traffic in persons
and of the exploitation of the prostitution of others require
a three-fold concerted effort, involving prevention, punishment of all forms of procuring and solidarity in order to
facilitate the social rehabilitation of the victims,
l. Congratulates the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the World
Tourism Organization for the action they have begun to
take in implementation of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1983/30;
2. Invites once again the Economic and Social Council
to consider the whole question of the suppression of the
traffic in persons and ofthe exploitation ofthe prostitution
of others at its first regular session of 1986 in connection
with the agenda item on human rights, together with the
reports requested by the Council in its resolution 1983/30;
3. Invites the Working Group on Slavery of the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection ofMinorities to transmit its report to the Commission
on the Status of Women at its next session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the issuanc.e as a United Nations document of the report on the
suppression ofthe traffic in persons and ofthe exploitation
of the prostitution of others prepared in pursuanc.e of Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/20.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/104.

United Nations Development Fund for
Women

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 39/ l 25 of 14 December 1984, ín
which it decided, inter afia, that the activities of the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women
Peac1•, Naimbi. 15-26 Julv 19/i.< (IJnited Nations publication, Sales No.
E.85.IY 10)

222

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

----------------------'--------------------------should be continued through establishment of a separate
and identifiable entity in autonomous association with the
United Nations Development Programme,
Taking note of decision 85/33 of 29 June 1985 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme, as well as decision 85/7 of28 June 1985, 97 in
which the Governing Council requested the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme to
develop an internal implementation strategy to strengthen
the capacity of the Programme to deal with issues of
women in development which, calling on the experience of
the Fund, would establish verifiable objectives and a timeframe for implementation,
Recognizing the Fund's dual priorities, to serve as a catalyst with the goal of ensuring the appropriate involvement of women in mainstream development activities, as
often as possible at pre-investment stages, and to support
activities directly benefiting women in line with national
and regional priorities,
Considering the innovative and experimental activities
of the Fund directed towards strengthening both governmental and non-governmental institutional capacities to
ensure access for women to development co-operation
resources and their full participation at all levels in the
development process,
Stressing that general questions of development and
access of women to development resources have, as a
common objective, the creation of conditions which will
improve the quality of life for all,
Aware of the broad range of linkages of the Fund with
Governments, national women's groups, non-governmental organizations and women's research institutes,
besides its close co-operation with United Nations development agencies, including the regional commissions,
Reaffirming that the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements ofthe United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, in adopting the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the
Advancement of Women, 51 underlined the necessity of
strengthening the role of women in national and international development programmes,
Taking note of the reports of the Consultative Committee on the Fund on its seventeenth and eighteenth sessions, 98
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General,99
l. Expresses its satisfaction that the establishment of
the United Nations Development Fund for Women, in
autonomous association with the United Nations Development Programme, was etfected on the agreed target date
of I July 1985, in accordance with the arrangements set
out in General Assembly resolution 39/125;
2. Approves the name United Nations Development
Fund for Women, with the acronym UNIFEM, as the new
name for the Fund, as proposed by the Consultative Committee on the Fund at its seventeenth session, held from
25 to 29 March 1985, in accordance with paragraph 4 of
resolution 39/125 andas reflected in the annex to that resolution;
3. Notes with satisfaction the steps that are being
undertaken to implement resolution 39/125, as well as the
commitment expressed by the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme to ensure the
appropriate involvement of women in mainstream development activities;
97 See Otficial Records ofthe Econom,c and Social Council. 1985. Supp/e
ment No. 11 (E/ 1985/32 and Corr. l ), annex 1
98 See A/40/727 and Corr. l, sect. VI.

4. Stresses the need for close and continuous working
relationships between the Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme and those bodies, organs and
organizations of the U nited Nations system and other
agencies concemed with women's issues and development
co-operation;
5. Expresses its appreciation for the contributions to
the Fund made by Govemments, intergovemmental and
non-govemmental organizations and individuals, which
have a vital role to play in maintaining and increasing the
financial viability of the Fund and the etfectiveness of its
work;
6. Urges Governments to continue and, where possible, to increase their contributions to the Fund, and calls
upon those Govemments that have not yet done so to consider contributing to the Fund, in order to enable the Fund
to give greater support to deserving requests received for
technical assistance;
7. Requests the Consultative Committee on the Fund
to continue to monitor the process of implementing the
new arrangements for the management of the Fund, as set
out in the annex to resolution 39/125;
8. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to submit to the Goveming
Council of the Programme an annual report on the operations, management and budget of the Fund, taking into
account the ad vice of the Consultative Committee on the
Fund;
9. Also requests the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-first session, through the Secretary-General, a report on the activities of the Fund, in
accordance with resolution 39/ 125.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/105. Incorporation of the interests of women in
the work programmes of the regional commissions
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/ l 27 of 14 December 1984, in
particular the reference to the incorporation of women's
concerns in the overall programme of work of each
regional commission and to the regularization of senior
women's programme officers posts,
Convinced that further etforts are needed to ensure adequate consideration of women's concerns within the
regional commissions,
Recognizing the important contribution the senior
women's programme officers can make to the integration
ofwomen in development at the national and regional levels,
1. Takes due note of the report of the Secretary-General on measures taken by the regional commissions to
incorporate women's concems at all levels in their overall
work programmes and to establish senior wom,,,.n'.-. prn
gramme officers posts; 100
2. Expresses deep concern at the inadequate response
of the regional commissions to the need to incorporate the
interests of women in their economic and social policies
and programmes;
3. Stresses that the integration of women in economic
development as well as in social development is essential
to the well-being of society;
99 A/401727 and Corr 1

100 A/40/838
