S/PV.7846

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7846th meeting

Monday, 19 December 2016, 4.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Martins
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-44831 (E)
*1644831*

S/PV.7846

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.

19/12/2016

Opposition. Moreover, there are clear indications that
Riek Machar and other opposition groups are pursuing
a military escalation.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.

It is time to put the people of South Sudan, and
not its leaders, at the forefront of any strategy. The
international community must come together to provide
the necessary help and incentives. At the same time, we
should be united and determined in following through
with severe consequences for those who impede the
path to peace and stability.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and give him
the floor.

In that spirit, I reiterate my call for an arms embargo
on South Sudan. Such an embargo would diminish the
capacity of all sides to wage war. South Sudan faces no
external threat. More weapons will only pose a greater
threat to its own people. We have repeatedly seen the
deliberate targeting of civilian communities perceived
to support an opposing side. As efforts to revive the
political process continue, the least we can do is to stop
the flow of more weapons, which pose a direct threat
to the safety and security of civilians and humanitarian
workers. Instability in South Sudan is also a threat to
the region. I call on all the neighbouring countries to
support and cooperate on an arms embargo.

The Secretary-General: Before proceeding, I
would like to offer my deepest condolences to the
Russian delegation following the assassination of their
colleague, Ambassador Andrey Karlov in Ankara,
earlier today. I condemn that senseless act of terror, for
which there can be no justification.

The most urgent need is to prevent the parties from
launching any military operation at the beginning of
the dry season. I urge the Security Council, regional
leaders and the international community to make it clear
to President Kiir and Riek Machar that the initiation of
a military offensive will carry serious consequences.

We are here to address one of the world’s most
urgent crises — the deteriorating situation South Sudan.
Not long ago, the people of South Sudan were riding a
wave of optimism. Africa’s longest civil war had ended.
The world’s youngest nation was born. Yet today, all of
that hope and promise has disappeared. South Sudan is
engulfed in yet another civil war. Tens of thousands of
civilians have been killed. The country’s economy is in
ruins. The social fabric is in tatters. Millions of people
are homeless and displaced. Hunger and poverty have
only deepened.

The parties must reinvigorate an inclusive political
process that is deemed credible by the people of South
Sudan and the international community. Any attempt
to rubber-stamp the legitimacy of those in power will
not bring peace or stability. An inclusive and credible
process requires all parties to the conflict to have a
seat at the negotiating table with the ability to share
and exercise power without fear of reprisals. A national
dialogue could be a positive step if all stakeholders are
able to participate in freedom and safety. Unfortunately,
that environment does not currently exist in South
Sudan.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

The responsibility for that tragic state of affairs
lies squarely on the shoulders of South Sudan’s leaders.
They have betrayed the public trust and continue to
show a perverse sense of entitlement, seeking to retain
power and wealth at all costs. Reports suggest that
President Salva Kiir and his loyalists are contemplating
a new military offensive in the coming days against
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in
2/12

I call on regional leaders to invest all possible
efforts into resuscitating the political process in South
Sudan. I commend the work of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union, and
call upon the Security Council to complement those
efforts. I strongly believe that an arms embargo is the
most appropriate way to do so. Such a step, I should
16-44831

19/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

emphasize, would strengthen and not undermine the
political process.
The conflict in South Sudan has already assumed
an ethnic dimension. We have witnessed hate speech
from many internationaln leadership positions. As
my Special Adviser for the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng, said to the Council after his recent
visit to South Sudan (see S/PV.7814), genocide is not
one event; it is a process. I am afraid that process is
about to begin unless immediate action is taken. The
Security Council must take steps to stem the flow of
arms to South Sudan, as well as to send a clear warning
that hate speech, incitement and violence must end and
that there will be accountability for mass atrocities and
other crimes.
As the Council is aware, after two independent
investigations, I have had to take some difficult decisions
regarding the performance of our troops in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). Moreover,
UNMISS continues to face serious restrictions on
its freedom of movement throughout the country, in
clear violation of the status-of-forces agreement. The
Secretariat has been providing the Security Council
with a list of those violations on a monthly basis.
Unfortunately, those reports have not resulted in any
action on the part of the Council to restore the freedom
of movement without which the Mission will be unable
to fully implement its mandate.
But an improvement of the Mission’s performance
is only one part of the picture. The Government of South
Sudan should also fulfil its pledges of unconditional
acceptance of the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force. Words alone are insufficient. They
must be matched by practical actions that demonstrate
a strategic shift to full cooperation with the United
Nations and all partners for peace.
I spoke with President Kenyatta of Kenya on
Saturday to exchange views on the South Sudan peace
process. I emphasized that the Regional Protection
Force represented the collective commitment of the
region to peace, security and stability. I would like to
commend Kenya for its unwavering commitment to
peace in South Sudan and for working closely with the
United Nations to meet that goal.
The people of South Sudan have suffered for far
too long and far too much. We must put all pressure on
leaders who think or act otherwise. If we fail to act, South
Sudan will be on a trajectory towards mass atrocities.

S/PV.7846

Its people will be the targets of those atrocities while
they pin their hopes on the international community in
general and the Security Council. I appeal to the Security
Council to act now in fulfilment of its responsibility
and in support of ongoing regional efforts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I wish to add my condolences for the
tragic loss of Ambassador Andrey Karlov today.
I fully align with the Secretary-General’s request
of the Council and of the Government of South Sudan.
I thank you, Mr. President, for this timely
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan. In my briefing
to the Council on 22 June, and in the written submission
issued jointly with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights in August, I highlighted the
spread of violence to new areas and its humanitarian
consequences. Six months later, the humanitarian
situation has deteriorated dramatically. This will not
come as any surprise to anyone in the Council, since
they have heard and have been following the reports, as
I have, month upon deteriorating month. Violence and
attacks against civilians have continued. Hundreds of
thousands of people have been driven from their homes
and hunger has deepened. There are numerous accounts
of horrific gender-based and sexual violence, with most
perpetrators walking free.
Last week, the conflict in South Sudan entered
its fourth year. Since December 2013, civilians have
borne the brunt and faced increasingly appalling
humanitarian conditions. We are now witnessing a
scale of need for assistance and protection that demands
our urgent, relentless attention and action. This year,
some 6.1 million people — half the population of that
young nation — required humanitarian assistance. The
humanitarian community expects that number to rise
by a staggering further 20 to 30 per cent in 2017, due
to the destructive violence on the ground and forced
displacement compounded by food insecurity, economic
decline, destitution and a breakdown of basic services.
Approximately 3.1 million South Sudanese have
been forced to flee their homes — 1.3 million of them
across borders as refugees and more than 1.8 million
internally. Many South Sudanese have been displaced
multiple times, failing to find the safety and security

16-448313/12

S/PV.7846

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

they so desperately need. Since July alone, more than
383,000 people have gone to Uganda while the others
have moved to Ethiopia, the Sudan, the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
People flee with almost nothing — just the clothes
on their backs and whatever few belongings they are
able to carry. Their journeys are mostly perilous, due
to insecurity, leg-sapping marshland to slog slowly
through, or desiccated, inescapable heat, and always
with a lack of food, water and shelter. I have received
more and more harrowing reports of families being
separated with little to no provisions. The sick, disabled
and elderly are simply, terrifyingly, being left behind to
an inhumane and unknown or sadly at times a too wellknown fate and of attacks, including killing, rape and
the abduction of young men.
For children, as ever the future of that young
country, the cost of protracted conflict continues to be
particularly brutal. Children make up around half of all
those who are displaced, and more than 9,000 children
are registered as being unaccompanied, separated or
missing. More than 17,000 children are believed to
have been recruited by armed actors since the conflict
began. Fewer than half of primary school-aged children
are currently enrolled in schools. One in four schools
is closed, primarily due to insecurity, and learning
in general has been disrupted by the displacement of
teachers and schoolchildren alike. There has been one
lost generation and now another, and much capacity to
rebuild South Sudan one day, somewhere ahead, has
also been lost.
Hunger and malnutrition levels are disconcertingly
high and encompass communities in places that were
considered to be relatively food secure less than a
year ago. More than 1 million children under the age
of five are now estimated to be acutely malnourished.
Recent screenings in Torit, Lafon and Ikotos in Eastern
Equatoria have found proxy global acute malnutrition
rates above the emergency threshold. At the height
of the lean season in 2016, approximately 4.8 million
people — more than one in every three people in
South Sudan — were estimated to be severely food
insecure. That number will increase in 2017 because
of the ongoing conflict, economic decline and poor
agricultural yields.
Basic services are severely stretched and in many
areas only partially functioning, if at all. Fewer than
half of the country’s medical facilities are operational,
and even when operational they have the capacity to
4/12

19/12/2016

provide only minimal services, given chronic lack of
essential medicines. Since December 2013, 106 health
facilities have closed, while at least 29 have been
looted or destroyed. As a result, the sick or wounded,
including survivors of rape, often have nowhere to go
to get treatment.
Women and girls continue to face heightened risks
of sexual violence, particularly by armed actors, with
rape used as a weapon of war. In Wau in February and
June, and in Juba in July, hundreds of women reported
rapes and gang rapes. Other reports have come in from
Bentiu, Leer, Malakal, Yambio and other locations
across the Equatorias, including of abductions and
rapes. Those reported attacks often occur at armed
checkpoints. There have also been multiple reports
of sexual violence perpetrated against women and
girls who leave protection-of-civilians sites to gather
firewood and food. With reference to the prevalence of
gang rape, the Commission on Human Rights in South
Sudan said last week that it is “running out of words to
describe the horror”.
At the very moment when needs are growing and
deepening, the ability of humanitarian partners to
provide life-saving assistance timely and effectively
is diminishing at an alarming pace. National and
international organizations continue to work tirelessly
to provide assistance in one of the most dangerous and
challenging operating environments in the world today.
I want to express my deep respect and admiration for
their commitment and courage. But everyone needs to
know that it comes at a high cost. So far, at least 67
humanitarian workers have paid with their lives — 12
of them since July. The humanitarian community is also
being targeted in other ways. During the horrific attack
on the Terrain Hotel in July, humanitarian workers were
sexually assaulted, raped and murdered. Over the past
months, reports of harassment have become numerous
and routine.
Beyond the ongoing insecurity, aid organizations
are now facing increasing levels of bureaucratic
obstruction and intimidation, mainly by the Government
of South Sudan, but also by parts of the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition. In the past
four weeks alone, there have been four serious incidents
in which South Sudanese authorities have arrested,
detained or deported senior staff of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). No formal charges have been
presented in any of those cases. In another case, one
of the largest South Sudanese NGOs had their office
16-44831

19/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in Juba shut down by authorities, again without
documented cause. Despite démarches from the United
Nations, there have been no explanations.
That is simply unacceptable, and those incidents
must stop. To be clear — our NGO partners deliver
around 70 per cent of all humanitarian assistance in
South Sudan. Their presence and programming are
fundamental to the continued life-saving response.
Without national and international NGOs on the
ground, food cannot be delivered to scale; emergency
medical relief cannot be provided to all those who
require it; malnutrition cannot be adequately treated;
and life-saving access to clean water to prevent the
spread of diseases such as cholera will be hampered.
Despite those immense challenges, humanitarians
have delivered life-saving aid to approximately
4.7 million people this year, including nearly
3.6 million, who were reached with food assistance
or emergency livelihoods support; more than 195,000
severely malnourished children, who were admitted
for treatment; more than 2 million who were provided
access to clean water; more than 1 million, who were
reached with emergency shelter and vital non-food
items; and nearly 200,000 children, who were
administered with the pentavalent vaccine against five
major diseases. More than 18,000 survival kits — an
inter-agency lightweight package of supplies designed
to be easily carried by people on the run — have been
dispatched to some of the most remote locations. That
assistance has been delivered based on assessed needs,
targeting people in the most severe need in all areas of
the country.
Against the backdrop of a humanitarian situation
that is a relentless descent into this catastrophic abyss
of hopelessness, fear, intimidation, irreversible damage,
destruction, stunting and death, an increasing number of
South Sudanese are looking to humanitarian actors for
assistance. Yet access to those most in need continues to
be restricted in some areas of the country. Last month,
100 reports of humanitarian access incidents were
documented — the highest number in any month since
June 2015. I am appalled to highlight that approximately
67 per cent of those incidents involved violence against
humanitarian workers or assets.
Where towns are controlled by one party to the
conflict and surrounded by another, we continue to
face major challenges to reaching people in need owing
to the active conflict and access denials, particularly

S/PV.7846

in Yei, Central Equatoria, in which we estimate that
tens of thousands of people who have been unable to
make the long and costly journey to Uganda remain
displaced in areas surrounding the town and unable to
access assistance and in Wau, Western Bahr el Ghazal,
in which tens of thousands of people outside the town
have been largely cut off from aid for months. The
recent proliferation of armed actors has increased the
complexity of access negotiations and heightened risks
to aid workers.
As I have stated before, including in Juba, Wau and
Aweil, during my visit in August, steps and action must
be taken once and for all to remove those obstacles,
which are unacceptable and run contrary to the parties’
obligations under international humanitarian law. It is
critical that all humanitarian organizations are granted
free, safe and unhindered access to all people in need
wherever they are. While we welcome steps taken by
the Government to address some of those challenges,
including the establishment of the Humanitarian
High Level Oversight Committee, it is vital that
commitments be translated immediately into concrete
and effective action.
South Sudan is on the brink. Decisive action to end
the violence is needed, and it is incumbent upon the
Council to make sure that the necessary action is taken.
My message today is therefore three-fold.
First, if a political solution is not urgently found
to stop the violence, the humanitarian crisis in South
Sudan will not only grow but will cascade way beyond
anyone’s control, not least, that of the Council. There
must be a cessation of violence. There is no alternative.
Secondly, collective leverage must be exerted to
ensure the facilitation of unhindered access to all those
who require assistance in all areas of the country. As
part and parcel of that, there must be real commitment
to protect humanitarian workers. Meanwhile, those who
killed, attacked and raped humanitarian workers must
be prosecuted and held to account just as the impunity
of those who attack civilians must come to an end.
Finally, I draw the Council’s attention, as did the
Secretary-General just a moment ago so powerfully,
to the recent call made by his Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide on the imminent risk of violence
escalating along ethnic lines with the clear potential for
genocide. There is no greater urgency than to prevent
that from happening. Millions of women, men, girls and
boys are already suffering. It is imperative that all do

16-448315/12

S/PV.7846

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

what is in their power to stop the current trajectory and
collectively help South Sudan and, above all, the South
Sudanese people avert a cataclysmic infernal event and
find a path to get back on a track to peace and security
for all its citizens.
I was going to stop there, but allow me as the
Council’s humanitarian adviser to add one more point.
I say this with the representative of South Sudan
present here today. The international community and
the Council itself have repeatedly said, “Never again”
—after Srebrenica and Rwanda. Given the clear facts
and evidence in South Sudan presented this evening,
how many more clues do we all need to move from
our anxious words to real, preventative action? How
many lives, women, men and children can we all save
if we and those with influence over the parties act
decisively today?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for showing his deep
dedication to the people of South Sudan by being here
today and injecting his passion and compassion for the
people of a country that he has visited many times.
I want to begin my remarks by apologizing to
the Secretary-General, because I do not know how
long he has been asking for an arms embargo and
targeted sanctions. It is not every day that he comes
to the Security Council and is very specific about
his prescriptions. Yet, in the case of South Sudan, he
has asked, and we have not delivered. I think that is
something upon which we need to reflect in light of
the graphic nature of the briefings that we have heard
and the first-hand eyewitness testimonies that we have
read, by which we have been horrified. South Sudan
used to be an issue on which the Council was pretty
unified. We should try to retrieve that unity in light of
the Secretary-General’s warning, which will go down
as one of his last warnings to this Council. If we fail to
act, South Sudan will be on a trajectory towards mass
atrocities. The Secretary-General has said it. We have
to admit that, as a Security Council — each and every
one of us.
I would just add an account of one family that has
been affected by the conflict, the matriarch of which
6/12

19/12/2016

is 28 year-old, Irene, a mother from Yei River state.
She and her children barely escaped death on two
occasions. The first time, she was reportedly at home
when armed men came to her door and called out her
husband’s name. Irene’s husband had just managed to
push her and the kids under their bed before the soldiers
kicked down the door and shot him in the head. Irene
fled for the Ugandan border but ran into another group
of armed men. As she relayed to a journalist, two
women were trapped and raped by the men. The men
took two infants and used them as if they were sticks
to beat the women. The children survived but they were
damaged inside.
That account is so graphic and so terrible and yet,
the number of accounts from the region that have that
kind of gory, savage detail is too large to count. Babies
used as clubs to beat their own mothers, rape, the
execution of a woman’s husband — that is what Irene
witnessed before getting to Uganda and the relative
safety of a refugee camp. That is just one story over the
past week — just this week. For Council members who
were saying that things are getting better, they should
know that an average of 5,189 refugees like Irene stream
into Uganda every day. That is this week. That is not
back in July or back when the conflict started in 2013.
The situation is not getting better, but worse.
Meanwhile, we are sitting on our hands as a
Council. We have to try to stop atrocities in South
Sudan, and the question is not whether we should do
that, but rather how quickly we can do that. We have to
adopt an arms embargo, targeted sanctions — the tools
in the toolbox that we have. If people have better ideas,
then we are open to better ideas, but more of the same is
not working. Violence is tearing South Sudan apart, and
the Government undermines virtually all international
efforts to help. I say that much more in sorrow than in
anger, given how closely the United States has worked
with that Government and how closely the United
States has wanted to work with that Government, even
throughout this crisis.
Three million people have been displaced inside
and outside South Sudan and more than half of the
country faces food insecurity. The United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad
Al Hussein, has reported that violations of human
rights are so widespread that they have become almost
commonplace. As we have heard from all the visitors
who go to various parts of South Sudan, violations
includes the systematic use of sexual violence as a
16-44831

19/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

weapon of war. What does that actually mean to the
people in the country? In the town of Yei, blockaded
civilians cannot venture out of the city into their fields,
so the crops that would feed them rot away. That is
what is happening right now. In the Equatorias, which
in one stage of the conflict had not seen violence, the
threat of violence is now so extreme that the only way
to flee the city is by crawling through the bush, because
soldiers and armed groups who rape and murder control
the roads. In Unity state, one rape victim told the
Commission on human rights in South Sudan, “there is
no stigma around rape because for us it is normal. It is
happening every day to us.”
Those Council members who were on the trip to
South Sudan heard those testimonies at first hand. That
should not surprise us. Consider the Government’s
unfortunate response: continued obstruction of
assistance and defiance of the demands of the Council.
As we have heard, in recent weeks, the Government
deported four highly experienced aid workers with no
apparent justification, including the country directors
for two very large non-governmental organizations.
We also have to talk about the opposition. The Sudan
People’s Liberation Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO)
is making it even harder for humanitarian agencies to
operate in the areas that they control. Non-governmental
organizations now need to petition the SPLA-IO for
accreditation, which requires a fee. Then they have to
give at least 48 hours notice of any humanitarian flight
before arrival. That is now common practice across
the country. It makes it impossible to deliver food to
people who need it. Again, for those who think that
the situation is getting better or is static, I have bad
news. The United Nations recorded more obstructions
to humanitarian assistance last month than during any
other month since June 2015. We see more obstructions
to humanitarian assistance and yet, we sit here doing
more of the same and expect a different result, which is
the definition of insanity.
South Sudan is making it harder for people to
get aid, even as the Council has done the right thing
in demanding unfettered access. The Government is
obstructing and defying. In August, we tried to mitigate
the violence by authorizing the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) Regional Protection Force
(RPF). I express thanks to all Council members who
supported the Force. Since then, the Government has
talked a lot about allowing the RPF to deploy, and they
have expressed some type of consent to the RPF in

S/PV.7846

statements and letters at least six times — we only know
about six times. How often have they consented? They
consented on 4 September, 20 September, 15 October,
16 October, 16 November and 30 November. However,
none of those letters of consent or words of consent has
translated into consent on the ground and deployment,
which is the measure of whether our will as a Council is
being respected. Again, we are witnessing obstruction
and defiance.
The South Sudan Government has also offered
assurance that UNMISS can patrol without interference.
That is part of what the Council has rightly asked for.
However, in reality, we know that is not happening.
In recent weeks, South Sudan’s authorities have again
imposed restrictions on UNMISS patrols around
the Equatorias, as well as in areas outside Wau and
in the region of Bahr el Ghazal — two places where
we know that people are in need of protection. Yet,
we see more obstruction and more defiance of the
Council’s resolutions.
The problem right now for us in taking this waitand-see posture is that South Sudan, as the SecretaryGeneral put it in his extraordinary briefing, may
be running out of time. Even if we could deploy the
entire RPF tomorrow and even if UNMISS faced no
obstruction of any kind, those peacekeepers would
face immense challenges in stopping the escalating,
ethnically based violence that we are witnessing on the
ground. The Council needs to do much more to respond
to the growing risk of mass atrocities. The warnings are
everywhere. We have all heard them. The Commission
on human rights in South Sudan has said that South
Sudan is on the brink of an all-out ethnic civil war.
The Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for the
Prevention of Genocide, Ms. Adama Dieng, who is
sitting right here with the rest of us, has warned of a
“strong risk of violence escalating along ethnic lines
with the potential for genocide”.
Nobody here can say that things have gotten better
since Adama Dieng briefed us. We have just heard from
the Secretary-General and Mr. Stephen O’Brien that
things have gotten worse. The people within the United
Nations system whose job it is to sound the alarm have
sounded it. History is going to show what each of us
did and where each of us stood when the sirens were
blaring and when the red lights were flashing in South
Sudan. Now is when each of us has to be counted.
Where were we when the lights flashed red for the
people of South Sudan?

16-448317/12

S/PV.7846

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In some parts of South Sudan, ethnic killings are
already underway. Every day, we hear vows to take
revenge on the airwaves, as the number of killings
increases and as the cycle of violence escalates. In
Central Equatoria, at least 1,900 structures — houses,
businesses, schools — have been destroyed since the
fighting began two months ago. The Government has
mobilized at least 4,000 militia from other areas and
staged them in Equatoria. We know that large-scale
attacks could start at any moment.
Let me wrap up with a closing argument on this
incredibly important issue. Some on this Council argue
that it is not the right time to impose an arms embargo
and targeted sanctions. Some point to the public
statements and nice words from Government officials
that say that we need to give the Government yet
another chance. Another chance? We have seen citizens
in South Sudan go hungry as money gets invested in
large weapons systems. We have seen the deployment
of peacekeepers stalled. It is late December. We were
there in early September. Not one soldier of the RPF
has been deployed — not one soldier.
Of course, we join others in hoping that our dear
friends in South Sudan, with whom we have worked
so closely and for whom we worked to secure their
independence, will follow through on their recent
promises, just as we had hoped that they would follow
through on previous promises. However, to use those
promises as an excuse to delay action, when we hear
from the Secretary-General so powerfully about what
is happening on the ground, when he has been banging
his head against this table for so long, for more than a
year, asking for such measures to try to mitigate the
violence, we have no more alibis.
Some Council members have been pretty direct
about expressing concerns about the risks that imposing
those measures would pose to their peacekeepers or to
their workers who are on the ground in South Sudan.
Every Government has a responsibility to look out for
their citizens, and I very much appreciate that concern,
as we also, of course, have many aid workers and
embassy personnel who are there in South Sudan.
But can we really believe — those of us who care
about our people — can we really believe that more
arms coming into the country is the way to look out
for their safety? Can we really believe that allowing the
Government of South Sudan to continue to invest its
money in such weapons systems, instead of in the food
8/12

19/12/2016

that people need to eat, is the best way to look out for our
people? The people that we are hoping to designate are
people whose public statements no one disputes — they
are on the record, advertising their statements aimed
at ethnicizing the conflict and spoiling whatever
hope there is to get back to a peace agreement. Those
individuals feel a sense of impunity. If the Council is
unprepared to act on such designations, can that sense
of impunity be good for our people on the ground, our
workers, our peacekeepers and our aid workers? It can
not be. How is impunity good? How are more arms
good for the safety of our people?
However, well beyond that, what about the South
Sudanese people? Do they get a vote? How would they
vote on such measures? We heard them when we met
with a wide range of civil society and other actors. We
know how they would vote, and we need to keep their
votes in mind. We need to bring this draft resolution at
last to a vote, which we will do by the end of this year.
Members of the Council will need to raise their hands
and make a decision on where they stand on the issues
of life and death that have been raised by the SecretaryGeneral and by everyone who goes to South Sudan
and comes back. Above all, the people of South Sudan
have a stake in our action. Council members — each
of us — will need to own our decisions, so the United
States urges members to prepare to vote your conscience
and to vote to stand with the people of South Sudan.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, allow me to thank Secretary-General
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, for
their briefings.
Uruguay expresses its deep concern about the
current situation affecting South Sudan. The worsening
violence, in particular since July, has had devastating
consequences for civilians. There have been widespread
violations of human rights law and humanitarian law,
including extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances,
rapes and other acts of sexual violence, arbitrary arrests
and imprisonment, attacks against civilians and attacks
against medical facilities, humanitarian assistance
workers, medical personnel and media workers. Some
human rights violations are increasingly taking on an
ethnic nature, and hate speech is increasing throughout
the whole country, which is extremely alarming, given
the fact that it could lead to large-scale atrocities.
Furthermore, the humanitarian crisis in the country is
increasing in scope and intensity as a result of the armed
16-44831

19/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

conflict in several parts of the country, the exacerbation
of the food-security situation and the worsening of the
economic situation.
The United Nations figures are disturbing: more
than 1 million refugees, more than 1.6 million internally
displaced persons and almost 5 million people who are
in a state of acute food insecurity. After the Security
Council mission to the country last September, we
returned very aware of what has happened there.
Uruguay calls upon all the parties involved in the
conflict and on the entire international community
to bring an end to the suffering of civilians in South
Sudan. The situation is unsustainable.
In that connection, we must continuously remind
the Government that its main responsibility is that of
protecting its own citizens and that it should provide that
protection regardless of their ethnic origin or political
affiliation. Also, the political leaders of South Sudan
must behave responsibly and reject any incitement to
violence, while opting for the path of dialogue. In the
final analysis, they must honour their leadership.
On this point, we take note of the statement delivered
by the President of South Sudan, Mr. Salva Kiir, on
14 December, when he announced the beginning of a
national dialogue process. We hope that that process
will truly be inclusive in nature. We urge all the
parties to join in a dialogue process, with a view to
achieving reconciliation and peace in the country, just
as happened five years ago, when South Sudan became
an independent country. Today we must seek unity and
pluralism, which is the only way to put the country on
the path towards stability and development.
Lastly, I would like to mention the work of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
whose mandate was renewed unanimously a few days
ago by the Council. It is crucial for UNMISS to be
able to fulfil its mandate fully. We therefore urge the
Government of South Sudan to fully cooperate with
the implementation of resolution 2327 (2016), including
the deployment of the Regional Protection Force, as
well as lifting any restriction on the Mission. Neither
UNMISS nor the Regional Protection Force are against
the Sudan. To the contrary, they are for South Sudan.
In conclusion, I would like to wish every success
to the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of UNMISS, Mr. David Shearer, and
assure him of my delegation’s support and cooperation.

S/PV.7846

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to start by conveying our
gratitude to the Secretary-General and Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, as well as to all our colleagues, who during
the previous meeting took the floor and extended
kind words of condolence to us following the killing
of Ambassador Karlov in Ankara. Their words of
condolence and support are extremely important for us.
I now to turn to South Sudan. We note the progress
in implementing the South Sudanese peace agreement
of last year. The Transitional Government of National
Unity and the Parliament are working effectively with
representatives of the armed opposition. Practical
steps are being taken to strengthen mechanisms aimed
at providing security and to draft a new constitution.
President Salva Kiir launched an inclusive national
dialogue. Amnesty has been declared for the partisans
of Riek Machar who participated in the July events in
Juba.
We are concerned by reports of armed clashes
in various parts of the country. However, one has to
understand clearly what their exact nature is. We share
the view of the United Nations and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) that, to a large
extent, those incidents have been the result of problems
in the command structures and a lack of discipline in
units of the Government’s armed forces and those of the
opposition. Another factor is the split in the opposition
forces of the partisans of Taban Deng Gai and Riek
Machar. There are also groups that are under no one’s
control. On top of all that there have been spontaneous
clashes that are the result of interethnic tensions or
even simply criminal actions.
Against that backdrop, we have doubts with regard
to the widely circulating rumours that the Government
is amassing its forces and mobilizing local armed
elements in the Equatoria region for a large-scale
offensive that is about to start after the end of the rainy
season.
I would like to take the opportunity of the presence
of representatives of the Secretariat to ask whether they
can comment on the fact that the Juba Government has
said that what is involved are normal rotations of the
armed forces? We would also call upon our colleagues
from the Council and the Secretariat to refrain from
speculation about the threat of genocide in South
Sudan. Naturally, we are concerned by the proliferation
of venomous rhetoric in South Sudan, as well as actions

16-448319/12

S/PV.7846

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

against various ethnic groups; however, those actions
are not targeted against any particular community,
rather there has been an increase in ethnic tensions in
general.
We also note that those manifestations and actions
have emanated, as a rule, from various types of armed
and criminal groups and undisciplined elements of
the security apparatus. This is why we would refrain
from concluding that there is any form of targeted or
systemic policy.
Among the positive events of late, we have Juba’s
unconditional agreement to and acceptance of the
Regional Protection Force. That step was welcomed by
the Secretary-General, as well as by the IGAD summit in
Addis Ababa. Practical issues regarding the deployment
of the Force are being discussed by representatives of the
Government and the United Nations in a constructive
manner, which was demonstrated, inter alia, by Juba’s
consent to the request of the United Nations for the
provision of plots of land for the use of the Force.
However, even the deployment of a fullfledged 4,000-strong Regional Force is unlikely to
significantly improve the difficult political, military
and humanitarian situation in the country. We agree
with the view of the Secretary-General and IGAD that
that would require the full implementation of the peace
agreement by the parties, with international partners’
support.
Our position regarding new sanctions against South
Sudan is well known and is shared by many members
of the Council. In the IGAD summit communiqué dated
9 December it was clearly stated that new targeted
sanctions or an arms embargo would not serve to
establish lasting peace and stability in South Sudan.
Furthermore, the African Union’s Peace and Security
Council’s summit communiqué dated 19 September
includes no calls for new sanctions.

19/12/2016

any such restrictions. We see that in the example of a
number of African States, including the Central African
Republic, where targeted sanctions and the arms
embargo are simply not working. South Sudan is awash
with arms. That is evident from the fact that the group
of a few hundred supporters of Riek Machar who fled
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo had very few
weapons with them, so quite obviously they dumped or
hid them somewhere in South Sudanese territory.
The former Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ellen Løj, also confirmed the presence of
weapons in camps for the protection of civilians as well
as in arms caches in the immediate vicinity. That, by
the way, might have been what motivated the decision
by the authorities to shut down the displaced-persons
camp in Juba.
Generally speaking, in order to establish lasting
peace in South Sudan, we do not need a Security Council
arms embargo but rather targeted measures aimed at
disarming the population as well as at demobilizing and
reintegrating combatants. Targeted sanctions against
the Minister of Information and the Chief of General
Staff of the Government Army may have unpredictable
consequences. We suspect that someone really wants
to get rid of President Salva Kiir by ensuring that he
gets into a fight with various influential figures in his
immediate surroundings.
Instead of helping to resolve the conflict, a number
of Security Council members are attempting to increase
pressure on Juba, including through targeted sanctions
and the hybrid court. Such short-sighted tactics will not
help the situation.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to start by saying that France also aligns itself
with the words of condolence conveyed to the Russian
Federation in the light of the criminal attack that struck
its Ambassador in Turkey.

Put succinctly, the sponsors of the draft resolution
on sanctions are essentially ignoring Africa’s position
regarding the counterproductive nature of new
restrictions on the process aimed at trying to reach a
settlement. Those colleagues are clearly demonstrating
in their statements that they only accept those African
documents that are in line with their interests and
approaches.

I had not intended to take the floor here today in
the Chamber, as I really only wanted to speak in the
consultations, but it is not every day that the SecretaryGeneral sends us such a powerful public message. The
Secretary-General, as well as, of course, the UnderSecretary-General, delivered strong messages warning
us that we have to assume our collective responsibility.
It is a call for action.

The sponsors of the draft resolution on sanctions
are ignoring the fact that differences among African
States will probably undermine the effectiveness of

For us, the serious nature of the situation in South
Sudan requires collective mobilization not only by the
Security Council but also by the whole of the United

10/12

16-44831

19/12/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Nations system and by the region itself, starting with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
along with the African Union. First and foremost,
however, resolute action by the Government of South
Sudan is essential. For us, collectively speaking, there
are five or six axes on which we need to act rapidly.
The first — stated quite clearly by the SecretaryGeneral — is the arms embargo. We regret the fact that
for almost a year we have been discussing the embargo;
the Secretary-General has advocated for it, and we have
called for it. We regret that the arms embargo has not
yet been imposed. Let me make it clear that for us the
arms embargo is not a punitive measure or a lever to
obtain some sort of political advantage. It is a measure
of common sense that is intended to help a country
ravaged by war and awash in weapons. The flow of
weapons needs to be halted, and an end needs to be put
to the arms trade circulating in that war-torn country. It
is necessary, therefore, that the arms embargo be put in
place as soon as possible.
The second element is a political process.
We know, of course, the roles that the region, the
subregion, IGAD and the African Union have played
in undertaking rather encouraging developments in
terms of national dialogue. What we would like to see
are those encouraging developments actually being
converted into actions. What is certain in any case is
that, in the face of the obstacles created by some parties
and the hate speech, which might hinder or undermine
the peace process, the Security Council will have
a role to play. We do have an instrument — targeted
sanctions — that will enable us to intervene in support
of a peace process, which we all desire.
The third element is the central question of the
protection of civilians. That is, after all, at the very heart
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). We decided last August to deploy
the Regional Protection Force to bolster UNMISS
capabilities. Since then, the Transitional Government
of South Sudan has given its formal consent to that
deployment, but unfortunately things have not moved
forward, and now it is high time for plots of land to be
provided so that we are able to deploy the Force. That
is, of course, a test of the good faith and will of South
Sudan, namely, to enable the deployment of the Force,
and it is very important that Juba demonstrate that.
The fourth element is linked to my previous point.
The implementation of the UNMISS mandate will
require the unfettered ability to move and act. All

S/PV.7846

obstacles that might hinder the deployment of the Force
must be lifted. That is a core element of the message
sent by Security Council members during their visit to
South Sudan in September. Obstacles to the status of
forces agreement must be lifted, and targeted sanctions
by the Security Council will ensure that that takes
place. In the case of confirmed obstacles, we could use
sanctions to ensure that the peacekeeping operation
that we have deployed is able to operate fully.
The fifth point I wanted to make is related to
humanitarian issues. After I heard the point made by
the Under-Secretary-General regarding the difficulties
and obstacles that we face and the unacceptable
price being paid by humanitarian workers, it is quite
clear that it is absolutely essential to ensure that full
access and cooperation be granted to the whole of the
humanitarian community, at a time when the situation
is quite disastrous.
My last point concerns the question of accountability
and impunity. The transitional agreement adopted
earlier this year provided for a hybrid court, the
establishment of which is absolutely essential. South
Sudan requires a judicial mechanism commensurate
with the grave crimes being committed. The African
Union will have an important role to play. It will enjoy
the support of the Security Council in that regard, but
there must be progress towards the establishment of the
hybrid court.
All of these messages are contained in resolution
2327 (2016), adopted a few days ago, but the Security
Council will have to make them more concrete and
operational, first by voting in favour of the draft
resolution on an arms embargo, and secondly by
remaining mobilized and prepared to use leverage,
starting with targeted sanctions, to curb a spiral of
violence that could well lead to the disastrous situation
described by Mr. Adama Dieng a few days ago.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malok (South Sudan): First, let me express my
deepest condolences to the delegation of the Russian
Federation for its loss.
I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency for this month. I would also like to
acknowledge the successful tenure of your predecessor
and the positive role he played in leading the Council
last month.

16-4483111/12

S/PV.7846

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Let me also thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for their kind briefings.
The Government of South Sudan has demonstrated
political will by expressing its commitment to fully
implementing the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. There is
not much more to be said other than to reiterate some
important points.
Recently the Government of South Sudan agreed and
accepted the deployment of Regional Protection Force
(RPF) without conditions. If there is any failure or delay
in the deployment of the Regional Protection Force, it
is not on the part of South Sudan. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has not informed us of any
failure on the part of the Government of South Sudan.
We have allocated land for the RPF, concerning which
we have communited officially to the Security Council
through the monthly presidency.
The Government has also formed a committee
that will look into the obstruction and the complaints
lodged by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) about any possible roadblock. From the
time the committee was established, there has been no
further report presented for us to look into.
Recently, the President of South Sudan, His
Excellency Mr. Salva Kiir Mayardit, announced a
national dialogue that will include all the stakeholders
in the country. The dialogue is the only viable means
of solving the political and socioeconomic problems
in South Sudan. Unfortunately, it was rejected by Riek
Machar.
We disagree with the characterization by Mr. Adama
Dieng, the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for
the Prevention of Genocide, of the ongoing conflict in
South Sudan, which according to him could become an
outright ethnic war, perhaps verging on genocide. Such
description is a bit exaggerated and does not reflect
the reality on the ground. There have been no attempts
that we are aware of on the part of the South Sudanese
masses to turn against each other. Recently, the rebels
have resorted to killing innocent civilians because of
their ethnic background, but the Government has not
planned or launched a campaign to target specific
ethnicities or communities and has no intention
whatsoever to engage in anything of that nature.
12/12

19/12/2016

We recognize the importance accorded to the
protection of civilians and the safeguarding of the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, but it is our
sincere hope that UNMISS will also pay due attention
to capacity-building of Government institutions,
which have crucial roles to play during the transitional
period. It should assist the activities of the South Sudan
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission, the National Constitutional Amendment
Committee and the National Elections Commission, and
provide technical expertise on security sector reform.
In other words, UNMISS should attach importance to
supporting the implementation of the agreement.
Some members have spoken of a lack of progress,
but I can report that there has been tremendous progress
made in the implementation of the peace process in
South Sudan. Council members did not mention that
people have been voluntarily leaving the protection
of civilians camps for their respective home regions.
Over the past two days, over 2,000 citizens have left
the protection of civilians camp in Juba to return to
Unity state, and the Government is assisting them by
providing transportation. If there had been progress,
they would not have risked their lives to go back to
their homes.
The proposed arms embargo and threats of
sanctions on all the parties engaged in the conflict in
South Sudan are unfortunately another indication of a
moral equivalency that does not distinguish between
a legitimately elected Government and an armed
rebellion intent on overthrowing the Government. To
deny the Government the necessary means to discharge
its responsibility is to fundamentally undermine
its sovereignty, which is totally unacceptable. The
imposition of sanctions would be counter-productive.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate my
Government’s commitment to implementing the
agreement in letter and spirit, and emphasize the need
to encourage and support political dialogue and the
efforts of the Government of National Unity to fully
implement the peace agreement. The road to final
peace may be long and difficult, but with the support of
our partners we are optimistic that we will shall see the
light at the end of the tunnel.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.
16-44831
