A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/122
23 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 100
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/50/622)]
50/122.

Renewal of the dialogue on strengthening
international economic cooperation for
development through partnership

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/165 of 21 December 1993 and 49/95 of 19
December 1994 on renewal of the dialogue on strengthening international
economic cooperation for development through partnership,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the Secretary-General to
encourage a constructive dialogue for enhancing development and to facilitate
actions in that regard,
Noting also the ongoing work of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group of
the General Assembly on an Agenda for Development,
Recognizing that the continued trend towards deepening interdependence
among countries and the increasing globalization of economic issues and
problems present risks and uncertainties as well as opportunities and
challenges for dialogue on international economic cooperation,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on renewal of
the dialogue on strengthening international economic cooperation for
development through partnership; 1/
2.
Reaffirms that such a dialogue should be conducted in response to
the imperatives of mutual interests and benefits, genuine interdependence,
shared responsibility and the partnership for achieving sustained economic
growth and sustainable development as well as improving the international
economic environment that is conducive to such development, and that the
United Nations should reinforce its activities in order to facilitate such a
dialogue;

1/
96-76783

A/50/480.
/...

A/RES/50/122
Page 2

3.
Stresses the need to put development at the centre of United
Nations activities and that the United Nations has a central role to play in
promoting international economic cooperation for development and in bringing
development issues to the attention of the international community;
4.
Recognizes that the ongoing discussions in the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Working Group of the General Assembly on an Agenda for Development and its
outcome aim at strengthening constructive dialogue with a view to enhancing
and revitalizing international economic cooperation for development through
increased partnership among and between countries;
5.
Agrees to hold a high-level dialogue for a period of two days at
the fifty-first session of the General Assembly - the date, modalities and
focus of the discussion to be decided on in the context of the outcome of the
work of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on an Agenda for Development and
the decision taken on the adoption of the agenda - on the theme of the social
and economic impact of globalization and interdependence and their policy
implications, and requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with
Governments, relevant organizations and other development actors, to make
initial preparations for such a dialogue;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit further recommendations
for enhancing the dialogue, taking into consideration agreed conclusions
1995/1 of 28 July 1995 of the Economic and Social Council on coordinated
follow-up by the United Nations system and implementation of the results of
the major international conferences organized by the United Nations in the
economic, social and related fields, 2/ the outcome of the ongoing
discussions in the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on an Agenda for
Development, and on restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations in
the economic, social and related fields;
7.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly at its fifty-first session for its consideration, recommendations on
possible future themes for dialogue, including the issues of regional
integration and of new information technology and the global economy;
8.
Further requests the Secretary-General to elaborate his proposals
to convene special sessions of the General Assembly, on major issues relevant
to the dialogue on international economic cooperation for development,
including those identified in an agenda for development;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session, under the item entitled "Agenda for development", a sub-item entitled
"Renewal of the dialogue on strengthening international economic cooperation
for development through partnership".
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995

2/

See A/50/3, chap. III, para. 22.
