A/77/461

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 December 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 66

Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance
Report of the Third Committee
Rapporteur: Ms. Shalini Gungaram (Mauritius)

I. Introduction
1.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of
its seventy-third session the item entitled:
“Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance:
“(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
“(b) Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action”
and to allocate it to the Third Committee.
2.
The Committee heard introductory statements, held interactive dialogues and a
general discussion jointly with item 67, entitled “Right of peoples to selfdetermination”, and considered proposals and took action on the item at its 39th to
41st, 45th and 54th meetings, on 31 October, and 1, 4 and 17 November 2022. An
account of the Committee’s consideration of the item is contained in the relevant
summary records. 1
3.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following
documents:

__________________
1

22-27378 (E)

A/C.3/77/SR.39, A/C.3/77/SR.40, A/C.3/77/SR.41, A/C.3/77/SR.45 and A/C.3/77/SR.54.

081222

*2227378*

A/77/461

Item 66 (a)
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance
Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (A/77/18)
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance on combating the glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance (A/77/512)
Note by the Secretariat transmitting the report of the Group of Independent Eminent
Experts on the Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
on its seventh session (A/77/233)
Item 66 (b)
Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action
Report of the Secretary-General on a global call for concrete action for the elimination
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related into lerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action (A/77/294)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the International Decade
for People of African Descent (A/77/333)
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Special Rapporteur on
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance (A/77/549)
Note by the Secretariat transmitting the report of the International Independent Expert
Mechanism to Advance Racial Justice and Equality in Law Enforcement ( A/77/172)
Note by the Secretariat on the promotion and protection of the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of Africans and of people of African descent against excessive
use of force and other human rights violations by law enforcement officers through
transformative change for racial justice and equality ( A/77/205)
Note by the Secretariat on the Working Group of Experts on People of African
Descent (A/77/232)
4.
At its 39th meeting, on 31 October, the Committee heard an introductory
statement by the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, who responded to
questions raised and comments made by the representative s of the United States of
America, Namibia, China and the Russian Federation.
5.
At the same meeting, the Committee heard an introductory statement by the
Chair of the Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent, who responded
to questions raised and comments made by the representatives of the European Union,
Brazil, the United States of America, Portugal, Côte d’Ivoire, the Russian Federation,
Cameroon, Algeria and the Syrian Arab Republic.
6.
Also at the same meeting, the Committee heard an introductory statement by the
Chair of the Group of Independent Eminent Experts on the Implementation of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, who responded to questions raised and
comments made by the representatives of South Africa, Brazil, Côte d’ Ivoire, Chile,
Algeria and the Russian Federation.

2/28

22-27378

A/77/461

7.
Also at its 39th meeting, the Committee heard an introductory statement by the
Chairperson of the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action (via video-link),
who responded to questions raised and comments made by the representative of the
Russian Federation.
8.
At its 40th meeting, on 31 October, the Committee heard an introductory
statement by the Chair of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
who responded to questions raised and comments made by the representatives of the
United States of America, the European Union, Jamaica, Cambodia, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, France, the Russ ian Federation,
Armenia, Cameroon, Azerbaijan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and China.
9.
At the same meeting, the Committee heard an introductory statement by the
Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, who responded to questions posed and comments
made by the representatives of Bulgaria, the United States of America, Cuba,
Indonesia, Hungary, Qatar, Uruguay, Albania, Romania, Canada, Israel, the European
Union, Austria, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Czechia,
Italy, Greece, the Russian Federation, Spain, Pakistan, Germany, Azerbaijan (on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement), Guatemala, Cyprus, Australia, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and China.
10. Also at the same meeting, the Committee heard an introductory statement by the
Chairperson-Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of
Complementary Standards, who responded to questions raised and comments made
by the representatives of South Africa, the European Union and the Russian
Federation.
11. At its 41st meeting, on 1 November, the Committee heard an introductory
statement by the Chair-Rapporteur of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries
as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination, who responded to questions raised and comments made by the
representatives of the European Union, Cuba and China.
12. At the 46th meeting, on 10 November, the representative of the United States of
America made a statement with regard to the draft resolutions before the Committee. 2

II. Consideration of proposals
A.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.5 and amendments thereto contained
in documents A/C.3/77/L.51 and A/C.3/77/L.52
13. At its 45th meeting, on 4 November, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other
practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance” (A/C.3/77/L.5), submitted by
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Equatorial Guinea, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Mali, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) and Viet Nam. Subsequently, Armenia,
China, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.

__________________
2

22-27378

See A/C.3/77/SR.46.
3/28

A/77/461

14. At the same meeting, Malawi, Nigeria, Philippines, Senegal and Zimbabwe
joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
15. Also at the same meeting, the representative of the Russian Federation made a
statement and orally revised the draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.5 by inserting after the
second operative paragraph a new operative paragraph, which read “Takes note of the
report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on contemporary forms
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, prepared in
accordance with the request contained in its resolution 76/149”.
Action on the amendments contained in documents A/C.3/77/L.51 and
A/C.3/77/L.52
16. Also at the 45th meeting, the Chair (Dominican Republic) drew the attention of
the Committee to the amendments to draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.5 submitted by
Australia, Japan, Liberia and North Macedonia as contained in documents
A/C.3/77/L.51 and A/C.3/77/L.52.
17. At the same meeting, the representative of Australia made a statement in
connection with the amendments contained in documents A/C.3/77/L.51 and
A/C.3/77/L.52 and announced the withdrawal of the amendment contained in
document A/C.3/77/L.51 following the oral revision of draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.5.
Action on the amendment contained in document A/C.3/77/L.52
18. Also at the same meeting, on 4 November, the Committee was informed that
Albania, Canada, Guatemala, Iceland, the Marshall Islands, Micro nesia (Federated
States of), New Zealand, Norway, Ukraine and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland had joined in sponsoring the amendment contained in document
A/C.3/77/L.52.
19. Also at the 45th meeting, Papua New Guinea and the United States of America
joined in sponsoring the amendment.
20. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted the amendment by a recorded
vote of 63 to 23, with 65 abstentions. The voting was as follows: 3
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Poland , Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Türkiye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America .
Against:
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, China,
Colombia, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lesotho, Mali, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Zimbabwe.
__________________
3

4/28

The delegation of Burundi subsequently indicated that it had intended not to participate, and the
delegation of Lesotho indicated that it had intended to abstain.
22-27378

A/77/461

Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Bhutan, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Central African Republic,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Namibia,
Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen.
21. Before the vote, the representatives of North Macedonia and Liberia made
statements, and statements in explanation of vote were made by the representatives
of Czechia (on behalf of the European Union and Ukraine), the Russian Federation
and Azerbaijan.
Action on draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.5 as orally revised and amended and as
a whole
22. At its 45th meeting, on 4 November, the Committee adopted the draft reso lution
A/C.3/77/L.5 as orally revised and amended by a recorded vote of 105 to 52, with 15
abstentions (see para. 31, draft resolution I). the voting was as follows: 4
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Ri ca, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britai n and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
__________________
4

22-27378

The delegations of Burundi, Egypt and Mali subsequently indicated that they had intended to
vote in favour.
5/28

A/77/461

Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Congo, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Mexico,
Myanmar, Palau, Panama, Republic of Korea, Samoa, Serbia, Switzerland,
Tonga and Türkiye.
23. Before the vote, the representative of Armenia (on behalf of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization) made a statement, and statements in explanation of vote
were made by the representatives of Canada, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America, Ukraine and Japan.
24. After the vote, statements in explanation of vote were made by the
representatives of Singapore, Croatia, Australia, Slovenia, Guatemala, Iceland (on
behalf of the Nordic and Baltic countries), Israel, Switzerland, Malaysia, Spain,
Colombia, Algeria, Austria, Italy, Indonesia, New Zealand, Albania, Ecuador,
Burundi and Egypt, and statements were made by the representatives of Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Nicaragua, Cuba, Sri Lanka, the Russian Federation,
Belarus, Viet Nam, South Africa, Eritrea, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Ethiopia, the Syrian Arab Republic and China.
25. Also at the 45th meeting, statements on a point of order were made by the
representatives of Japan, Cuba and the United States of America, to which the
Secretariat responded.

B.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.23/Rev.1
26. At its 54th meeting, on 17 November, the Committee had before it a revised
draft resolution entitled “A global call for concrete action for the elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action” (A/C.3/77/L.23/Rev.1), which was submitted by Pakistan on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of
77 and China. Subsequently, the Russian Federation joined in sp onsoring the draft
resolution.
27. At the same meeting, the representative of Pakistan, on behalf of the Group of
77 and China, made a statement.
28. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution
A/C.3/77/L.23/Rev.1 by a recorded vote of 126 to 17, with 36 abstentions (see para.
31, draft resolution II). The voting was as follows:
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the

6/28

22-27378

A/77/461

Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Austria, Canada, Croatia, Czechia, France, Germany, Hungary, Israel,
Italy, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Netherlands, Slovakia, Spain, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America .
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Japan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland.
29. Before the vote, the representative of South Africa made a statement, and
statements in explanation of vote were made by the representatives of Israel, the
United States of America and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
30. After the vote, statements were made by the representatives of Uruguay, Czechia
(on behalf of the European Union, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia,
Montenegro, North Macedonia, the Republic of Moldova and Serbia), New Zealand
and the Islamic Republic of Iran.

22-27378

7/28

A/77/461

III. Recommendations of the Third Committee
31. The Third Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolutions:

Draft resolution I
Combating glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other
practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 3
and other relevant human rights instruments,
Recalling the provisions of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2004/16 of
16 April 2004 4 and 2005/5 of 14 April 2005 5 and relevant Human Rights Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 7/34 of 28 March 2008, 6 18/15 of 29 September
2011 7 and 21/33 of 28 September 2012, 8 as well as General Assembly resolutions
60/143 of 16 December 2005, 61/147 of 19 December 2006, 62/142 of 18 December
2007, 63/162 of 18 December 2008, 64/147 of 18 December 2009, 65/199 of
21 December 2010, 66/143 of 19 December 2011, 67/154 of 20 December 2012, 68/150
of 18 December 2013, 69/160 of 18 December 2014, 70/139 of 17 December 2015,
71/179 of 19 December 2016, 72/156 of 19 December 2017, 73/157 of 17 December
2018, 74/136 of 18 December 2019, 75/169 of 16 December 2020 and 76/149 of
16 December 2021 on this issue, and its resolutions 61/149 of 19 December 2006,
62/220 of 22 December 2007, 63/242 of 24 December 2008, 64/148 of 18 December
2009, 65/240 of 24 December 2010, 66/144 of 19 December 2011, 67/155 of
20 December 2012, 68/151 of 18 December 2013, 69/162 of 18 December 2014, 70/140
of 17 December 2015, 71/181 of 19 December 2016, 72/157 of 19 December 2017,
73/262 of 22 December 2018, 74/137 of 18 December 2019, 75/237 of 31 December
2020 and 76/226 of 24 December 2021, entitled “A global call for concrete action for
the elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action”,
Acknowledging other important initiatives of the General Assembly aimed at
raising awareness about the suffering of victims of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and forms of discrimination, including in the
historical perspective, in particular regarding commemoration of the victims of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade,
__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23),
chap. II, sect. A.
5
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23, E/2005/23/Corr.1 and E/2005/23/Corr.2),
chap. II, sect. A.
6
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53),
chap. II.
7
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and A/66/53/Add.1/
Corr.1), chap. II.
8
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. II.
1
2

8/28

22-27378

A/77/461

Recalling the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal, and the Judgment of the
Tribunal which recognized as criminal, inter alia, the SS organization and its integral
parts, including the Waffen SS, through its officially accepted members implicated in
or with knowledge of the commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity
connected with the Second World War, as well as other relevant provisions of the
Charter and the Judgment,
Mindful of the horrors of the Second World War, and stressing in this regard that
the victory over Nazism in the Second World War contributed to the establishment of
the conditions for the creation of the United Nations, designed to prevent future wars
and save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Noting that neo-Nazism is more than just the glorification of a past movement,
it is a contemporary phenomenon with strong vested interests in racial inequality and
an investment in gaining broad support for its false claims of racial superiority,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001, 9 in particular paragraph 2
of the Declaration and paragraphs 84 to 86 of the Program me of Action, as well as
the relevant provisions of the outcome document of the Durban Review Conference
of 24 April 2009, 10 in particular paragraphs 11, 13 and 54,
Alarmed at the spread in many parts of the world of various extremist political
parties, movements, ideologies and groups of a racist or xenophobic character,
including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and at the fact that this trend has resulted
in the implementation of discriminatory measures and policies at the local or national
level,
Noting with concern that, even where neo-Nazis or extremists do not formally
participate in government, the presence therein of extreme right-wing ideologues can
have the effect of injecting into governance and political discourse the same
ideologies that make neo-Nazism and extremism so dangerous,
Alarmed at music lyrics and video games that advocate racial hatred and incite
discrimination, hostility or violence,
Concerned by the use of Internet platforms by groups that advocate hatred to
plan, fundraise and circulate information about public events aimed at promoting
racism, xenophobia and related intolerance, such as rallies, demonstrations and acts
of violence,
Mindful of the role that the Internet can play in promoting equality, inclusion
and non-discrimination as part of strengthening democracy and respect for human
rights,
Seriously concerned that neo-Nazi groups, as well as other groups and
individuals espousing ideologies of hatred, have increasingly targeted susceptible
individuals, mainly children and youth, by means of specifically tailored websites
with the aim of their indoctrination and recruitment,
Deeply concerned by all recent manifestations of violence and terrorism incited
by violent nationalism, racism, antisemitism, discrimination based on religion, belief
or origin, including Islamophobia, Christianophobia and Afrophobia, xenophobia and
related intolerance, including during sports events,
Recognizing with deep concern the continued alarming increase in instances of
discrimination, intolerance and extremist violence motivated by antisemitism,
__________________
9
10

22-27378

See A/CONF.189/12 and A/CONF.189/12/Corr.1, chap. I.
See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
9/28

A/77/461

religion or belief, including Islamophobia and Christianophobia, and prejudices
against persons of other ethnic origins, religions and beliefs,
Underlining the existing lack of uniformity of norms regarding protected speech
and expression and prohibited racial discrimination and advocacy of national, racial
or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence,
Noting with concern, in this regard, that the variation in national standards
prohibiting hate speech may provide safe havens for neo-Nazi, extremist, violent
nationalist, xenophobic or racist speech owing to the fact that many neo -Nazi and
relevant extremist groups of a racist or xenophobic character operate transnationally
by relying on Internet service providers or social media platforms,
Stressing that the purpose of addressing hate speech is not to limit or prohibit
freedom of speech, but to prevent incitement to discrimination and violence, whic h
shall be prohibited by law,
Expressing its concern about the use of digital technologies by extremist and
hate groups, including neo-Nazi groups, to disseminate their ideology, while
recognizing that digital technologies are of great importance for the enjoyment of
human rights and for combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance,
1.
Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and of the
outcome document of the Durban Review Conference, in which States cond emned
the persistence and resurgence of neo-Nazism, neo-Fascism and violent nationalist
ideologies based on racial and national prejudice and stated that those phenomena
could never be justified in any instance or in any circumstances;
2.
Recalls the provisions of the Durban Declaration and of the outcome
document of the Durban Review Conference, in which States recognized the positive
contribution that the exercise of the right to freedom of expression, in particular by
the media and new technologies, including the Internet, and full respect for the
freedom to seek, receive and impart information can make to the fight against racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
3
Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on contempo rary forms
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, prepared in
accordance with the request contained in its resolution 76/149;
4
Notes with alarm that the Russian Federation has sought to justify its
territorial aggression against Ukraine on the purported basis of eliminating
neo-Nazism, and underlines that the pretextual use of neo-Nazism to justify territorial
aggression seriously undermines genuine attempts to combat neo -Nazism;
5.
Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their efforts to fight racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, including the maintenance by the Office of the High Commissioner of
the database on practical means to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance;
6.
Expresses deep concern about the glorification, in any form, of the Nazi
movement, neo-Nazism and former members of the Waffen SS organization,
including by erecting monuments and memorials, holding public demonstrations in
the name of the glorification of the Nazi past, the Nazi movement and neo -Nazism,
declaring or attempting to declare such members and those who fought against the
anti-Hitler coalition, collaborated with the Nazi movement and committed war crimes
and crimes against humanity participants in national liberation movements, as well as
by the renaming of streets glorifying them;
10/28

22-27378

A/77/461

7.
Calls for the universal ratification and effective implementation of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
and urges those States parties that have not yet done so to consider making th e
declaration under its article 14, thus providing the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination with the competence to receive and consider communications
from individuals or groups of individuals within their jurisdiction claiming to be
victims of a violation by a State party of any of the rights set forth in the Convention;
8.
Urges States to eliminate all forms of racial discrimination by all
appropriate means, including legislation as required by circumstances, while ensuring
that the definition of racial discrimination set out therein complies with article 1 of
the Convention;
9.
Encourages those States that have made reservations to article 4 of the
Convention to give serious consideration to withdrawing such reservations as a matter
of priority, as stressed by the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
10. Acknowledges that discrimination based on race, ethnicity, religion or
belief in all its forms and manifestations, including neo-Nazism, Islamophobia,
Christianophobia and antisemitism, is a threat to social cohesion, not just to those
racial and ethnic groups that are their direct target;
11. Recalls that any legislative or constitutional measures adopted with a view
to countering extremist political parties, movements, ideologies and groups of a racist
or xenophobic character, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups and similar
extremist ideological movements, should be in conformity with the relevant
international human rights obligations, in particular articles 4 and 5 of the Convention
and articles 19 to 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Righ ts;
12. Encourages States to develop and implement national action plans for the
elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, with
a view to, inter alia, monitoring closely the phenomenon of Nazism, neo -Nazism and
Holocaust denial, such as commemorative celebration of the Nazi regime, its allies
and related organizations;
13. Encourages States parties to the Convention to take appropriate measures
to ensure that their legislation is in accordance with their obligations under the
Convention, including those under article 4;
14. Stresses that the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and
association are important in supporting the fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance worldwide;
15. Emphasizes once more the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur that
“any commemorative celebration of the Nazi regime, its allies and related
organizations, whether official or unofficial, should be prohibited” by States, 11 also
emphasizes that such manifestations do injustice to the memory of the countless
victims of the Second World War and negatively influence children and young people,
and stresses in this regard that it is important that States take measures, in accordance
with international human rights law, to counteract any celebration of the Nazi SS
organization and all its integral parts, including the Waffen SS, and that failure by
States to effectively address such practices is incompatible with the obligations of
States Members of the United Nations under its Charter;
16. Expresses deep concern about increased frequency of attempts and
activities intended to desecrate or demolish monuments erected in remembrance of
__________________
11

22-27378

A/72/291, para. 79.
11/28

A/77/461

those who fought against Nazism during the Second World War, as well as to
unlawfully exhume or remove the remains of such persons, and in this regard urges
States to fully comply with their relevant obligations, inter alia, under article 34 of
Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949; 12
17. Firmly condemns incidents that glorify and promote Nazism, such as acts
involving pro-Nazi graffiti and paintings, including on monuments dedicated to
victims of the Second World War;
18. Welcomes efforts by Member States to preserve historical truth, including
through constructing and preserving monuments and memorials dedicated to those
who fought in the ranks of the anti-Hitler coalition;
19. Expresses alarm over the use by extremist groups, including neo-Nazi
groups, and individuals espousing ideologies of hatred, of information technologies,
the Internet and social media to recruit new members, especially targeting children
and young people, and to disseminate and to amplify their hate-filled messages, while
recognizing that the Internet can also be used to counteract these groups and their
activities;
20. Calls upon States to take appropriate measures to address the new and
emerging threats posed by the rise in terrorist attacks incited by racism, xenophobia
and other forms of intolerance, or in the name of religion or belief;
21. Notes with concern the significant number of racist incidents worldwide,
including the rise of skinhead groups, which have been responsible for many of these
incidents, as well as the resurgence of racist and xenophobic violence targeting, inter
alia, persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, or on
any other grounds, including arson attacks on houses and vandalization of and
violence in schools and places of worship and cemeteries;
22. Reaffirms that such acts may, in certain circumstances, be qualified as
falling within the scope of the Convention, that they may not be justifiable as
exercises of freedom of peaceful assembly, freedom of association and freedom of
expression and that they will often fall within the scope of article 2 0 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and may be subject to certain
restrictions, as set out in articles 19, 21 and 22 of the Covenant;
23. Encourages States to take appropriate concrete measures, including
legislative and educational ones, in accordance with their international human rights
obligations, in order to prevent revisionism in respect of the Second World War and
the denial of the crimes against humanity and war crimes committed during the
Second World War;
24. Calls upon States to take active measures to ensure that education systems
develop the necessary content to provide accurate accounts of history, as well as
promote tolerance and other international human rights principles;
25. Recalls the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur that education that
seeks to undercut the racist effects of nationalist populism should include accurate
and representative accounts of national history that give voice to racial and ethnic
diversity and that expose the untruths of those who attempt to write ethnic groups out
of national histories and identities in order to sustain ethnonationalist myths of
racially or ethnically “pure” nations; 13
26. Condemns without reservation any denial of or attempt to deny the
Holocaust, as well as any manifestation of religious intolerance, incitement,
__________________
12
13

12/28

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17512.
A/73/305 and A/73/305/Corr.1, para. 56.
22-27378

A/77/461

harassment or violence against persons or communities, on the basis of ethnic origin
or religious belief;
27. Affirms its deep commitment to the duty of remembrance, and welcomes
the call of the Special Rapporteur for the active preservation of those Holocaust sites
that served as Nazi death camps, concentration and forced labour camps and prisons,
as well as his encouragement to States to take measures, including legislative, law
enforcement and educational measures, to put an end to all forms of Holocaust
denial; 14
28. Recalls the conclusions of the Special Rapporteur that revisionism and
attempts to falsify history may, in certain circumstances, fall under the prohibition of
hate speech under article 4 (a) of the Convention, which States are required to declare
as offences punishable by law, 15 and that neo-Nazi recruitment attempting to
mainstream extreme ideologies or racial, ethnic or religious hatred and intolerance
may fall under article 4 (b) of the Convention;
29. Calls upon States to continue to take all appropriate measures aimed at
preventing and countering hate speech, including on the Internet, and incitement to
violence against persons in vulnerable situations, including the organization of
meetings and violent protests, fundraising and engagement in other activities;
30. Expresses serious concern regarding attempts to prohibit, at the legislative
level, symbols associated in States with the victory over Nazism;
31. Expresses deep concern about attempts at commercial advertising aimed
at exploiting the sufferings of the victims of war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed during the Second World War by the Nazi regime;
32. Stresses the need to respect the memory and that the practices described
above do injustice to the memory of the countless victims of crimes against human ity
committed in the Second World War, in particular those committed by the SS
organization and by those who fought against the anti-Hitler coalition and
collaborated with the Nazi movement, and may negatively influence children and
young people, and that failure by States to effectively address such practices is
incompatible with the obligations of States Members of the United Nations under its
Charter, including those related to the purposes and principles of the Organization;
33. Also stresses that all such practices may fuel contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, antisemitism, discrimination based on religion or belief,
including Islamophobia and Christianophobia, xenophobia and related intolerance
and contribute to the spread and multiplication of various extremist political parties,
movements and groups of a racist or xenophobic character, including neo -Nazis and
skinhead groups, and in this regard calls for increased vigilance;
34. Expresses concern that the human rights and democratic challenges posed
by extremist political parties, movements and groups are universal and no country is
immune to them;
35. Emphasizes the need to take appropriate measures necessary to counter the
practices described above, and calls upon States and all other stakeholders to take
more effective measures, while fully respecting international human rights law, to
prevent, counter and combat those phenomena and extremist movements of a racist
or xenophobic character, which pose a real threat to democratic values, and to increase
their vigilance and be proactive in strengthening their efforts to recognize and
effectively address those challenges;
__________________
14
15

22-27378

A/72/291, para. 91.
A/HRC/38/53, para. 15.
13/28

A/77/461

36. Underlines the importance of reliable disaggregated data and statistics on
racist and xenophobic crimes for identifying the types of offences committed, the
profiles of victims and of perpetrators and whether the latter are affiliated with
extremist movements or groups, thus enhancing better understanding of the
phenomenon, identifying effective measures to address such racist and xenophobic
crimes and assessing the impact of these measures, and recalls in this regard the
commitments made in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 16 on data,
monitoring and accountability, including collecting data disag gregated by
characteristics relevant in national contexts;
37. Encourages States to adopt further measures to support training for the
police and other law enforcement bodies on the ideologies of extremist political
parties, movements and groups the advocacy of which constitutes incitement to racist
and xenophobic violence, to strengthen their capacity to address racist and
xenophobic crimes and prevent racial profiling practices, to fulfil their responsibility
for bringing to justice the perpetrators of such crimes and to combat impunity;
38. Expresses deep concern about the increased number of seats occupied by
representatives of extremist parties of a racist or xenophobic character in a number of
national and local parliaments, and emphasizes in this re gard the need for all
democratic political parties to base their programmes and activities on respect for
human rights and freedoms, democracy, the rule of law and good governance and to
condemn all messages disseminating ideas that are based on racial sup eriority or
hatred and that have the objective of fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
39. Recalls the concern of the Special Rapporteur regarding the resurgence of
neo-Nazism in contemporary times and growing support for and acceptance of
neo-Nazism and related ideology in an increasing number of countries; 17
40. Notes with appreciation, in this regard, the call of the Special Rapporteur
upon political leaders and parties to strongly condemn in citement to racial
discrimination or xenophobia, to promote tolerance and respect and to refrain from
forming coalitions with extremist parties of a racist or xenophobic character; 18
41. Welcomes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur to continue to
take steps through national legislation, in accordance with international human rights
law, aimed at preventing hate speech and incitement to violence, to withdraw
support – financial and otherwise – from political parties and other organizations that
engage in neo-Nazi or other hate speech and to take steps to dismantle responsible
organizations where such hate speech aims, or can reasonably be expected, to incite
violence; 19
42. Encourages States to improve diversity within law enforcement agencies,
and urges them to take all appropriate measures to facilitate the filing of complaints
about and to impose appropriate sanctions against those within the public service
found to have committed racially motivated violence or to have used hate speech;
43. Expresses deep concern about the increase in reported cases of racism,
antisemitism, discrimination based on religion, belief or origin, including
Islamophobic, Arabophobic, Afrophobic and xenophobic manifestations during sports
events, including those committed by extremist groups of a racist or xenophobic
character, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and calls upon States,
international organizations, sports federations and other relevant stake holders to
__________________

Resolution 70/1.
A/HRC/38/53, para. 16.
18
A/72/291, para. 83.
19
A/HRC/38/53, para. 35 (c).
16
17

14/28

22-27378

A/77/461

strengthen measures to address such incidents, while also welcoming the steps that
many States and sports federations, clubs and fan groups have taken to eliminate
racism at sporting events, including through sport practised without discriminati on of
any kind and in the Olympic spirit, which require human understanding, tolerance,
inclusion, fair play and solidarity;
44. Recalls the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur to introduce into
national criminal law a provision according to which co mmitting an offence with
racist or xenophobic motivations or aims constitutes an aggravating circumstance,
allowing for enhanced penalties, 20 and encourages those States whose legislation does
not contain such provisions to consider that recommendation;
45. Notes measures taken by States to prevent discrimination against, in
particular but not limited to, persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities, people of African descent, Roma, migrants, refugees and asylum
seekers, and to ensure their integration into society, urges States to ensure the full and
effective implementation of legal, policy and institutional measures protecting these
individuals and groups, including women and girls, and recommends that States
effectively guarantee to everyone, without discrimination of any kind, their human
rights, including those related to safety and security, access to justice, adequate
reparation and appropriate information about their rights, and pursue prosecution and
adequate punishment, as appropriate, of those responsible for racist and xenophobic
crimes against them, including the possibility of seeking reparation or satisfaction for
damages suffered as a result of such crimes;
46. Calls upon States to increase awareness about available national and other
remedies for human rights violations based on racial discrimination and racism;
47. Underlines that the roots of extremism are multifaceted and must be
addressed through adequate measures such as education, awareness-raising and the
promotion of dialogue, and in this regard recommends the increase of measures to
raise awareness among young people of the dangers of the ideologies and activities
of extremist political parties, movements and groups;
48. Reaffirms, in this regard, the particular importance of all forms of
education, including human rights education, as a complement to legislative
measures, and calls upon States to continue to invest in education, in both
conventional and non-conventional curricula, inter alia, in order to transform attitudes
and counteract ideas of racial hierarchies and superiority, and counter their negative
influence, and to promote the values of non-discrimination, equality and respect for
all, as outlined by the Special Rapporteur;
49. Recognizes the paramount role of education in promoting human rights
and fundamental freedoms and combating racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance, especially in promoting the principles of tolerance,
non-discrimination, inclusion and respect for ethnic, religious and cultural diversity
and preventing the spread of extremist racist and xenophobic movements and ideas;
50. Strongly condemns the use in educational settings of educational material
and rhetoric that promulgate racism, discrimination, hatred and violence on the basis
of ethnic origin, nationality, religion or belief;
51. Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur presented at
the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, in which he emphasized the

__________________
20

22-27378

A/69/334, para. 81.
15/28

A/77/461

importance of history classes in teaching the dramatic events and human suffering
which arose out of the adoption of ideologies such as Nazism and Fascism; 21
52. Stresses the importance of other positive measures and initiatives aimed at
bringing communities together and providing them with space for genuine dialogue,
such as round tables, working groups and seminars, including training seminars for
State agents and media professionals, as well as awareness-raising activities,
especially those initiated by civil society representatives, which require continued
State support;
53. Underlines the positive role that relevant United Nations entities and
programmes, in particular the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, can play in the aforementioned areas;
54. Reaffirms article 4 of the Convention, according to which States parties
condemn all propaganda and all organizations which are based on idea s or theories of
superiority of one race or group of persons of one colour or ethnic origin, or which
attempt to justify or promote racial hatred and discrimination in any form, and
undertake to adopt immediate and positive measures designed to eradicate a ll
incitement to, or acts of, such discrimination and, to this end, with due regard to the
principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the rights
expressly set forth in article 5 of the Convention, inter alia:
(a) Shall declare an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas based
on racial superiority or hatred, and incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all
acts of violence or incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons of
another colour or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist
activities, including the financing thereof;
(b) Shall declare illegal and prohibit organizations, and also organized and all
other propaganda activities, which promote and incite raci al discrimination, and shall
recognize participation in such organizations or activities as an offence punishable by
law;
(c) Shall not permit public authorities or public institutions, national or local,
to promote or incite racial discrimination;
55. Also reaffirms that, as underlined in paragraph 13 of the outcome
document of the Durban Review Conference, any advocacy of national, racial or
religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence
should be prohibited by law, that all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority
or hatred, or incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or
incitement to such acts, shall be declared offences punishable by law, in accordance
with the international obligations of States, and that these prohibitions are consistent
with freedom of opinion and expression;
56. Recalls the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech,
which sets out strategic guidance for the United Nations system to address hate speech
at the national and global levels;
57. Recognizes the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression, as well as full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and
impart information, including through the Internet, can play in combating racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;

__________________
21

16/28

A/64/295, para. 104.
22-27378

A/77/461

58. Calls upon States to strengthen freedom of expression, which can play a
crucial role in promoting democracy and combating racist and xenophobic ideologies
based on racial superiority;
59. Also calls upon States, which have the primary responsibility to counter
discrimination and hate speech, and all relevant actors, including political and
religious leaders, to promote inclusion and unity in response to th e coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and to prevent, speak out and take strong action
against racism, xenophobia, hate speech, violence, discrimination and stigmatization;
60. Expresses concern about the increased use of digital technologies to
promote and disseminate racism, racial hatred, xenophobia, racial discrimination and
related intolerance, and in this regard calls upon States parties to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to counter the dissemination of the above mentioned ideas while respecting their obligations under articles 19 and 20 of the
Covenant, which guarantee the right to freedom of expression and outline the grounds
on which the exercise of this right can be legitimately restricted;
61. Recognizes the need to promote the use of new information and
communications technologies, including the Internet, to contribute to the fight against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
62. Also recognizes the positive role that the media can play in combating
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, promoting a culture
of tolerance and inclusion and representing the diversity of a multicultural society;
63. Encourages States, civil society and other relevant stakeholders to use all
opportunities, including those provided by the Internet and social media, to counter,
in accordance with international human rights law, the dissemination of ideas based
on racial superiority or hatred and to promote the values of equality,
non-discrimination, diversity and democracy;
64. Encourages national human rights institutions, where they exist, to
develop appropriate programmes to promote tolerance, inclusion and respect for all
and to collect relevant information in this regard;
65. Notes the importance of strengthening cooperation at the regional and
international levels with the aim of countering all manifestations of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular regarding issues
raised in the present resolution;
66. Stresses the importance of cooperating closely with civil society and
international and regional human rights mechanisms in order to counter effectively
all manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, as well as extremist political parties, movements and groups, including
neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and other similar extremist ideological movements
that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
67. Recalls the request of the Commission on Human Rights, in its resolution
2005/5, that the Special Rapporteur continue to reflect on this issue, make relevant
recommendations in future reports and seek and take into account in this regard the
views of Governments and non-governmental organizations;
68. Invites States to consider including in their reports for the universal
periodic review and their reports to relevant treaty bodies information on the steps
taken to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
including with the aim of implementing the provisions of the present resolution;
69. Requests the Special Rapporteur to prepare, for submission to the General
Assembly at its seventy-eighth session and to the Human Rights Council at its fifty22-27378

17/28

A/77/461

third session, reports on the implementation of the present resolution, and encourages
the Special Rapporteur to pay specific attention to paragraphs 4, 11, 13, 14, 15, 19,
27, 28, 29, 47 and 49 above, based on the views collected in accordance with the
request of the Commission, as recalled in paragraph 65 above;
70. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments and non-governmental
organizations that have submitted information to the Special Rapporteur in the course
of the preparation of her report to the General Assembly;
71. Encourages States and non-governmental organizations to cooperate with
the Special Rapporteur, including by providing information on developments with
regard to the issues raised in the present resolution in order to con tribute to the
preparation of future reports to the General Assembly;
72. Stresses that such information is important for the sharing of experiences
and best practices in the fight against extremist political parties, movements and
groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and other extremist ideological
movements that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
73. Encourages Governments to invest more resources in building and sharing
knowledge on successful positive measures to prevent and counter racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in addition to sanctioning any
violations, including by providing remedies to victims of violations, as appropriate;
74. Encourages Governments, non-governmental organizations and relevant
actors to disseminate, as widely as possible, information regarding the contents of
and the principles outlined in the present resolution, including through the media, but
not limited to it;
75.

18/28

Decides to remain seized of the issue.

22-27378

A/77/461

Draft resolution II
A global call for concrete action for the elimination of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the
comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the comprehensive follow -up to the
World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance and the effective implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference, 1 in particular its resolutions
66/144 of 19 December 2011, 67/155 of 20 December 2012, 73/262 of 22 December
2018 and 76/226 of 24 December 2021, as well as its resolutions 75/314 of 2 August
2021 and 76/1 of 22 September 2021, and in this regard underlining the imperative
need for their full and effective implementation,
Recalling also the suffering of the victims of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, and the need to honour their memory,
Calling upon States to honour the memory of victims of the historical injustices
of slavery, the slave trade, including the transatlantic slave trade, colonialism and
apartheid,
Stressing that the outcome of the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance has the same status as the
outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences, summits and special sessions
in the human rights and social fields, and that the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action remains a solid basis and the only instructive outcome of the World
Conference, which prescribes comprehensive measures for combating all the scourges
of racism and adequate remedies for victims, and noting with concern the l ack of
effective implementation thereof,
Expressing deep concern at emerging obstacles to the enjoyment of the right to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief 2 and at instances of intolerance,
discrimination, incitement to violence and violence against persons based on religion
or belief, inter alia, the increasing number of related acts of violence, and recalling
that the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action calls upon States, in opposing
all forms of racism, to recognize the need to counter antisemitism, anti-Arabism and
Islamophobia worldwide,
Alarmed at the global rise in hate speech, constituting incitement to racial
discrimination, hostility and violence, stressing the importance of addressing it, in
accordance with international law, and in this regard welcoming the observance of
18 June as the International Day for Countering Hate Speech 3 and noting the issuance
of the United Nations Guidance Note on Addressing and Countering COVID -19related Hate Speech on 11 May 2020,
Underlining the need to promote tolerance, inclusion and respect for diversity
and the need to seek common ground among and within civilizations in order to
address common challenges to humanity that threaten shared values, universal human
rights and the fight against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, through cooperation, partnership and inclusion,
__________________

See A/CONF.189/12 and A/CONF.189/12/Corr.1, chap. I.
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, art. 18 (see resolution 217 A (III)).
3
Resolution 75/309.
1
2

22-27378

19/28

A/77/461

Alarmed at the spread in many parts of the world of various racist extremist
movements based on ideologies that seek to promote na tionalist, right-wing agendas
and racial superiority, and stressing that these practices fuel racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Deploring the ongoing and resurgent scourges of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance in many regions of the world, often targeting
migrants and refugees, as well as people of African descent, expressing concern that
some political leaders and parties have supported such an environment, and in this
context expressing its support for migrants and refugees in the context of the severe
discrimination that they may face,
Reaffirming the necessity of eliminating racial discrimination against migrants,
including migrant workers, in relation to issues such as employment, social services,
including education and health, and access to justice, and that their treatment must be
in accordance with international human rights instruments and free from racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Deploring the recent incidents of excessive use of force and other human rights
violations by law enforcement officers against peaceful demonstrators defending the
rights of Africans and of people of African descent, and recalling Human Rights
Council resolutions 43/1 of 19 June 2020, 4 44/20 of 17 July 2020, 5 47/21 of 13 July
2021, 6 48/18 of 11 October 2021 7 and 51/32 of 7 October 2022, 8
Recognizing that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance have a deep negative impact on the enjoyment of human rights, and
therefore require a united and comprehensive response from the international
community,
Expressing concern at the loss of life and livelihoods and the disruption to
economies and societies caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
and its negative impact on the enjoyment of human rights around the world,
disproportionately affecting certain individuals, including those facing racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, which the pandemic has
highlighted and exposed, including underlying deep and long -standing structural
inequalities and fundamental problems in various areas of social, economic, civil and
political life, and its exacerbation of existing inequalitie s, and recalling that systemic
and structural racism and racial discrimination further exacerbate inequality in access
to health care and treatment, leading to racial disparities in health outcomes and a
higher rate of mortality and morbidity among individ uals and groups facing racial
discrimination,
Noting with concern the disproportionate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
the existing inequalities within our societies and regretting that, in that context,
persons belonging to racial and ethnic minorities and to other groups, including
Asians and people of Asian descent, especially women and girls, have been victims
of racist violence, threats of violence, discrimination and stigmatization,
Recalling the three Decades for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination previously declared by the General Assembly, and regretting that the

__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/75/53),
chap. IV, sect. A.
5
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
6
Ibid., Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/76/53), chap. VII, sect. A.
7
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/76/53/Add.1), chap. IV, sect. A.
8
Ibid., Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/77/53/Add.1), chap. III, sect. A.
4

20/28

22-27378

A/77/461

Programmes of Action for those Decades were not fully implemented and that their
objectives have yet to be attained,
Noting that the seventy-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights 9 and the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action 10 will be commemorated in 2023, and
stressing in this regard the importance of fully integrating the matter of combating
racism into these commemorations,
Stressing in this respect the need to also address negative stereotypes,
stigmatization and the assigning of identity based on race as essential in the fight
against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Reiterating that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights
and have the potential to contribute constructively to the development and well-being
of their societies, and that any doctrine of racial superiority is scientifically false,
morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous and must be rejected, together
with theories that attempt to determine the existence of separate human races,
Underlining the intensity, magnitude and organized nature of slavery and the
slave trade, including the transatlantic slave trade, and the associated historical
injustices, as well as the untold suffering caused by co lonialism and apartheid, and
that Africans and people of African descent, Asians and people of Asian descent and
Indigenous Peoples continue to be victims, and acknowledging that the ongoing
effects must be remedied,
Acknowledging the efforts and initiatives undertaken by States to prohibit racial
discrimination and racial segregation and to engender the full enjoyment of economic,
social and cultural rights, as well as civil and political rights,
Emphasizing that, despite efforts in this regard, millions of human beings
continue to be victims of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, including their contemporary forms and manifestations, some of which
manifest in violent forms,
Welcoming the efforts made by civil society in support of the follow-up mechanisms
in the implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
Recalling the appointment of the five independent eminent experts by the
Secretary-General on 16 June 2003, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 56/266
of 27 March 2002, with the mandate to follow up on the implementation of the
provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and to make
appropriate recommendations thereon,
Underlining the primacy of the political will, international cooperation and
adequate funding at the national, regional and international levels needed to address
all forms and manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance for the successful implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action,
Recalling its resolution 2142 (XXI) of 26 October 1966, in which it proclaimed
21 March as the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,
Recalling also its resolution 62/122 of 17 December 2007, in which it
designated 25 March as the annual International Day of Remembrance of the Victims
of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade,
__________________
9
10

22-27378

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
21/28

A/77/461

Recalling further, in the above context, the erection of the permanent memorial
for the victims of slavery and the slave trade, including the transatlantic slave trade,
the Ark of Return, based on the theme “Acknowledge the tragedy, consider the legacy,
lest we forget”,
Welcoming the call upon all the former colonial Powers for reparations,
consistent with paragraphs 157 and 158 of the Durban Programme of Action, to
redress the historical injustices of slavery and the slave trade, including the
transatlantic slave trade,
Recognizing and affirming that the global fight against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and all their abhorrent and
contemporary forms and manifestations is a matter of priority for the international
community,
I
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
1.
Reaffirms the paramount importance of universal adherence to and the full
and effective implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 11 adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965, in addressing the scourges of racism
and racial discrimination;
2.
Calls upon States that have not done so to accede to and/or ratify the
Convention, and States parties to consider making the declaration under article 14 of
the Convention;
3.
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so, and consistent with
paragraph 75 of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, to consider
withdrawing their reservations to article 4 of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
4.
Underlines, in the above context, that the provisions of the Convention do
not respond effectively to contemporary manifestations of racial discrimination, in
particular in relation to xenophobia and related intolerance, which is recognized as
the rationale behind the convening of the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in 2001;
5.
Takes note of the acknowledgement by the Human Rights Council and its
subsidiary structures of the existence of both procedural and substantive gaps in the
Convention, which must be filled as a matter of urgency, necessity and priority;
6.
Expresses its concern at the lack of progress in the elaboration of
complementary standards to the Convention to fill existing gaps through the
development of new normative standards aimed at combating all forms of
contemporary and resurgent scourges of racism;
7.
Recalls Human Rights Council resolution 34/36 of 24 March 2017, 12 in
which the Council requested the Chair-Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Elaboration of Complementary Standards to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination to ensure the commencement of
the negotiations on the draft additional protocol to the Convention criminalizing acts
of a racist and xenophobic nature during the tenth session of the Ad Hoc Committee;

__________________
11
12

22/28

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/72/53),
chap. IV, sect. A.
22-27378

A/77/461

8.
Requests the Chair-Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Elaboration of Complementary Standards to present a progress report to the General
Assembly at its seventy-eighth session;
II
International Decade for People of African Descent
9.
Recalls the proclamation of the International Decade for People of African
Descent, as contained in its resolution 68/237 of 23 December 2013, and the
celebratory launch of the Decade on 10 December 2014;
10. Also recalls the programme of activities for the International Decade for
People of African Descent, in which it was recommended that a forum on people of
African descent be established and that consideration be given to the elaboration of a
draft United Nations declaration on the promotion and full respect of the human rights
of people of African descent;
11. Welcomes the establishment of the Permanent Forum on People of African
Descent, through its resolution 75/314 of 2 August 2021, which determines its
mandate and composition, as a consultative mechanism for people of African descent
and other relevant stakeholders and as a platform for improving the safety and quality
of life and livelihoods of people of African descent, as well as an advisory body to
the Human Rights Council;
12. Requests the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action to devote at
least half of its annual session to the elaboration of a draft United Nations declaration
on the promotion and full respect of the human rights of people of African descent,
to be considered during the high-level closing event of the International Decade for
People of African Descent, to be held in the final year of the Decade; 13
13. Invites the Permanent Forum on People of African Descent and the
Working Group of Experts on People of African Descent, in accordance with their
respective mandates, to contribute to the elaboration of a draft United Na tions
declaration on the promotion and full respect of the human rights of people of African
descent;
14. Recalls the draft programme of action for the International Decade for
People of African Descent as an instructive framework in which all the initiat ives
aimed at improving the quality of life of people of African descent are anchored and
which, if adopted, would contribute to the programme of activities for the
implementation of the International Decade for People of African Descent;
15. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the programme of
activities for the implementation of the International Decade for People of African
Descent 14 and on a global call for concrete action for the total elimination of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action; 15
16. Acknowledges and profoundly regrets the untold suffering and evils
inflicted on millions of men and women and children as a result of slavery, the slave
trade, the transatlantic slave trade, colonialism, apartheid, genocide and past
tragedies, noting that some States have taken the initiative to apologize and have paid
reparations, where appropriate, for grave and massive violations committed, further
__________________

See resolution 69/16.
A/77/333.
15
A/77/294.
13
14

22-27378

23/28

A/77/461

calls upon those that have not yet expressed remorse or presented apologies to find
some way to contribute to the restoration of the dignity of victims, and calls upon all
the relevant States that have not already done so to dispense reparatory justice,
contributing to the development and recognition of the dignity of the affected States
and their people;
17. Takes note of the report of the Working Group of Experts on People of
African Descent, 16 invites the Human Rights Council, through the Chair of the
Working Group, to continue to submit a report on the work of the Working Group to
the General Assembly, and in this regard invites the Chair of the Working Group to
engage in an interactive dialogue with the Assembly under the item entitled
“Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance” at
its seventy-eighth session;
18. Takes note with appreciation of the proclamation of 31 August as the
International Day for People of African Descent, and invites all Member States, all
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system and other international and
regional organizations, the private sector and academia, as well as civil society, to
observe the International Day for People of African Descent in an appropriate manner,
in accordance with its resolution 75/170 of 16 December 2020;
19. Stresses that everyone, including people and communities of African
descent, should be able to participate in an inclusive manner and guide the design and
implementation of processes that contribute to halting, reversing and repairing the
lasting consequences and ongoing manifestations of systemic racism, and notably
acknowledges the important role that young people have played and should continue
to play in these processes;
20. Encourages States to examine the extent and impact of systemic racism
and to adopt effective legal, policy and institutional measures that address racism
beyond a summation of individualized acts, recommends that progress be measured
according to indicators grounded in impact rather than intent, and further calls for the
recognition of the impact of racial discrimination and inequality experienced by
children and youth of African descent in all areas of life, including the administration
of justice, law enforcement, education, health, family life and development; 17
21. Welcomes the establishment of an international independent expert
mechanism, comprising three experts with law enforcement and human rights expertise,
aimed at furthering transformative change for racial justice and equality in the context
of law enforcement globally, especially where relating to the legacies of colonialism
and the transatlantic slave trade in enslaved Africans, to investigate the responses of
Governments to peaceful anti-racism protests and all violations of international
human rights law and to contribute to accountability and redress for victims;
22. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Department of Global Communications of the Secretariat to continue
awareness-raising efforts and public information campaigns in support of the
International Decade for People of African Descent through the use of social networks
and digital media, including the wide distribution of user-friendly, concise and
accessible versions of material in this regard;

__________________
16
17

24/28

A/77/232.
See A/77/294.
22-27378

A/77/461

III
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
23. Requests the Secretary-General and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide the resources necessary for the effective
fulfilment of the mandates of the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, the Working
Group of Experts on People of African Descent, the Group of Independent Eminent
Experts on the Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of Complementary Standards and the
Permanent Forum on People of African Descent, and in this regard to ensure the
participation of experts in each session of those follow -up mechanisms in order to
provide advice on the specific issues under discussion and assist the mechanisms in
their deliberations and the adoption of action-oriented recommendations in relation
to the implementation of the Declaration and Programme of Action;
24. Recalls Human Rights Council resolutions 43/1 and 47/21, and welcomes
the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the
promotion and protection of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of Africans
and of people of African descent against excessive use of force and other human rights
violations by law enforcement officers and the annex thereto, entitled “Four-point
Agenda towards Transformative Change for Racial Justice and Equality”, submitted
pursuant to resolution 43/1; 18
25. Stresses the importance of consolidating all efforts aimed at combating
racism under a single anti-racial discrimination unit, including on the issues of racial
equality and justice;
IV
Group of Independent Eminent Experts on the Implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action
26. Recalls the report of the Group of Independent Eminent Experts on the
Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action on its seventh
session, 19 and in this regard notes that the session, which took place in private and
virtually, was held on 26 October 2021;
27. Notes resolution 51/32 of the Human Rights Council entitled “From rhetoric
to reality: a global call for concrete action against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance” and the recommendations contained therein with
regard to the Group of Independent Eminent Experts, further agrees to limit the tenure
of the Eminent Experts to four years, which may be renewed once, and that the current
Experts will continue to serve until the appointment of new Experts is finalized, and
requests that the limit of tenure also apply to the continued service of Experts already
appointed as of the date of adoption of the present resolution;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint the five Eminent Experts, one
from each region, from among candidates proposed by the President of the Human
Rights Council, after consultation with the regional groups, in line with the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action 20 and paragraph 13 of resolution 56/266, by the
end of 2023;
29. Requests the five regional groups to nominate a candidate for appointment
to the Group of Independent Eminent Experts in a timely fashion;
__________________

A/HRC/47/53.
See A/77/233.
20
A/CONF.189/12, para. 191 (b).
18
19

22-27378

25/28

A/77/461

V
Trust fund for the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination
30. Recalls the establishment by the Secretary-General, in 1973, of the trust
fund for the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination as a funding mechanism that has been utilized for the implementation
of the activities of the three Decades for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination declared by the General Assembly, and in this regard appreciates the
fact that the trust fund has also been utilized for the subsequent programmes and
operational activities transcending the three Decades;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to include, in his report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the General Assem bly at its seventyeighth session, a section outlining the progress in the implementation of paragraph 18
of its resolution 68/151 of 18 December 2013 regarding the revitalization of the trust
fund for the purpose of ensuring the successful implementation of the activities of the
International Decade for People of African Descent and enhancing the effectiveness
of the comprehensive follow-up to the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance and the effective
implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
32. Strongly appeals to all Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and individuals, as well as other donors in a position to do so, to
contribute generously to the trust fund, and to that end requests the Secretary -General
to continue to undertake appropriate contacts and initiatives to encourage contributions;
VI
Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
33. Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights
Council on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance, 21 and encourages the Special Rapporteur, within her mandate, to
continue to focus on the issues of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance and incitement to hatred, which impede peaceful coexistence and
harmony within societies, and to submit reports in this regard to the Human Rights
Council and the General Assembly;
34. Reiterates its previous requests to the Special Rapporteur to consider
examining national models of mechanisms that measure racial equality and their value
added in the eradication of racial discrimination and to report on such challenges,
successes and best practices in her next report, and expresses concern at the lack of
progress in this regard;
VII
Commemoration of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
35. Takes note with appreciation of the adoption of a political declaration
aimed at mobilizing political will at the national, regional and international levels for
the full and effective implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action and its follow-up processes during a one day high-level meeting of the General
Assembly, on 22 September 2021, commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the

__________________
21

26/28

A/77/512.
22-27378

A/77/461

adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, under the theme
“Reparations, racial justice and equality for people of African descent”; 22
36. Emphasizes the critical importance of increasing public support for the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and the participation of civil society
and other relevant stakeholders in its realization, and requests the United Nations
system to strengthen its awareness-raising campaigns to increase the visibility of the
message of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, its follow-up
mechanisms and the work of the United Nations in the fight against racism; 23
37. Invites Member States, United Nations entities, international and regional
organizations, civil society, including non-governmental organizations, and other
stakeholders to organize and support various high-visibility initiatives, aimed at
effectively increasing awareness at all levels, to commemorate the adoption of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
38. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a programme of outreach, with
the involvement of Member States and United Nations funds and programmes, as well
as civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to appropriately
commemorate the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
39. Calls upon Member States and the United Nations system to intensify
efforts to widely distribute copies of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action, and encourages efforts to ensure its translation and wide dissemination;
40. Expresses its appreciation for the continuing work of the mechanisms
mandated to follow up on the World Conference and the Durban Review Conference;
VIII
Follow-up and implementation activities
41. Acknowledges the guidance and leadership role of the Human Rights
Council, and encourages it to continue to oversee the implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action and the outcome documents of the Durban
Review Conference and the Commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
42. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to continue to provide the Human Rights Council with all the support
necessary for it to achieve its objectives in this regard;
43. Welcomes the consideration by the Human Rights Council, at its fifty-first
session, of the question of a multi-year programme of activities to provide for the
renewed and strengthened outreach activities needed to inform and mobilize the
global public in support of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and to
strengthen awareness of the contribution that they have made in the struggle against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in consultation with
Member States, national human rights institutions, relevant civil society organizations
and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes;
44. Also welcomes the efforts undertaken by the Human Rights Council,
through its Advisory Committee, in preparing a study on appropriate ways and means
of assessing the situation regarding racial equality, while identifying possible gaps
and overlaps;

__________________

Political declaration entitled “United against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance” (resolution 76/1).
23
See Human Rights Council resolution 51/32; see also A/77/233.
22

22-27378

27/28

A/77/461

45. Further welcomes the commemorative event in March 2022 to mark the
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, on the theme “Voices
for action against racism”;
46. Takes note with appreciation of the commemorative plenary meeting of
the General Assembly held on 29 March 2022 to mark the International Day of
Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade;
47. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
48. Requests the President of the General Assembly and the President of the
Human Rights Council to continue to convene annual commemorative meetings of
the Assembly and the Council during the commemoration of the Interna tional Day for
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, with the appropriate focus and themes, and
in this context encourages the participation of eminent personalities active in the
struggle against racial discrimination, Member States and civil society organizations
in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Assembly and the Council,
respectively;
49. Decides to remain seized of this priority matter at its seventy-eighth
session under the item entitled “Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance”.
_____________

28/28

22-27378
