asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6896

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6896th meeting
Wednesday, 19 December 2012, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Loulichki/Mr. Bouchaara . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Morocco)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2012/907)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-65732 (E)

*1265732*

S/PV.6896

that the Afghan people have the confidence to focus on
building a better future.

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2012/907)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Australia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan and
Turkey to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/907, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: I will shortly mark my first full year of
representing the United Nations in Afghanistan. It has
been both a challenge and a privilege.
From Kabul, the international media’s relentless
depiction of Afghanistan almost solely as a place
of conflict and terror is disconcerting. However,
Afghanistan today is about so much more. In my travels
around 22 provinces this past year, I have seen girls
and boys getting an education unthinkable a decade
ago, bustling and industrious towns and villages and
Government institutions slowly becoming increasingly
capable, with Afghans determined to take their destiny
into their own hands. Any transition is, by definition,
a delicate period. Certainty and sustained partnership
with Afghanistan is what is required now, ensuring

2

The Chicago and Tokyo conferences provided a
solid foundation. Sound and representative governance
is central to the concept of transition and underpins
sustainability. This includes a credible and widely
accepted constitutional transfer of power with the
2014 presidential election. The Independent Election
Commission has now named the date — 5 April 2014. The
second part of the electoral indicator is the development
of a credible and robust electoral architecture by early
2013.
Just as important as what is agreed is how it is
agreed, with commitment to a transparent, inclusive and
consultative process. Vital issues such as the electoral
system, appointments to the management bodies,
and a dispute resolution mechanism are currently the
subjects of vigorous debate. I am closely following the
progress of the two electoral laws, which will require
compromise on all sides.
The Council of Minister’s support for building a
system of voter identification and eligibility based
on two pillars — the issuance of electronic national
identity cards and a series of fraud-mitigating
measures — requires a coherent approach across
Afghan institutions, with strong Afghan leadership
in driving the implementation of the national
identification programme. Such arrangements must
respect and reinforce the different constitutional
roles and responsibilities of the various institutions,
including the constitutionally mandated authority of the
Independent Election Commission in the compilation
and finalization of the voter list. They must ensure the
broadest possible enfranchisement of Afghan actors
across the country and create conditions for the fullest
possible participation of the Afghans, men and women
on election day throughout the country.
Given the necessary realignment of electoral
assistance, a United Nations needs assessment mission
made an initial visit to Kabul in December. Following a
second visit in early 2013, the team will advise United
Nations leadership on appropriate parameters for
support to Afghan-led and managed electoral processes.
In ensuring the legitimacy of institutions,
anti-corruption efforts are also high on the agenda.
I welcome the robust reporting of the Independent
Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee on the Kabul Bank crisis. A public inquiry is

12-65732

S/PV.6896

a valuable step towards public accountability. Decisive
Government action to strengthen the country’s financial
sector is now required to ensure that such events are
never repeated.
Closely correlated with corruption is the corrosive
effect of the narcotics industry. The increase in both
cannabis and opium cultivation reported in this period
must be a wake-up call, with the illicit economy being
an active impediment to institutional development
and sustainable growth. Greater attention to tackling
this scourge – including on the part of international
donors – is required across all lines of effort, including
the use of such platforms as the counter-narcotics
confidence-building measure of the Istanbul Process.
Finally, on the issue of ensuring a sound
institutional framework, I note the protracted delay in
making a number of senior appointments. This includes
the constitutional requirement for a new Chief Justice.
Meanwhile, civil society continues to be concerned at
the extended process of appointments to Afghanistan’s
Independent Human Rights Commission. As was made
clear at Tokyo, the protection of human rights is vital
to state legitimacy and a cornerstone of sustained
international engagement. The gains made over the
past decade — particularly in the rights of women and
girls — must be reinforced and expanded.
Progress in implementation of the Law on the
Elimination of Violence Against Women can be seen
over the past three years, but application remains
uneven. Only a small number of cases are ever reported.
I am, however, encouraged by what appears to be
increased confidence in approaching authorities, and
by successful prosecutions. The human rights unit of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) conducted research in 16 provinces over the
course of a year, and found that in 470 reported cases of
violence against women, prosecutors filed indictments
in 163, with convictions in 100.

notes, it is the insurgency that is behind the majority of
cases. The Taliban leadership has reacted strongly to
our assessments on civilian causalities. We stand by our
verification systems and international legal definitions
of civilians. To account fully and most precisely for all
incidents, regardless of their perpetrators, UNAMA has
been investigating all claims, including those presented
by the insurgency. We continue to be ready to cooperate
with all parties in order to contribute to the reduction
and prevention of civilian causalities and to provide as
precise and correct reporting as possible.
I
welcome
increased
attention
to
the
professionalization of the police with a law enforcement
role distinct from the military, in line with Tokyo
commitments. The new Minister of the Interior
has reiterated the importance of community police
initiatives in building public confidence.
National accord, reconciliation, peace, good
governance and justice are Afghanistan’s greatest
needs. The High Peace Council’s work is enjoying
renewed momentum following its positive visit to
Pakistan, facilitated logistically by UNAMA. Highlevel engagement and concrete outcomes were
highlighted in the joint statement. Consistent dialogue
between the neighbours can now help build upon mutual
understandings, facilitate peace and reconciliation
efforts, and engage the insurgency.
In support of Afghan-led efforts, encouraged by the
Afghan parties and in line with its mandate, UNAMA
is ready to facilitate an inclusive infra-Afghan
dialogue, eventually bringing the series of dialogue
meetings to Afghanistan. On 8 and 9 December, initial
consultative meetings were held amongst diverse
Afghan stakeholders to help define the focus, agenda,
participation and modalities of such a process. The first
track-two inter-Afghan dialogue under the UNAMA
umbrella is planned to take place in Turkmenistan in
February 2013.

The challenges women who take an active role in
public life still face were starkly highlighted in this
period. On 1 December, Anisa, a young woman in
Kapisa who was an active volunteer in vaccination
initiatives was killed. Ten days later, on Human Rights
Day, the acting head of the Department of Women’s
Affairs of Laghman province was murdered, her
predecessor having been killed a few months earlier.

I welcome the adoption of resolution 2082 (2012),
which defines a strong role for the Afghan Government
and provides for increased flexibility in the mechanism
to secure travel ban exemptions for those insurgents
who are willing to contribute towards these aims.
Exploratory dialogue requires contacts with recognized
interlocutors, and that resolution establishes a less
onerous means to ensure compliance.

Civilians overall are bearing the heaviest burden
of the conflict and, as the Secretary-General’s report

in

12-65732

Afghanistan is increasingly embedding itself
regional consultative processes, partnership

3

S/PV.6896

agreements and regional organizations. The Istanbul
Process has moved into practical work on the agreed
confidence-building measures. I look forward to the
endorsement of implementation plans at the next senior
officials’ meeting, to be held in Baku in February.
Afghanistan now enjoys observer status in
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. In a new
development, UNAMA has also institutionalized
dialogue with the organization to help seek support for
a stable Afghanistan within the region.
On the security transition, the Afghan Government
is seeking to assert a greater lead to smooth the many
associated processes. I urge cooperation from Member
States in that regard. Soon, the start of the fourth
tranche of security transition will be announced by
President Karzai. Afghan authorities and communities
need to be better engaged on the closure of provincial
reconstruction teams. So far, communication and
coordination on assets- and tasks-transfer has varied
enormously.
There have been some appeals to the United Nations
to assume new functions and projects from other parts of
the international community. However, the very core of
transition is that the Afghan Government is in the lead.
That must be the first port of call. Where requested by
the Afghan Government, the United Nations will look
to assist. I emphasize, however, that tasks and efforts
must be part of agreed Afghan national priorities and
strategies, and be in line with United Nations mandates
and capacities.
Amid that focus on building the sustainable
development systems for the future, immediate
humanitarian needs must not be forgotten. Contributions
for this year’s consolidated humanitarian appeal — at 48 per
cent of the requested $448 million — were disappointing.
I hope donors will strengthen their support in the coming
year.
As I end my presentation, I would like to thank the
Permanent Mission of Germany, under the leadership of
Ambassador Wittig, for its support and contribution to
the work of all of us as the penholder on the Afghanistan
portfolio. I would also like to thank all the outgoing
members of the Security Council for their support and
hard work.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Kubiš
for his briefing.

4

I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): First, let me congratulate
you and your delegation, Sir, on the assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for December. My
delegation assures you of our full support as you steer
the activities of the Council to a successful conclusion.
We are also thankful to our good friend Ambassador
Singh Puri of India and his team for their excellent
leadership of the Council during November.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
on Afghanistan (S/2012/907). I also wish to thank
Special Representative Kubiš for honouring us with
his presence here today. We are grateful to him for his
insightful briefing and able leadership of the United
Nations activities in the country.
Eleven years ago, following the fall of the Taliban
regime, the Bonn Agreement was signed. It created a
concrete road map that paved the way for a new era
in Afghanistan’s history. The Agreement was about an
integrated national movement, aimed at establishing the
foundations for peace, stability and democracy, with
the help of the international community. An interim
administration was established, led by President Hâmid
Karzai. The inauguration ceremony, which took place
on 22 December 2001, had an atmosphere filled with
unprecedented enthusiasm. I was there and remember
very clearly how the representatives of the Afghan
people, coming from all walks of life, had come together
to express their shared feelings about the difficult past
and their hope for a better future.
Eleven years ago, we were weak. Conflict and
consecutive foreign intervention had led us to become
a failed State and a broken society; in fact, we were
on the verge of collapse. It was impossible to change
that situation alone. That is why the international
community was placed at the centre of our efforts
for peace and stability. In that historic decade, the
international community and Afghanistan struggled
together, worked together and joined hands for the noble
objective of peace and a better future for the Afghan
people. It was one of the most significant international
engagements of our time, with more than 50 countries
providing military and civilian support. Our shared
achievements are monumental.
Early this morning I arrived from Kabul, a city that
I found to be vibrant and full of life, in contrast to a city
that appeared dead 11 years ago. The situation in the

12-65732

S/PV.6896

country has substantially improved. It is a great source
of pride and honour that millions of Afghan girls and
boys are going to school, millions of people have access
to health services and millions of people are emerging
from poverty and destitution. But the most important
success is that, 11 years later, the Government of
Afghanistan, with the help of the international
community, has started to take full responsibility for
nation-building and for normalizing the situation. It is
imperative that, during transition and beyond, we and
the international community continue to be together.

are preparing for a new beginning in the country. The
absolute majority of Afghans see their future as linked
with the continuation of the democratic system that
we have established over the past 10 years. There is a
concern shared by all Afghan people: not to lose what we
have achieved and not to go backwards, but to continue
moving forward. Once again, as happened in Bonn
11 years ago, we see the prospect of an emerging unity
of understanding between different political forces
that can lead to unity of purpose and to a constructive
national dialogue aimed at saving the future.

As we approach 2014, when the international
combat forces leave Afghanistan, the transition is
gaining momentum. In the next two years, a successful
security transition and, most important, an efficient
political preparation will enable us to embark upon the
decade of transformation, in which we will stabilize the
situation in Afghanistan. The steady implementation
of security transition is but one example of the many
gains made thus far. With the first three stages of
the five-stage transition process nearly complete, the
overwhelming majority of Afghanistan’s population
now resides in areas where Afghan security forces
have lead security responsibility. I am pleased to say
that security has improved in areas where lead security
responsibility has been transitioned to Afghan forces.
The Afghan National Army and Police are operating
with greater confidence and capability. The launch of
stage four of the security transition will be officially
announced in the coming days.

At the centre of that dialogue is our grand
strategy of national reconciliation. The peace process
gained momentum following the visit of the High
Peace Council, led by His Excellency Mr. Salahuddin
Rabbani, to Islamabad last month. The peace process
road map, which was presented to the Government of
Pakistan during the visit, provides a concise framework
for effective action that focuses on the release of
some Taliban detainees in Pakistan’s custody, the
establishment of direct contacts with influential
Taliban leaders, the provision of safe passage for
Taliban negotiators, and the sustaining of peace talks
with the armed opposition groups, which include, but
are not limited to, the Taliban.

As the transition proceeds, we see it as imperative
that the sustainability of Afghanistan’s security forces
remain a priority. The Chicago NATO Summit, last
May, was a milestone in that regard. We appreciate the
commitments pledged by NATO and other partners for
long-term support to our army and police. We also look
forward to the development of a new NATO mission
in 2014, which will focus on training, advising and
assisting Afghan national security forces.
Transition is not about security alone. To normalize
and stabilize the situation in the country, we need to put
in place a comprehensive political framework that will
provide the country and the international community
with a new agenda at the end of the military phase and
at the beginning of a new, transformative period. Such a
framework will comprise at least three main elements.
The first element is national consensus and national
reconciliation. The Afghan people and political forces

12-65732

Just two weeks ago, His Excellency Foreign
Minister Rassoul paid a visit to Islamabad, where he
held extensive discussions on bilateral cooperation and
ways to achieve the goals set out in the peace process
road map.
As the Afghan-led reconciliation process forges
ahead, we will continue to rely on the support of the
international community as a whole and the United
Nations in particular. We look to the Council to help us
expedite our efforts by meeting our delisting and travelban exemption requests for concerned individuals.
We recognize and welcome with appreciation the fact
that the successor resolution to resolution 1988 (2011)
adequately incorporates the ideas and recommendations
of the Afghan Government to help advance our peace
and reconciliation efforts. Special thanks go to our
colleagues at the United States Mission for their
efforts in drafting the resolution and to the Council as
a whole for the constructive spirit of compromise and
cooperation during negotiations.
The second element involves elections. In April
2014, Afghanistan will choose its new leadership,
just a few months before NATO combat forces leave

5

S/PV.6896

the country. With the elections and the end of the
military phase of international support, a new chapter
in Afghanistan is unfolding, one characterized by
sovereignty, self-reliance and the normalization of the
situation. The preparations under way are Afghan-led
and Afghan-managed. The international community is
assisting us in these important elections. The Afghan
Independent Election Commission, with the support
of the Government of Afghanistan, has responsibly
begun preparations for the elections by announcing
the elections calendar and by focusing on all aspects
of the preparation process — political, technical and
financial — well in advance.
Our diligent planning may help to bring more
certainty to the Afghan people about the political
transition. The draft electoral law is now under
consideration by parliament. As noted by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, elections will be the cornerstone
of the political transition. Elections have the potential
to become a new venue for national consensus and
unity, a reflection of our shared vision of a stable and
peaceful country. It will be an opportunity to put to the
test our unfaltering efforts for human rights, including
the rights of women.
The third element is international and regional
cooperation. The key aspects of the outcomes of the
Chicago and Tokyo conferences were about not only
security but also political guarantees for the future. The
international community and Afghans came together to
build partnerships and to ensure success in achieving
our shared goals. The International Security Assistance
Force and General Assembly resolutions on Afghanistan
reiterated the global consensus on supporting the
transition and assisting Afghanistan in the long haul.
We hope that this affirmation of international support
will remain.
As part of our long-term partnership with the
international community, we have entered into a number
of bilateral and strategic partnership agreements. We
are discussing with the United States the details of
our security cooperation, in line with our strategic
partnership. Similar discussions are ongoing with
our NATO partners on the scope and shape of a new
training, advisory and assistance mission. Early next
month, President Karzai will visit the United States, at
the invitation of President Obama. We look forward to
that visit, which will go a long way towards addressing
key issues in the context of our long-term partnership.

6

At the same time, we see visible progress in our
relations with our neighbors and in expanding the scope
of and strengthening regional cooperation. Relations
with Pakistan have taken a new form characterized by
confidence-building. In recent months, contacts at high
levels have helped us concentrate on concrete areas of
cooperation, including counterterrorism efforts and the
strengthening of the peace process.
We are also placing special focus on relations with
other partners in the region. Regional cooperation is
a crucial element of Afghanistan’s future peace and
security, and it is taking a new shape as the Istanbul
Process swiftly moves forward. The Heart of Asia
Ministerial Conference, held in Kabul in June, marked
the beginning of the implementation phase of the
process. The conference emphasized the three key
issues of political consultation, confidence-building
and the role of regional organizations in making
progress towards a peaceful and prosperous region
that is characterized by increased confidence and joint
cooperation. Seven confidence-building measures
were identified covering a wide array of fields, and a
number of action plans have been developed for the
implementation of confidence-building measures. We
look forward to the next Ministerial Meeting of the
Istanbul Process, to be held in Astana, Kazakhstan, this
coming April.
Afghans see the transition as an opportunity for
an end to war and a means to ensure that stability and
prosperity are realized. The transition is also about
continuing our partnership with the international
community and fulfilling our commitment to a safer,
more secure and prosperous future for the Afghan
people. The Bonn and Tokyo conferences were
milestones in that regard, mapping out and defining
the nature of the long-term partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community for
the way forward. On the basis of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, we will work to address the
remaining challenges through a more results-oriented
cooperation and with a special focus on ensuring that
mutual expectations are met.
Let me conclude by saying that we have come a
long way in our joint endeavour. Eleven years later,
Afghanistan is on its path to a new era, reasserting
its status as a fully stable, prosperous and self-reliant
country, able to meet the needs of Afghan citizens in
all sectors. Afghanistan’s full realization of ownership
and leadership is a shared goal of Afghanistan and its

12-65732

S/PV.6896

international partners, one which we must work towards
jointly during this decade of transformation.
Let me also take this opportunity to thank my good
friend Ambassador Wittig and his team at the German
Mission for the able manner in which he has led the
Council’s work on Afghanistan over the past two
years. It was my responsibility to say that, as we are
nearing the end of the month, when the non-permanent
membership of Germany will also end.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me, at the outset,
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kubiš for his comprehensive briefing. Let me also,
shortly before leaving the Council, pay tribute to him
personally and to the whole staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
commitment and for the dedicated work that they are
doing, in sometimes very difficult circumstances.
I align myself with the European Union statement
to be delivered later in this debate.
This debate comes at the end of a crucial year for
Afghanistan. Over the past 12 months, the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community have
engaged in a series of conferences held in Bonn,
Chicago, Kabul and Tokyo. They reaffirmed their
mutual commitments to long-term security, stability
and development in Afghanistan throughout the
transformation decade. The challenge ahead is the swift
and comprehensive implementation of the decisions
taken at those conferences. I would like to touch upon
three issues that are key in that regard.
The first is elections. Conducting free, fair,
transparent and inclusive presidential and provincial
council elections in 2014 is pivotal in ensuring the
legitimacy of the political transition. In that context, we
welcome the Afghan Government’s announcement that
it will hold those elections simultaneously on 5 April
2014. Challenges remain, however, regarding voter
registration and the legal framework. We encourage all
relevant Afghan institutions to continue their efforts
to prepare the elections in an effectively coordinated
manner, working towards the common goal of
conducting credible elections. UNAMA can assume
a beneficial role in supporting the Government of
Afghanistan in its preparations. We therefore welcome
the decision taken by the Afghan authorities to request
UNAMA’s support for the 2014-2015 elections.
Secondly, we welcome the leading role of the
Government of Afghanistan in enabling and establishing
12-65732

the structural framework for the implementation of the
decisions taken at the Tokyo Conference. The political
and technical steering committees, working under the
umbrella of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board, will be instrumental in further improving the
effectiveness of development cooperation. Germany
looks forward to assuming its responsibilities as a
member of those committees, which have already held
their first meetings.
Thirdly, a stable security environment, as we
all know, is of paramount importance in achieving
Afghans’ goal of further developing into a democratic
and economically thriving country. We therefore
welcome the continuing and considerable reduction in
security incidents in Afghanistan. Germany remains
committed to supporting Afghanistan in its efforts to
achieve stability, economic growth and development.
The United Nations will continue to play a crucial
role during the transformation decade to come. There
are many essential and challenging tasks for UNAMA:
to support preparations for the upcoming elections, to
protect and promote gains in the human rights situation,
particularly women’s rights, and to support the Afghan
Government in ensuring effective coordination
between donors and the Government. Germany will
therefore continue to lend its full support to UNAMA
in implementing its mandate.
I would like to conclude by taking this opportunity
to cordially thank our Afghan colleagues, Ambassador
Tanin and his team, for their trust and friendship over
the past two years, during which my country had the
honour to be a member of the Council and to hold the
pen for this important dossier. Germany will continue to
support Afghanistan and its people on the road towards
Afghan-led security, stability and development.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for
his briefing and for his able leadership of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Pakistan has always supported and facilitated the work
UNAMA. We are also encouraged by the positive
feedback about Afghanistan given by Mr. Kubiš even
as the Afghanistan Government tackles difficult
problems. We welcome His Excellency Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, in our midst,
and we appreciate his very important statement today.
UNAMA needs the support of all States Members
of the United Nations to ensure predictable funding

7

S/PV.6896

for its challenging mandate. Budgetary cuts faced by
the Mission should not compromise its core functions.
With a renewed mandate since March, UNAMA has
continued to align itself with the transition process.
The role of UNAMA should evolve on the basis of the
situation on the ground, emerging realities and, above
all, the aspirations of the people of Afghanistan.
The future role of the United Nations in Afghanistan
is going to be very important, especially in the wake of
the drawdown and withdrawal of international forces in
2014. We urge the continued engagement of the United
Nations in five critical areas: support to Government
institutions, facilitation of the peace and reconciliation
process, counter-narcotics, the return and rehabilitation
of refugees, and the coordination of humanitarian aid,
particularly food aid.
Pakistan reiterates the need to maintain the current
political and financial interest in the transition process
with a view to setting Afghanistan on a sustainable
course. In that regard, the Tokyo Conference and the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework provide a
useful mechanism of shared responsibility. Long-term
international support and private-sector investment in
Afghanistan are extremely important. Donor fatigue
and fiscal constraints in the international economic
climate should not squeeze funding in critical areas of
assistance for Afghanistan.
We have always highlighted the value of dialogue
and reconciliation in addressing the question of Afghan
security and in changing the underlying dynamics of
conflict in Afghanistan. The Afghan-led peace and
reconciliation process is the essence of such a dialogue.
It rightly seeks to address the root causes of security
and tackles the fundamental nature of conflict in
Afghanistan.
Pakistan supports an Afghan-led peace process.
We fully support the efforts of the Afghan High Peace
Council under the able leadership of Mr. Salahuddin
Rabbani. His recent visit to Islamabad was productive
and successful. Pakistan will continue to contribute
to the peace process. Efforts in that regard should be
sustained and should be based on solid commitments
and tangible steps by all stakeholders. We hope that
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2082 (2012) will
energize the peace process. The sustainability of our
efforts will be ensured if all stakeholders share the goals
of reconciliation. Afghanistan’s international partners

8

have a crucial role to play in facilitating convergences
and reducing divergences.
The challenges in Afghanistan need a
comprehensive regional approach. We will always
emphasize the importance of regional unity in dealing
with the challenges of security and development in
Afghanistan. Pakistan is engaged in a number of
important regional initiatives on Afghanistan that aim
at greater regional connectivity to promote economic
and commercial cooperation, as well as to root out the
scourges of illicit narcotics, terrorism and extremism.
Last week, the trilateral summit of Afghanistan,
Turkey and Pakistan reaffirmed our vision of regional
cooperation through high-level dialogue, security
cooperation and economic development partnership.
President Asif Ali Zardari participated in the Summit
and held important meetings with President Hamid
Karzai and President Abdullah Gül. The three
Presidents shared and promoted a common vision of
peace and progress in Afghanistan, and they said that
all three leaders, in particular those of Afghanistan and
Pakistan, would work towards the stability of the entire
region.
Last month, Pakistan organized a regional
ministerial conference on counter-narcotics, which was
attended by 13 countries. The conference declaration
seeks to establish a regional contact group on counternarcotics as part of a comprehensive regional approach.
It charts a concrete road map based on agreed timelines.
Pakistan’s bilateral relations with Afghanistan are
driven by a sense of shared destiny. Our cooperation
spans the entire spectrum of political, economic,
educational and cultural relations. There is continuous
dialogue and a regular exchange of visits, including at
the highest levels. Our documented bilateral trade has
reached $2.5 billion, and the target set by our leadership
is to double it by 2015. Our bilateral assistance to
Afghanistan is the highest we have with any other
country. Parliamentary exchanges between the two
countries are strengthening mutual understanding and
goodwill.
In the area of security, Pakistan has always
sought closer engagement with Afghanistan and
its international partners on real issues that lie
beyond polemics. The interdiction of illegal crossborder movement is vital to counter-terrorism, drug
trafficking and commercial smuggling. That is a joint
responsibility, which needs to be discharged more

12-65732

S/PV.6896

vigorously. Pakistan has established over 1,000 posts
along our border with Afghanistan. More than 140,000
Pakistani troops are deployed on our side of the border,
at considerable financial cost. That needs to be matched
on the other side of the international border.
Our ongoing intelligence and military cooperation
with Afghan and international counterparts is
growing. The Tripartite Commission, which includes
representatives of Afghanistan, Pakistan and the
International Security Assistance Force, is a viable
mechanism for such cooperation.
The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan is
often eclipsed by the glare of security and political
challenges. That is unfortunate, as the country continues
to suffer from natural calamities, food insecurity and
the impact of conflict. As reported by the SecretaryGeneral, humanitarian funding in Afghanistan has
suffered a shortfall of 50 per cent, from $900 million
in 2011 to $484 million this year. That is worrisome
for Afghanistan and its immediate neighbours. We
urge the donor community to meet these shortfalls and
limit the impact on the most vulnerable segments of the
population.
By hosting more than 3 million Afghan refugees,
Pakistan is easing the humanitarian burden on
Afghanistan at considerable economic and social cost
to itself. After 10 years of internationally assisted
State-building efforts in Afghanistan, more refugees
should be repatriated to the country. Creating pull
factors in Afghanistan is part of the solution strategy
for Afghan refugees agreed to in Geneva this year. We
look forward to its smooth implementation.
I take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Peter Witting of Germany and his delegation for
their guidance of the Council’s work on Afghanistan
in the past two years. Since this our last scheduled
public meeting for the year, I also express our sincere
appreciation and thanks to the delegations of Colombia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa for their
valuable contributions as non-permanent members. It
has been a privilege to share the Security Council table
with those delegations in 2012.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to start by
thanking Special Representative Ján Kubiš for his
briefing and for his excellent work and able leadership,
and also to welcome Ambassador Tanin to the Council
and thank him for his important contribution. Both
statements offer a clear and comprehensive picture of

12-65732

the Afghanistan of today, the achievements attained
and the challenges still facing the country.
I will limit myself to some points that Portugal
deems of particular importance and, in doing so, I would
like to say that Portugal shares the views reflected in
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union later on.
Portugal believes that the transition process plays a
central role in the present and future of Afghanistan’s
security and stability. By progressively assuming full
responsibility for security, the Afghan authorities are
overcoming significant challenges and cementing
their role within the territory and vis-à-vis the Afghan
population. National leadership and ownership in the
areas of security, governance and development will
allow Afghanistan to assume the role that history and
geography have framed for it and to which the Afghan
people aspire for their country — a land bridge between
East and West, Central and South Asia, in peace with
its neighbours and a factor for peace, security and
prosperity for the entire region.
The international community has a clear stake in the
success of the path the Afghan people have chosen for
their country. International commitment, materialized
in the International Security Assistance Force, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and the activity of a significant number of
United Nations agencies, funds, programmes, as well
as through bilateral cooperation and non-governmental
organizations, provides the tangible evidence that
Afghanistan will not be left on its own when the
military presence redeploys and assumes a different
configuration and role. That activity must be free
and unfettered, and the security of its agents must be
guaranteed and actively safeguarded.
The implementation of the multiple frameworks
currently under discussion or already in place will
require essential conditions, which must be guaranteed
in the first place by the Afghan authorities. To that
end, the United Nations and bilateral and multilateral
international stakeholders, such as the European
Union, NATO and others, must strive to do their best
in coordinating their action in order to maximize the
already scarce resources.
The recent developments in efforts at the regional
level, such as the visit of the High Peace Council to
Pakistan, are also noteworthy as a clear example of
Afghan-led reconciliation efforts engaging also the

9

S/PV.6896

immediate neighbours. Portugal commends such
efforts and expresses its best wishes for success. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report,
“Long-term consistent engagement is vital to
building a shared understanding and, ultimately,
mutual solutions” (S/2012/907, para 56).
Finally, I turn to the issue of human rights and the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan, areas in which
significant steps have been taken, but where a great
deal must still be accomplished. I begin by echoing
the statement issued by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights condemning in the
strongest terms the latest murder of a leading women’s
rights activist in Afghanistan. Najia Seddiqi, the head of
the women’s affairs department in Laghman province,
was shot dead on 10 December. She is the second
female head of that department in Laghman to be killed
in just four months. We urge the Afghan authorities to
leave no stone unturned in finding her killers, in order
to show that people responsible for crimes, in particular
those that specifically target women in Afghanistan,
will be brought to justice.
That tragic loss is another sign that the enemies of
the constitutional order embraced by the Afghan people
see women’s rights and women’s political participation
as a clear threat to their political aims, and target those
who are brave enough to publicly promote and protect
human rights. Their struggle is our struggle. There can
be no compromise in matters of principles and shared
values.
I conclude by reiterating my country’s support for
the work of UNAMA and the Special Representative.
Over the past two years, Portugal has witnessed the
beginning and consolidation of the transition and the
holding of summits, such as those in Istanbul, Bonn,
Chicago and Tokyo, that have created or brought new
energy to mutually reinforcing forms of international
cooperation with Afghanistan. We are pleased to also
count the 2010 Lisbon Summit among those summits
where critical decisions for Afghanistan’s future were
taken. It is our sincere belief and hope that we will be
able to see Afghanistan’s continued stabilization and
growth according to the will of the Afghans themselves
and to the steadfast support of Afghanistan’s numerous
friends and allies.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): We
welcome Special Representative Kubiš back to the
Council and we thank him for his briefing today. We

10

express our deep appreciation to him, the staff of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the United Nations country team for
their continued service to the Afghan people. We
also thank Ambassador Tanin for sharing his views.
As always, we value his close cooperation with
the Security Council. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Witting for his leadership of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011) and for the Afghanistan-related resolutions
adopted by the Council over the past two years.
Today I will address Afghanistan’s continued
transition, recent developments in the Afghan-led peace
process and the need to begin robust planning efforts
for the United Nations role in Afghanistan post-2014.
Afghanistan continues to take the necessary steps
towards a security and political transition in 2014.
The security transition progresses as planned, with
over 75 per cent of the Afghan population, including
every provincial capital, now living in Afghan-led
secured regions. As pledged in Chicago this year, the
international community is committed to sustained
assistance for Afghanistan’s security. In Tokyo we
committed to development support for Afghanistan
in the context of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. Those actions demonstrate the international
community’s unwavering commitment to the Afghan
people, through transition and into the transformation
decade. President Obama reaffirmed the United States’
commitment in May when he signed our strategic
partnership agreement.
With the Afghan elections in 2014 approaching, we
welcome the efforts under way by Afghan authorities to
hold inclusive, transparent and credible elections. Those
elections, as confirmed at the Tokyo Conference, will
help to build a political system that reflects a pluralistic
society and remains firmly founded in the Afghan
Constitution. We appreciate the role that Afghan civil
society is playing in the preparations and, of course, the
United Nations work in support of the electoral process.
Recent regional economic development efforts have
also shown encouraging signs, such as the economic
focus and confidence-building measures of the Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a
Secure and Stable Afghanistan. We welcome the next
ministerial meeting, to be held in Astana in April 2013.
As Afghanistan looks forward to security and
political transitions in 2014, an inclusive political

12-65732

S/PV.6896

dialogue among Afghans is the surest path to long-term
peace and stability. When President Obama visited
Afghanistan, in May, he discussed the importance
of pursuing an Afghan-led reconciliation process. In
Bonn in 2011 and in Tokyo in 2012, the international
community again affirmed its support for a peace and
reconciliation process.
We are encouraged by the briefing of Aghan High
Peace Council Chair Rabbani to this Council in the 1988
Committee last month. Afghans are sitting down with
other Afghans to determine the future of their country.
It is vital that all voices be heard. We welcome the forum
held in Kabul this month, at which Afghan leaders and
parliamentarians joined with women representatives
of the provincial peace councils and the High Peace
Council to discuss strategies for integrating the views
of women in the reconciliation process. We also look
forward to UNAMA’s plans for a complementary tracktwo national dialogue.
We appreciate the role that regional actors can play.
Their support will be critical to peace and stability in
Afghanistan. The visit by Chair Rabbani to Islamabad
in November and the resulting joint statement was a
powerful message to the region. We welcome Pakistan’s
engagement and its call to bring the Taliban to the table
in peace negotiations.
The Security Council aided in that process by
supporting and promoting Afghan-led reconciliation
through the 1988 Committee. We again demonstrated our
commitment this week by reaffirming the Committee’s
mandate to enact sanctions against those individuals
associated with the Taliban who constituted a threat to
the peace, stability and security of Afghanistan, and to
encourage sanctioned individuals to reconcile. Those
who refuse to meaningfully participate in reconciliation
should know that the Security Council will continue to
develop the necessary measures to inhibit their ability
to execute violent attacks in Afghanistan. At this point,
it is up to the Taliban to fulfil its obligations and decide
to move forward.
With the security and political transitions under
way, we believe it is time to begin discussions about
the United Nations role, including the roles of UNAMA
and the United Nations agencies, after 2014. United
Nations support has been indispensable and will remain
so going forward. We look forward to the United
Nations consulting with Afghanistan, the Council,
regional partners and Member States in its planning an

12-65732

integrated vision for long-term support to the Afghan
people.
The future of Afghanistan is indeed for Afghans to
determine. Afghans themselves will need to have the
difficult conversations about how to build an inclusive
society that reflects their own needs and wants. The
United States will continue to support them, and
welcomes the valuable contributions of the United
Nations in those efforts.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I join others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for scheduling today’s
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, for his statement. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his most recent report
(S/2012/907), and we are particularly appreciative of
the briefing by Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan.
As the year 2012 draws down, today’s debate
provides us an opportunity for a stock-taking of the
collective efforts of the international community in
Afghanistan. An overview would indicate that the
international community in Afghanistan has achieved
important milestones this year on the long road towards
peace, progress and security in the country.
At major international conferences in Bonn, Chicago
and Tokyo and at regional-level conferences in Istanbul
and Kabul, the international community renewed its
commitment to peace, security and development in
Afghanistan. The realization of commitments flowing
from the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan is essential
for Afghanistan’s fiscal sustainability and its quest for
self-reliance. Regional cooperation has also received
new momentum under the Istanbul Heart of Asia process
and other regional processes. The Delhi Investment
Summit on Afghanistan, held on 28 June and hosted
by India, was an important endeavour in focusing
regional and international attention on investmenting
in Afghanistan and its potential to provide economic
development and stability to Afghanistan during the
transition period.
Afghanistan looks forward to holding simultaneous
presidential and provincial elections in April 2014, which
will be another important step in the consolidation of
democracy in Afghanistan.
Amid those salient developments, Afghanistan
continues to face an existential threat from terrorism.

11

S/PV.6896

The infrastructure of terror is still intact in the region
and draws upon ideological, financial and logistical
support from beyond its borders. The syndicate of
terrorism, which includes elements of the Al-Qaida,
the Taliban, Lashkar-e-Toiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups, is active in the region and is far
from being isolated. While the security situation
continues to remain fragile, the International Security
Assistance Force drawdown has proceeded apace.
That has accentuated the uncertainties, with a risk of
creating a security vacuum coupled with an economic
downturn in Afghanistan, which could undermine the
hard-fought gains we have achieved together during the
past decade. The security transition must ensure lasting
peace and security for all sections of Afghan society.
We renewed the mandate of the sanctions regimes
created under resolution 1988 (2011) and resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) just two days ago (see
S/PV.6890). In the functioning of the sanctions regimes,
it is important to ensure that the fight against terrorism
is not be diluted. The linkages between Al-Qaida
and the Taliban are real and cannot be wished away.
The recently adopted Security Council resolutions
(resolutions 2082 (2012) and 2083 (2012)) clearly
recognize that aspect and have tasked the Monitoring
Team to report periodically on the matter.
As Afghanistan takes forward the task of national
reconciliation in accordance with the criteria set
forth in the Kabul communiqué, we fully support
the efforts for regional confidence-building as a
critical component of international efforts to support
the country. Regional cooperation and connectivity
are critical for Afghanistan’s political and economic
progress. We are fully cognizant that the economic
viability of Afghanistan depends upon its fuller
integration into the neighbourhood so that it can regain
its historical role as a land bridge between South Asia,
Central Asia, the Middle East and Eurasia. Conscious
of that imperative need, India has taken the lead in two
commercial confidence-building measures under the
Istanbul Process.
Afghanistan and India have had a long shared
history going back over millenniums. The two countries
are natural strategic partners by virtue of geography
and a common vision of peace and cooperation in the
region. President Karzai’s visit to India last month
offered us an opportunity to review the entire gamut
of the bilateral relationship and to discuss regional
and international issues of mutual interest. During

12

the visit, the Prime Minister of India, Mr. Manmohan
Singh, reiterated India’s support of Afghanistan during
the crucial period of transition to the end of 2014
and thereafter. The implementation of the strategic
partnership agreement of October 2011 between the
two countries has already been set in motion with
the convening of the first meeting of the Partnership
Council on 1 May.
During the past decade, India pledged up to
$2 billion in development and humanitarian assistance.
We have managed to carry out some of the most
economical and cost-effective projects in Afghanistan.
The $500 million in assistance announced by the Prime
Minister of India in May 2011 is being spent from
2012 to 2015. The projects under consideration will be
aligned with the projects suggested under the national
priority programme of the Government of Afghanistan.
The pace and nature of the utilization of the present
and future Indian assistance will be determined by the
preference, comfort level and absorptive capacity of the
Afghan Government.
India remains unwavering in its commitment to
assisting the people of Afghanistan in their endeavour
to build a peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous
nation. We support the good work being done by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
As we enter the new year, we must create an enabling
environment wherein the Afghan people can live in
peace and security and decide their future themselves
without outside interference, coercion or intimidation.
We need to impart added momentum to our effort to
strengthen the Afghan Government’s capacity for
security, governance and economic development.
The international community must continue to work,
with renewed vigour and unity of purpose, towards
strengthening the efforts of the Afghan Government in
seeking solutions that are inclusive and are led by the
Afghan people themselves.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I should
first like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Ján Kubiš, for the comprehensive report that he
gave us today on the situation in Afghanistan, as well
as to congratulate him for his work and his dedication
during the first year of his activities there. I would also
like to welcome Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, and to thank him
for explaining to the Council his perspective on his

12-65732

S/PV.6896

country’s development over the past few years and
the way in which his Government and his people have
managed to overcome a critical phase and find the path
to peace. I also wish to register to my great pleasure
in acknowledging the contribution of Germany in the
country — physically, economically and by supplying
troops — as well as that of our colleague in the Council,
Ambassador Peter Wittig, in guiding the management
and focus of our actions.
The policies and measures adopted by the
Government of Afghanistan to make headway in
implementing the principles and mutual commitments
in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,
including the adoption of action plans to meet the
indicators and the finalization of the aid management
policy, demonstrate its determination to work for a
stable, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan. That
progress constitutes additional steps towards meeting
the commitments taken on by Afghanistan in the Tokyo
Conference in the five identified priority areas. Those
commitments pertain to democracy and fair elections;
governance, the rule of law and human rights; the
integrity of public finances and commercial banking;
budget execution and governance; and inclusive and
sustained growth.
The determination of a timetable for the
simultaneous holding of the presidential and provincial
elections in April 2014 and tackling the plan of
operations presented by the Independent Election
Commission are grounds for optimism on the process.
The holding of inclusive and transparent elections
will be a clear indicator of the progress of the Afghan
State with regard to democratic consolidation. The
Organization must be ready to respond to the requests
made by Afghanistan and provide all the necessary
technical assistance in electoral matters.
On security and the protection of the civilian
population, we must voice our concern at the increase
in the number of civilian victims over the past three
months. Given that the transition process is progressing
according to the agreed timetable, with a view to
Afghans having complete responsibility and leadership
in 2014, it is vital to continue to increase the capacity
and professionalism of the Afghan security and
police forces. That must include institutionalizing the
mechanisms for accountability and combating impunity,
as well as strengthening measures for the protection of
civilians, respect for human rights and ensuring the
command and control structure. In that connection, the

12-65732

contribution of the International Security Assistance
Force and the NATO training mission is still essential.
With regard to the political process and the process
of reconciliation, it is important that the parties
show clearly that they are committed to dialogue
and reconciliation so as to avoid instability and
fragmentation. We are aware of the difficulties to be
overcome. But we are also optimistic, given the signs
of interest in dialogue shown by various sectors of the
insurgency. We highlight as well the positive balance
in the implementation of the programme of peace
and reconciliation. The large number of reintegrated
persons and the decreased number of incidents allow
for confidence in the sustainability of the programme.
In that context, we welcome the Council’s
adoption on Monday of resolution 2082 (2012), which
strengthens the cooperation and dialogue between the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) and the Government of Afghanistan. In addition
to reaffirming the special role of Afghanistan in the
listing and delisting process, the procedure set out in
the resolution to authorize exemptions from the travel
ban on persons on the list, so as to allow them to take
part in meetings as part of the peace process, shows the
Security Council’s commitment to Afghan ownership
of the reconciliation dialogue process and facilitates
decisions and actions of the Committee having a direct
and timely beneficial effect on the process.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General should continue giving priority to
supporting the Afghan-led peace and reconciliation
process and lend help with Afghan institutional
capacity-building, to fulfil their responsibilities
in priority areas such as governability, economic
development and regional cooperation. We hope that
the reductions projected for 2013 will not significantly
affect the operational capacity of the Mission and that
it will continue to be able to fulfil the essential tasks of
its mandate.
The United Nations should continue to play a central
role in coordinating international assistance to ensure
that it is in accordance with Afghan priorities and so
as to avoid duplication of effort. As to the worrying
humanitarian situation, it is imperative that all parties
respect humanitarian principles and allow aid to reach
those people most in need. That must be an essential
requirement for participation in the reconciliation

13

S/PV.6896

process. Cognizant of the devastating need for aid in the
areas of health, sanitation, education and food security,
we join the call by the humanitarian team in the country
for donors to earmark at least 10 per cent of official
development assistance to funding humanitarian aid
needs.
Achieving stability in Afghanistan is the
fundamental goal. It is therefore essential to foster a
State architecture that guarantees governability and
economic development at the local and national levels
and also provide access to justice, because those are
critical elements for a lasting and definitive transition.
Consensus about deepening and expanding relations
between Afghanistan and the international community
should contribute to building the State and its capacity
to fulfil its primary responsibility to meet the Afghan
people’s needs. That relationship should translate into
tangible political, social and development results.
Lastly, I want to state that we agree with the
Secretary-General that the seriousness with which
the Afghan Government has moved ahead in meeting
its commitments made at the Tokyo Conference on
Afghanistan calls out for the international community
to make similar progress in meeting its commitments,
such that Afghanistan stabilizes into a fully functioning
sustainable State that is capable of providing basic
services to its people without depending upon foreign
assistance.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2012/907), Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for his briefing and
for his leadership of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Ambassador
Zahir Tanin for his comments and contribution this
afternoon. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank Ambassador Wittig for his chairmanship
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011) and for his guidance to the Council on the
Afghanistan dossier.
I will focus my statement today on four key
areas — the 2014 elections, the peace and reconciliation
process, human rights and the role of the United Nations
in Afghanistan.
First, with regard to the elections, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report suggests, the 2014 elections are
central to the success of the Afghan political transition.
They will bring many challenges, but we should not

14

underestimate their importance. The United Kingdom
looks forward to credible and inclusive elections that
deliever a peaceful transition of power to a Government
chosen by the people of Afghanistan. The Afghan
people will demand nothing less, and the international
community should strongly support that objective. The
timetable for elections remains ambitious. The United
Nations has an important role to play in supporting the
electoral process, providing expertise and facilitating
open dialogue. We fully support the analysis outlined
in the Secretary-General’s report on the issue.
Turning now to the peace and reconciliation
process, a political settlement in Afghanistan remains a
top priority for the international community, including
the United Kingdom. The offer to the Taliban and
other armed groups remains the same. It is for them
to sever ties to Al-Qaida and other terrorist networks
and participate in peaceful dialogue with the Afghan
Government. The time for dialogue is now. We welcome
UNAMA’s work to date in support of that peace process.
Last year, when the Council split the former regime
established by resolution 1267 (1999) , it sent a clear
message. Resolution 2082 (2012), adopted on Monday,
built on that and introduced a highly flexible travel-ban
exemption procedure and greater consultation with the
Afghan Government. It further reinforced the Council’s
commitment to ensuring that sanctions work in support
of the peace process, and never as a brake on it.
The United Kingdom will continue to do all that
we can to support the efforts of Afghanistan and
Pakistan in strengthening their bilateral relations.
In the past few months both nations have stepped up
their engagement and taken practical steps towards a
genuine partnership in the pursuit of peace. The United
Kingdom has convened three trilateral meetings in the
past six months and will continue to offer a forum for
open dialogue.
Thirdly, on the subject of improving human
rights in Afghanistan, we welcome the Afghan
Government’s continuing commitment to protecting
the human rights of the Afghan people, as enshrined
in the Constitution, but there is still much work to be
done. The United Kingdom is deeply concerned by
reports of serious violence against women and harmful
traditional practices, as reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report. We urge the Government of
Afghanistan to continue its important work to ensure
the full implementation of the law on the elimination of
violence against women.
12-65732

S/PV.6896

The United Kingdom also noted with concern the
figures on civilian casualties in the Secretary-General’s
latest report. We note that the overwhelming and
increasing majority of such incidents are caused by the
insurgency. The United Kingdom condemns all such
acts.

At the same time, the security situation in
the country remains challenging. Heavy civilian
casualties continue to be incurred in armed hostilities.
Unfortunately, the international military presence is
responsible for some of these. Additional measures
must be taken to minimize civilian casualties.

Finally, I want to address the long-term role of the
United Nations in Afghanistan. UNAMA is doing an
important job. The renewal of its mandate next March
will provide a further opportunity for the Council to
focus on the next steps in Afghanistan. We will work
to ensure that UNAMA continues to have a clear set
of priorities and deliverables and that it has adequate
resources to allow it to deliver.

Much remains to be done in enhancing the
preparedness of the Afghan National Army and Police.
Failing that, it will be extremely difficult to ensure
Government control throughout the country’s territory.
We note the problem of the feasibility of an accelerated,
time-bound transfer of responsibilities from the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). Would
it not be more appropriate to first report to the Security
Council on the implementation of the mandate it has
issued? In that context, we cannot conceal our concern
about the possible spill-over of extremism into the
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States
that are neighbours of Afghanistan.

We note that the transition of security responsibilities
continues to make progress. With the third tranche now
in place, 75 per cent of the population live in areas
where the Afghan national forces have the security
lead. In line with that progress, the British Prime
Minister announced today that British force levels will
be reduced from 9,000 to around 5,200 by the end of
2013. That drawdown is in line with planning by the
International Security Assistance Force and the NATO
strategy agreed in Chicago this year. But even as the
drawdown progresses, our commitment to supporting
the Afghan Government remains steadfast. The United
Kingdom will deliver on all the commitments it has
made in Chicago and Tokyo to Afghanistan’s long-term
security and development. We will continue to work in
partnership with the Government of Afghanistan and
the United Nations to meet our shared objective of a
stable, inclusive and prosperous Afghanistan.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Ján Kubiš, for
his substantive briefing and for his work as the Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We listened closely to the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Tanin. Indeed, Afghanistan is entering
a crucial phase in its development, one that calls for
new efforts, based on what has been achieved, from
the people and Government of Afghanistan and calls
as well for increased support on the part of the entire
international community. The April 2014 elections will
be an important milestone that will require meticulous
and comprehensive preparation, including with the
support of UNAMA.

12-65732

Furthermore, we have questions with respect to
the intention to maintain a foreign military presence
in Afghanistan after 2014. Will that not have a
destabilizing impact on the situation in the region?
Will it not become a factor for disturbance to the local
population, be exploited to consolidate the armed
opposition and give rise to further extremism? We need
the maximum possible transparency in that regard.
We have repeatedly emphasized that we see the
future of Afghanistan as a sovereign, self-sufficient and
prosperous State. We are convinced that the restoration
of its neutral status would serve to strengthen regional
stability and cooperation and help to establish an
atmosphere of trust and good-neighbourliness in
relations between Afghanistan and its neighbours.
The regional dimension is extremely important
with respect to the situation in Afghanistan. We stress
the useful efforts for stabilization and economic
development being taken by the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (CSO) and the Dushanbe Four, comprised
of Russia, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Tajikistan. We
welcome the decision taken at the June summit of
CSO leaders in Beijing to accord Afghanistan observer
status in that organization. Particular support should be
provided to the position, first articulated at the Kabul
regional conference, concerning enhanced regional
cooperation, including by implementing the agreed
confidence-building measures, as well as efforts to

15

S/PV.6896

develop strategies for the sustainable development of
Afghanistan after 2014.

allow for simplified or more collective exemptions of
persons on the list.

Urgent problems persist with respect to the illegal
drug traffic in Afghanistan. Effective measures
must be undertaken to physically destroy drug crops
and laboratories, curb the supply of precursors to
Afghanistan, and include drug lords on the Security
Council’s sanctions list. We believe that drug
production in that country threatens international
peace and stability, and in that context the activities of
the CSTO — including the counter-narcotics Operation
Canal — are especially important in countering the
Afghan drug threat.

ISAF must play an ancillary role in national
reconciliation and its actions must be agreed by the
Government of Afghanistan. We advocate strengthening
the central coordinating role of the United Nations
in international civilian efforts in the context of the
Afghan settlement. UNAMA will need to remain the
coordinator of international efforts to assist in the
stabilization of Afghanistan.

The proposals that have been put forward
repeatedly by the CSTO and the CSO to ISAF and
NATO with respect to counter-narcotics cooperation
and coordination in the Afghan context remain valid.
Putting an end to illegal drug trafficking would
above all be a major contribution to the fight against
international terrorism, which is reliably sustained and
financed by the drug traffic.
The process of national reconciliation could
have a considerable impact on easing the situation
in Afghanistan. We anticipate that the activities of
the High Peace Council will lend additional impetus
to that process and help to strengthen national unity
in Afghanistan. We are not opposed to contacts with
opposition groups that are prepared to adhere to the
three well-known principles of recognition of the
Afghan Constitution, ending violence and breaking ties
with Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations. We
have seen an increase of such contacts recently, and we
believe that it is unacceptable for the peace dialogue
to include those who feature on Security Council
sanctions lists.
Ongoing, effective support for the Council’s
sanctions regime is of the utmost priority as an
important tool for countering terrorism. The idea of
dividing the sanctions list pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) between Al-Qaida and Taliban was reflected
in resolutions adopted two years ago, and guides the
international community towards adopting more
flexible and targeted approaches. It is important in
that respect that the practice of using sanctions against
individuals and entities involved in terrorist activities
continue to be based on a case-by-case approach and on
compliance with relevant procedures, which would not

16

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ján Kubiš for his briefing. I also welcome Ambassador
Tanin of Afghanistan and thank him for his statement.
China has always and unequivocally supported
peace and reconstruction in Afghanistan, as well as
the early achievement of the goal of Afghanistan being
governed by its own people. Efforts to promote national
reconciliation should continue to abide by the principle
of Afghan leadership and ownership, and strike an
appropriate balance in such areas as the political
process, economic development, security, stability
and national reconciliation. China appreciates the
achievements of the Afghan Government and people in
various nation-building endeavours.
Recent international conferences on this question
have reaffirmed the international community’s
commitment to Afghanistan. In that regard, I wish to
emphasize the following four points.
First, the 2014 elections will be a critical element of
the political process. Afghanistan is actively preparing
for the elections. China welcomes the fact that the
Afghan Government has already defined an electoral
time frame. The international community should
respect Afghan sovereignty and political independence
in the elections. The United Nations has rich electoral
experience, and China welcomes the electoral
assistance of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), at the request of the Afghan
Government.
Secondly, efforts to achieve lasting security and
stability in Afghanistan still face challenges. The
security situation in some provinces is not stable,
and there has been an increase in civilian casualties.
China welcomes Afghanistan’s efforts to build the
capacities of its security forces and to gradually assume
responsibility for maintaining State stability and

12-65732

S/PV.6896

security. In the prevailing circumstances, the handover
of security responsibilities should be progressive and
orderly so as to maintain overall stability.
Thirdly, national reconciliation is an important
component of peace and reconstruction processes
in Afghanistan. China supports the ongoing
implementation of the Kabul communiqué and the
promotion of an Afghan-led reconciliation process.
Mr. Rabbani, Chair of the High Peace Council, recently
visited Pakistan. The two sides achieved an important
consensus, which China welcomes. The Security
Council recently adopted resolution 2082 (2012),
adjusting relevent sanctions measures. We hope that this
step will contribute to the promotion of reconciliation.
Fourthly, it is only by ensuring the prosperity
and development of Afghanistan that the foundation
for lasting security and stability can be laid. China
supports the efforts of the Afghan Government to build
the economy, increase employment and improve living
standards. We hope that the international community
will honour its aid commitments to Afghanistan and
support the development priorities independently
identified by the Government. It is criticial to alleviate
food shortages in some parts of the country.
The promotion of peace and reconstruction in
Afghanistan requires the joint efforts of that country
and the international community. China supports the
United Nations lead role in coordinating international
efforts to address that matter. We hope that UNAMA will
continue to strengthen its coordination and cooperation
with the Afghan Government. China supports the
positive role played by the countries of the region
and regional organizations in Afghanistan’s peace
and reconstruction processes. Regional cooperative
initiatives should respect Afghan sovereignty, prioritize
the legitimate concerns of the countries of the region,
and advance steadily through full consultations.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his report
on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2012/907). We also
welcome Mr. Ján Kubiš and thank him for his valuable
briefing. We are also grateful for the statement by
Ambassador Zahir Tanin. We would like to highlight
four issues in the report of the Secretary-General.
The first issue pertains to the electoral process,
which will overlap with the end of the Afghan transition
period. We welcome the issuance of a detailed calendar
for carrying out the presidential and provincial

12-65732

council elections. Nevertheless, the report refers to
shortcomings in establishing a legal and technical
framework to prepare for the April 2014 electoral
process. We encourage the Afghan Government to
continue to attach priority to the preparatory process.
In our experience, democratic governance and the
holding of elections, in line with the Constitution, are
prerequisites for long-term stability.
The second point has to do with the issue of
Afghan-led national reconciliation under Afghan
ownership. A few weeks ago, we had an opportunity
to hold an informal interactive dialogue with
Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Chair of the High Peace
Council. In that dialogue, we heard first-hand of the
progress in the national process, including a successful
visit to Islamabad. Another pertinent point in that
connection has to do with resolution 2082 (2012),
which was adopted last Monday and by which the
Council renewed and strengthened the sanctions
regime under resolution 1988 (2011). We are convinced
that the improvemetns made to the sanctions regime
will effectively contribute to the national reconciliation
process.
The third point involves the security situation.
We are pleased that, when it comes to security, to
date the transition has made the expected and hoped
for progress. It is encouraging to note the ongoing
progress being made in the transfer of responsibility
for security. That has now reached 75 per cent, with the
remaining tranches to be announced at the beginning of
2013. There continue to be threats and challenges that
jeopardize the security situation. We note with concern
the attack that took place early this month against
against the chief of Afghanistan’s intelligence service.
As to the fourth point, we agree with the SecretaryGeneral that the increase in civilian casualties during
the reporting period is a source of great concern.
However, what we find truly outrageous is the
information contained in paragraph 26 of the report,
where it is pointed out that more than 355 children
were killed or injured in the armed conflict from
1 August to 31 October. That is undoubtedly one of the
most regrettable facts from this reporting period. In
addition, we continue to find deplorable the situation
faced by women and girls in Afghanistan. We call on
the Afghan Government to take concrete measures to
protect women and girls and guarantee their rights. We
resolutely support the efforts of the United Nations in
this area.

17

S/PV.6896

Lastly, we view positively the follow-up to the
systems and mechanisms for carrying out the mutual
commitments established at the Tokyo Conference on
Afghanistan. That is being boosted by the regional
Istanbul Process. We believe that significant progress
has been made in establishing confidence-building
measuers. Both processes will be an important avenue
for generating social and economic opportunities, in
particular as the international military forces draw
down.
Before I conclude, I should like to join other
delegations in thanking the delegation of Germany and
Ambassador Peter Witting for their important role in
leading the Afghanistan Sanctions Committee, and
more generally in familiarizing the Security Council
with the various issues relevant to that country.
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I should like
to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš for introducing the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2012/907), as well as for his tireless efforts as Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) aimed at restoring stability in that country.
I also welcome the presence among us of Ambassador
Tanin and I thank him for his statement.
In his report last September (S/2012/703),
the Secretary-General stated that the situation in
Afghanistan was a cause for cautious optimism. Three
months later, we see that while we have reason for hope
in certain areas, such as in the politial situation, others,
on the other hand, require additional commitment
and sacrifice, in particular when it comes to security,
human rights and combating narcotics.
On the political front, we see that, with the support
of the international community, Afghanistan has made
outstanding progress in fulfilling the commitments
made at the Tokyo Conference last July, in particular
by identifying steps to place the 2015-2024 on a solid
foundation.
The holding of credible presidential and
provincial elections, scheduled for 2014, continues
to be a significant challenge to overcome. Afghan
stakeholders, including civil society, have not hesitated
in firmly commiting themselves to preparing for those
elections. In order to provide a more robust legal
foundation for the electoral process, appointment to
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board will
henceforth take place on the basis of a law. We express
the hope that the Commission that is in place, in which

18

both houses of parliament are represented, will work
tirelessly to find a compromise on the appointment of
the remaining members.
The fact that political parties have also stepped up
their activities is an encouraging sign.
Given that the media has an important role to
play in that process, we appreciate President Hamid
Karzai’s approach of meeting with members of the
media covering the elections. That approach also helps
to entrench the freedom of expression, which continues
to be a crucial aspect of democracy and of ensuring free
and fair elections.
My country acknowledges the United Nations,
and especially the United Nations Development
Programme, for the valuable support extended to the
Afghan authorities through the ELECT II assistance
programme (Enhancing Legal and Electoral Capacity
for Tomorrow, second phase).
In addition to the measures undertaken to hold
transparent and credible elections, it is encouraging to
note that the peace process is under way. Proof of this
was the holding of a week of peace and national unity,
during which numerous events took place throughout
the country. The release on that occasion of a number of
Taliban members sends a strong signal to them and to
armed opposition groups, which, we hope, will respond
to the Government’s outreach to them to resolutely join
the peace process.
In that regard, we welcome the holding in Chantilly,
France, starting today, as had been announced, of
inclusive talks with the participation for the first time
of representatives of the Taliban with close ties to
Mullah Omar. Those talks will represent a necessary
milestone towards the holding of genuine inter-Afghan
negotiations on the security future of Afghanistan
following 2014.
The visit by Mr. Rabbani late last month and
his meetings with the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) made
it possible to discuss prospects for the peace process.
That progress has been made in a more favourable
regional climate, given that the confidence-building
measures undertaken under the Istanbul Process on
Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and
Stable Afghanistan are continuing to be implemented.
In the context of the process of strengthening
regional integration, several meetings have been

12-65732

S/PV.6896

held, including the Mazar-e-Sharif conference on
strengthening economic ties between Afghanistan and
Central Asia, on 14 and 15 November.
While there have been positive developments in the
political field, unfortunately the same cannot be said of
the security situation, which remains unfavourable, even
as we are seeing the gradual transfer of responsibilities
from the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) to the Afghan authorities.
We take note of the conclusions of the Brussels
meeting held on 9 and 10 October, at the end of which
ISAF was directed to begin planning a post-2014
training mission. We also welcome the negotiations
undertaken bilaterally on 15 November by the United
States and Afghanistan, in line with their strategic
partnership agreement. For now, even though we are
witnessing an overall decline in the number of security
incidents, the people, particularly in the south and east
of the country, continue to pay a heavy price, as they
are the victims of the activities of illegal armed groups,
tribal clashes and disputes over natural resources. In
addition, United Nations personnel and implementing
partners are the victims of violence, as evidenced by
the attacks carried out against their convoys in several
provinces.
Human rights have not fared any better in that
atmosphere, which is marked by an increase of 28 per
cent in the number of civilian victims as compared
with the last three months of 2011. We are particularly
disturbed to note that women continue to be subjected
to violence and harmful traditional practices. The same
holds true for children, as attacks have been carried
out against educational and health-care facilities. It is
important that such heinous acts not reoccur.
We welcome the initiatives of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women and of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) aimed at dealing with the
practice of the early marriage of young girls.
The fight against drugs remains a major challenge.
Joint research undertaken by the Ministry of CounterNarcotics and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime indicated that opium cultivation rose by 18 per cent
in 2012. We look forward to seeing the implementation
of measures in the context of the regional ministerial
conference held on 12 and 13 November aimed at
strengthening cooperation on counter-narcotics efforts,
specifically the establishment of a hotline between the

12-65732

relevant national agencies and the creation of a regional
contact group.
There is no doubt that the situation in Afghanistan
continues to require assistance from the international
community, particularly in the wake of the scheduled
withdrawal of ISAF at the end of 2014. The hopes
sparked by the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan, held
on 8 July, cannot be dashed. The considerable progress
made must be consolidated.
Let me in conclusion reiterate Togo’s deep gratitude
to the United Nations and to all of its specialized
bodies and agencies, in particular the United Nations
Development Programme, UNAMA and ISAF, for all
of the sacrifices they have made to ensure a prosperous
future for Afghanistan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Special Representative, Mr. Ján Kubiš,
for his briefing and his efforts, as well as the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implications for international peace and security
(S/2012/907). We are also grateful to Ambassador Tanin
of Afghanistan for his statement. I would also like to
express our deep appreciation to Ambassador Wittig
of Germany and his team for their excellent leadership
and valuable contribution as penholder for Afghanistan
over the past two years.
Since the Council last considered the issue, in
September (see S/PV.6840), Afghanistan has continued
to make vigorous strides to achieve the objectives of the
transition process to be completed by the end of 2014.
The unanimous adoption by the General Assembly on
27 November of resolution 67/16, which Azerbaijan had
the privilege of co-sponsoring, once again reaffirmed
the irreversibility of the Afghan Government’s choice
for the future of the country and the international
community’s strong resolve to stand by Afghanistan on
that path.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment of
the Afghan Government’s efforts to operationalize the
Tokyo commitments. We welcome the promulgation
of a comprehensive timeline for the 2014 presidential
and Provincial Council elections, ongoing electoral
reforms and measures to ensure greater public activity
and involvement in the pre-election process. Successful
elections will further strengthen the political
foundations of the country ahead of the transformation
decade. Therefore, we encourage the Government
to continue its progress in that realm and stress the

19

S/PV.6896

imperative of uninterrupted international financial and
technical assistance to Afghanistan to that end.
The activities of the High Peace Council aimed
at advancing an inclusive Afghan-led and Afghanowned reconciliation process, in particular its practical
initiatives to reach out to a wider spectrum of Afghan
society and its close interaction with regional partners,
are creating the necessary conditions and confidence
conducive to a durable peace in the country. Resolution
2082 (2012), adopted on Monday, on the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), will further facilitate this process.
The continued support of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the
Council’s activities and for the implementation of the
Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme is
critical to the promotion of a unified vision among all
Afghans on the peaceful future of the country. In that
regard, we welcome the plan announced by UNAMA
to initiate a complementary track-2 dialogue aimed at
encouraging diverse Afghan stakeholders to join the
reconciliation process in an individual capacity.
Despite the quantitative decrease in securityrelated incidents during the reporting period, the high
death toll prevailing among civilians as a result of
the unabated assassinations and suicide bombings by
insurgents is a matter of grave concern. All parties
in Afghanistan must take the necessary measures to
minimize the number and scale of civilian casualties.
In particular, insurgents must renounce the tactic of
targeting civilians, which not only violates international
law and contravenes religious and humanistic tenets,
but also seriously undermines reconciliation efforts.
We commend the Afghan security forces for their
decisive actions to thwart insurgent attacks in Kabul
and other provinces. Overall, we welcome the progress
in the ongoing implementation of the first three
tranches of the transition of security responsibilities to
the Afghan national security forces. We also welcome
the accomplishments in the areas under their control.
We look forward to the earliest commencement of the
fourth tranche in the remaining parts of the country and
to the phased completion of the transition by mid-2013.
Greater political dialogue and cooperation between
Afghanistan and its immediate neighbours and other
regional counterparts on a wide range of issues based
on a common vision and mutual confidence is an
imperative for the peaceful and stable future of the

20

country and the region. That having been said, we
emphasize the particular importance of the Istanbul
Heart of Asia process on regional security and
cooperation for a secure and stable Afghanistan and the
timely realization of the agreed confidence-building
measures. The meetings of senior officials involved
in the Istanbul Process, which were held in September
in New York and in October in Ankara, reviewed and
agreed on the elaboration of implementation plans for all
of the confidence-building measures. We will host the
next meeting of senior officials in Baku on 6 February
2013, when all plans are expected to be endorsed.
Azerbaijan has long been a part of international
efforts in Afghanistan. My country joined the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) almost
at its beginning and has steadily increased its military
participation in ISAF. Azerbaijan provides its territory
to ISAF countries for overflights and transits to
Afghanistan, accounting for 35 per cent of all non-lethal
goods transit.
Azerbaijan has consistently expanded its
contributions
by
providing
capacity-building
assistance in non-military spheres in Afghanistan
and has provided financial support for the training
of Afghan security forces. As part of the Istanbul
Process, my country participates in a number of
confidence-building measures and serves as one of the
leaders in the implementation of counter-narcotics and
regional infrastructure confidence-building measures.
The meetings of NATO-ISAF defence and foreign
ministers in October and December, respectively,
adopted important decisions on the post-2014 training,
advice and assistance mission in Afghanistan. In
furtherance of its long-term commitment to be a part
of international assistance to Afghanistan and given
its ongoing contributions, Azerbaijan has decided to
partner with NATO in that endeavour.
To conclude, I would like to reaffirm my
Government’s strong support for Afghanistan’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity, and we
reconfirm our determination to further assist the
Government of Afghanistan and its people, bilaterally
and multilaterally, in their legitimate aspiration to
become a secure, self-reliant and self-sustaining State.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš
for introducing the quarterly report (S/2012/907) of
the Secretary-General to the Council. We also thank

12-65732

S/PV.6896

Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement on the
situation in his country.
South Africa welcomes the continued progress
registered by the Government of Afghanistan despite
the very difficult and challenging security environment
within which it operates. At the political level, the
upcoming presidential and provincial elections in 2014
and 2015 will be a key step in the further consolidation
of Afghanistan’s nascent democracy. In that regard,
my delegation welcomes the publication on 31 October
by the Independent Election Commission of a
comprehensive timeline for the elections, as well as the
draft concept of operations with an indicative budget.
Given the divisive nature of elections in any society,
particularly in post-conflict societies, we encourage the
Government to complete the remaining elements of the
electoral architecture, including the publication of the
outstanding two electoral laws, and to continue dialogue
and public debates to ensure the enhanced transparency,
inclusiveness and sustainability of the elections. South
Africa is pleased by the positive response of the United
Nations to the request for support by the Independent
Election Commission.
Long-term stability and security in Afghanistan can
be sustained only through a process of reconciliation
and nation-building. South Africa is therefore
encouraged by the ongoing work of the High Peace
Council, including the holding of its International Peace
Conference in Kabul on 22 September. My delegation
furthermore welcomes the visit of the High Peace
Council to Islamabad from 12 to 14 November, which
led to the release of a number of Taliban detainees and
the adoption of a joint statement that should further
enhance reconciliation and dialogue. In that regard,
we are pleased with the support provided by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to the High Peace Council and with its efforts to initiate
a track-two dialogue process.
The visit to Washington, D.C., and New York of
Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Chair of the Council, is
an important element in communicating the work
and importance of the Council to the international
community. Key in that regard is the fact that the
international community and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) should continue those engagements with a view
to responding positively to the work of the Council in its
reconciliation efforts. South Africa reiterates its view

12-65732

that sanctions should be a flexible tool in the hands
of the Security Council, which should adapt to the
dynamic political situation on the ground. We therefore
welcome the adoption of resolution 2082 (2012) as an
important contribution to the peace process.
Turning to the security situation, while we welcome
the decline in security incidents during the reporting
period compared to the previous year, my delegation
remains concerned about the impact of those incidents
on the civilian population of Afghanistan and about the
continued insecurity that confronts those communities
on a daily basis. With the Government now exercising
control for security in an area in which 75 per cent of
the population resides, it remains critical that Afghan
police and security forces should be well trained and
well equipped to protect local populations. In that
regard, we welcome UNAMA’s role in facilitating
and coordinating resources from the international
community to assist Afghan authorities in strengthening
the capacity of female police officers. South Africa
welcomes the increased role of Afghan security
institutions in performing training and oversight roles
previously conducted by the international forces. That
is an important development for sustaining Afghan
ownership and leadership over its security forces.
Political stability and security inside Afghanistan
will depend, by and large, on regional stability. We
are therefore pleased at the ongoing engagement
of the Government with regional States to address
issues of mutual interest, including security and
development. The recent high-level meetings with
Pakistan, Kazakhstan, Turkey and China, as well as the
international conference held in Lithuania on the theme
“Afghanistan and the region: practical approaches for
sustainable development”, are encouraging.
Since the Government of Afghanistan relies
on international support to address that country’s
economic and development challenges, we welcome the
increase in development assistance. The withdrawal of
the international military presence will, however, have
an impact on the economic and employment situation.
In that regard, my delegation is encouraged by the
ongoing efforts to operationalize the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework. It remains important
that Afghan and international stakeholders should
build on that momentum to ensure that commitments
and visions translate into meaningful progress and
improvement in the lives of ordinary citizens, who have
been traumatized by the conflict.

21

S/PV.6896

South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
impact of the conflict in Afghanistan on the civilian
population. We are particularly disturbed by the 28 per
cent increase in civilian casualties registered during the
reporting period, compared to the same period last year.
We strongly condemn the targeting of civilians by the
insurgents as a means of intimidation and coercion, as
well as the use of pressure-plate improvised explosive
devices.
The fact that 355 children were killed or injured
during the reporting period is appalling. Most recently
a further 10 young girls were killed in a landmine
explosion while collecting firewood in the province of
Nangarhar, in eastern Afghanistan. There can be no
excuse for such diabolical acts. This is an intolerable
situation, which must be condemned. Equally, the
targeting of schools and health facilities are serious
humanitarian law violations for which perpetrators
must be held accountable.
We further wish to underline that all armed elements
operating in Afghanistan have the responsibility to
ensure that unarmed civilians are protected, and failure
by both State and non-State actors to uphold this
responsibility should not go unpunished. In that regard,
we are concerned about reports that International
Security Assistance Force air attacks continue to result
in civilian causalities, including the killing of children,
as witnessed in October in Helmand province.
In conclusion, national ownership coupled with
international support remains crucial to achieving
political, security and socioeconomic progress in
Afghanistan. For its part, the international community
should continue its supportive role in the country’s
move from conflict to stability and prosperity. South
Africa stresses that, given the magnitude of these
challenges, a comprehensive strategy incorporating
security, humanitarian efforts, good governance and
socioeconomic development is required. In that regard,
we wish to underscore the central role of UNAMA
in supporting the Government of Afghanistan and
coordinating international assistance to the country.
The continued role played by bilateral and multilateral
partners remains indispensable.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
briefing and his work at the head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well
as Ambassador Tanin for his statement. I align myself

22

with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
In my national capacity, I will address only three
subjects: the transition, the elections and reconciliation.
First, the transition is continuing and now involves
75 per cent of the Afghan population. We have seen
no deterioration in the situation since the transfer of
responsibility for security in Surobi and Kapisa, where
we have seen the third Afghan Army brigade reveal its
combat capacity in the field.
The Secretary-General notes the important drop in
incidents, as compared to figures from 2011, and we
welcome that. However, we share his concern about
the increase in civilian victims in the last quarter,
80 per cent of whom were targeted by the insurgents.
It is essential that UNAMA continue to carry out its
impartial work of counting the civilian casualties,
without any threats or interference.
In accordance with the announcement of the
President of the French Republic in May at the
Chicago Summit, our last combat forces withdrew on
15 December. We must now move towards another sort
of long-term commitment. France will remain engaged
in supporting and training the International Security
Assistance Force until the end of the transition, on the
understanding that this participation will involve no
further combat.
Beyond its military presence, France will continue
to stand with the Afghans, including after the
transition period, in accordance with the international
community’s commitment, as stated at the Bonn
and Tokyo Conferences. A treaty of friendship and
cooperation was signed and ratified between our two
countries. It establishes the long-term relations between
France and Afghanistan over the next 20 years, on the
basis of our 10 years of military engagement. On 8 July,
the French Minister for Foreign Affairs announced at
the Tokyo Conference a 50 per cent increase in our
cooperation with Afghanistan over the next five years,
totalling €308 million for the period from 2012 to 2016.
Secondly, the presidential elections of 2014 will
mark an important moment for Afghanistan. They
will mark a political transition after the two terms of
President Hâmid Karzai and will therefore be a test of
the strength of democracy in the country. They will
be a milestone for the international community and its
long-term support of Afghanistan, in accordance with
the framework agreed in Tokyo.

12-65732

S/PV.6896

From our point of view, it is vital that the Afghans be
able to organize credible, free and transparent elections
that will endow the leaders to be elected by the Afghans
with a strong democratic legitimacy. We therefore call
upon the country’s authorities to ensure that they have
the tools necessary to carry out the polling, count the
results and follow up on possible complaints. That
will require, in particular, revising and modernizing
electoral lists.
We welcome the fact that the Independent Election
Commission has decided upon a date, 5 April 2014, for
holding the next presidential elections. The Commission
has asked for help from the United Nations. We are
obviously in favour of that, given that support for the
electoral process is one of the priorities established by
the Council for UNAMA. The international community
must be duly informed about the electoral process on a
regular basis.
Thirdly, only a genuine intra-Afghan reconciliation
will make it possible to see the emergence of a stable and
peaceful Afghanistan after 2014. In Bonn in December
2011, the international community announced its
support for an inclusive, Afghan-led peace process
open to the insurgents willing to forswear violence,
sever all ties with international terrorism and respect
the Constitution of Afghanistan, particularly with
regard to women’s rights.
This reconciliation process must be supported
by the States of the region, and I welcome the most
recent contacts and statements of the Afghan and
Pakistani authorities on bilateral relations. However,
the reconciliation process must, above all, be led by the
Afghans, together with all the components of Afghan
society.
It is in this context that the Security Council has
renewed its sanctions regime against all persons and
groups associated with the Taliban that constitute a
threat to peace, security and stability in Afghanistan.
Together with the delisting and listing decisions, the
establishment of a more flexible travel ban exemption
procedure should facilitate contacts in Afghanistan
while observing Security Council rules.
Allow me to conclude by paying tribute to the
men and women serving in Afghanistan under the
United Nations flag, who today, under the leadership
of the Special Representative, are doing excellent
work in sometimes difficult conditions in the service

12-65732

of the Afghans and at the invitation of the Afghan
Government.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. Ján
Kubiš and thank him for his briefing on the situation
in Afghanistan. We appreciate his efforts and his
effective leadership of United Nations efforts in that
country. We also appreciate the role of the Afghan
Ambassador, Mr. Zahir Tanin, in our discussion today
and his explanation of Afghanistan’s achievements and
ambitions and the challenges it faces.
The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council (S/2012/907) is being presented in a very
delicate regional and international climate, two years
before international forces are set to leave Afghanistan
and at the beginning of the transformation decade,
which will start in 2015. The period covered by the
report witnessed a profound domestic dialogue on the
elections set for 2014, which will be the cornerstone of
the political transition in Afghanistan. In preparation
for those presidential and provincial elections, we
welcome the ongoing consultations in the parliament
concerning a new electoral law to be submitted to the
Cabinet.
We express our satisfaction with regard to the
gradual transition of responsibility for security from
the international forces to the Afghan authorities,
which now cover areas inhabited by over 75 per cent of
the Afghan population. This coincides with a reduction
in the number of security incidents compared to last
year, by virtue of the effective role of the international
and Afghan forces in combating insurgents, despite
the increased number of casualties. We hope that all
forces will increase their efforts to limit such incidents
in order to preserve the safety and security of civilians.
At the regional level, during the reporting period a
number of meetings were held between Afghan officials
and officials from neighbouring countries in order to
expedite cooperation on various fronts, including in the
economic, security and energy sectors. With respect to
financial cooperation, we appreciate the efforts of the
Afghan Government to implement the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, and the detailed work plan
it has put together, and we welcome the recent decision
of the Afghan Cabinet in this regard.

23

S/PV.6896

Afghanistan has taken considerable steps recently
towards stability, but still faces many challenges that
must be met in close cooperation with the international
community, which has frequently reiterated its readiness
to support the efforts of the Afghan Government in this
regard.

re-embarking upon the long and uneven path towards
the ultimate goal of the peace process. In the same
month, we also witnessed Chair Rabbani’s active
interaction with the United Nations through dialogue
with the Security Council and its Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). These exchanges
gave us an opportunity to reflect on how the United
Nations and its organs could more efficiently serve the
peace and reconciliation process.

I cannot fail to highlight the effective role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in coordinating international efforts and cooperation
aimed at achieving stability and sustainable development
for all Afghan constituencies. Afghanistan is a very
important country in the region, and its stability
and security are of vital importance to neighbouring
countries and to its many partners. We wish Afghanistan
every success in addressing its security challenges and
in its efforts to achieve stability, national reconciliation
and development in order to maintain its unity and
territorial integrity.

It is Japan’s fervent hope that the Afghan
Government’s strong political will and efforts, combined
with the profound engagement of its neighbouring
countries and the rest of the international community,
will succeed in propelling the peace process forward
and achieving further and more inclusive dialogue. In
this vein, it is also encouraging to see the continued
positive trend of the increasing number of ex-combatants
included in the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme.

In conclusion, I thank our colleague Ambassador
Wittig for his extraordinary and sincere efforts in the
service of peace and stability in Afghanistan through
his chairmanship of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), and to promote the
implementation of Security Council resolutions on
Afghanistan.

Furthermore, Japan welcomes the Afghan
Government’s intensive follow-up efforts over the past
four months, in close coordination with international
stakeholders, to realize the commitments made in the
context of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,
which resulted in the holding of the first meeting of the
steering committee on 5 December.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Despite these recent positive developments,
challenges in the field of security, including the high
level of civilian casualties, continue to be one of the
predominant obstacles to the country’s stability. Only
recently, we again witnessed another reprehensible
incident — an attack against the chief of the National
Directorate of Security. Japan calls for renewed
determination and actions by the Afghan Government
to ensure the safety of those Afghans and internationals
who devote themselves to creating a better future for
the country.

I give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to thank Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his comprehensive
and informative briefing, and to acknowledge with
appreciation the hard work and dedication of all
the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) under his leadership. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin for his
statement. Let me also express our sincere appreciation
to Ambassador Wittig of Germany and his team for
their leadership in guiding the debate on the situation
in Afghanistan, as the pen holder, in a most effective
manner for the past two years.
Japan is pleased to welcome the progress in the
Afghan-led peace and reconciliation process over
the past quarter. The visit of Mr. Rabbani, Chair
of Afghanistan’s High Peace Council, to Pakistan
in November achieved substantial outcomes and
reinvigorated the momentum of stakeholders in

24

Looking back on the past year, Japan would also
like to call on all the stakeholders for their continued
attention and further efforts in addressing the persistent
humanitarian needs and the worrisome decline in
assistance. Without improving the severe humanitarian
situation of the more than 450,000 internally displaced
persons in the country, any gains achieved in
socioeconomic development or in the political process
will remain fragile and unsustainable.
The year 2013 must lay the foundation for 2014, the
critical year for the sustainable future of Afghanistan.

12-65732

S/PV.6896

During this upcoming year of truly decisive importance,
Japan would like to see the following three things in
particular: first, as we made clear at the beginning of this
statement, continuous efforts for further development
of the Afghan-led peace and reconciliation process;
secondly, concrete evidence of the enhanced quality
and capability of the Afghan national security forces
in their efforts towards the successful completion
of the transition process; and last but not least,
commitments made in the context of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, especially the holding of
fair and credible elections in 2014 and the completion
of the remaining six national priority programmes, in
order to provide further steady and tangible results
on the ground. In order to achieve a transparent and
inclusive election, results-oriented measures must be
taken in a timely manner to meet both the technical and
the political challenges, such as building the capacities
of the Independent Election Commission, establishing
a unified and functioning voter registration system and
accelerating electoral law reforms.
In conclusion, Japan believes that the year 2013
should be the year that gives the people of Afghanistan
a sense of security and future prospects.
The President: I give the floor to Mr. Vrailas.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The acceding country Croatia; the
candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Norway, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2012/907) and Special
Representative Ján Kubiš for his briefing and for the
work that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) does under his leadership.
The international Conferences held in Bonn last
year and in Kabul and Tokyo earlier this year, as
well as the Summit in Chicago, have reaffirmed the
partnership between the Government of Afghanistan
and the international community for Afghanistan’s
long-term security, economic growth and development.

12-65732

Those Conferences have set out the way forward for
Afghanistan to progressively assume responsibility
for all aspects of policy and to achieve its security,
development and governance goals.
In the EU statement in the Security Council
debate on Afghanistan in September (see S/PV.6840),
we briefly highlighted the important outcome of
the Tokyo Conference, in particular the principle
of mutual accountability encapsulated in the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework, and addressed
the importance of regional cooperation. The
implementation of the Tokyo Framework remains
paramount to achieving a successful transition and
transformation in Afghanistan. Without consistent
delivery on commitments and the implementation of
reforms on good governance and transparency, the rule
of law and human rights, the international community
will find it increasingly difficult to defend a continued
commitment and allocation of financial resources
vis-à-vis domestic constituencies.
In this statement, we want to focus on two topics,
namely, progress on national reconciliation and
preparations for the upcoming election.
We welcome the visit of the Afghan High Peace
Council to Pakistan and the increased dialogue between
the Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan. Progress
will be sustainable only if the peace and reconciliation
process is truly inclusive, not only engaging armed
groups, but fully involving civil society and including
a balanced representation of people from all regions
and sections of Afghan society, in particular Afghan
women. Both the process and its outcome must respect
the principles set out by the Afghan Government and
the international community at Bonn, including the
human rights provisions of the Afghan Constitution.
We also encourage particular attention to the
progressive implementation of the Law on the
Elimination of Violence against Women. The European
Union wishes to reiterate its firm commitment to
resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent resolutions
on women and peace and security. We welcome the
commitment of the Afghan Government to its full
implementation through the establishment of the
inter-ministerial steering committee on resolution 1325
(2000).
We welcome the announcement of the date for the
presidential election. It will be critical for Afghanistan’s

25

S/PV.6896

future that elections are inclusive and transparent, and
lead to an outcome that is widely accepted as legitimate.

democratic and prosperous society for the benefit of all
Afghans.

We call on the Afghan authorities to engage all
political parties and civil society in agreeing to reform
the electoral process, based on lessons learned from
previous elections. In particular, it will be important
to put in place a legal framework consistent with the
Constitution, with credible measures to prevent fraud,
and overseen by independent bodies. Definitive and
clear decisions by the relevant Afghan authorities, in
consultation with parliament, political parties and civil
society, on the system and registration process to be used
for elections are needed, both to enable international
support to the processes, in particular by the United
Nations, and to allow for clear communication and
voter education.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Allow me to reiterate our full support for the
essential role of UNAMA during the transition and
beyond. The political role of UNAMA in advising
and assisting the Afghan Government is of central
importance, not the least in the perspective of the
elections in 2014 and 2015. UNAMA must be properly
mandated and adequately resourced to fulfil that role.
UNAMA also plays a key role in supporting increased
Afghan ownership and in coordinating international
development efforts in the coming years. The work of
UNAMA will be vital in enabling Afghanistan and the
international community to work effectively together to
fulfil the commitments made in Tokyo earlier this year
and in monitoring the human rights and humanitarian
situation.
In conclusion, it is important that the international
community remain strongly committed to progress
in Afghanistan. That will require sustained support
beyond 2014. The EU commitment to Afghanistan is
long-term. We look forward to the swift completion
of the negotiations on the cooperation agreement on
partnership and development between Afghanistan
and the European Union and its member States early
next year. The European Union is currently giving
more than €1 billion a year in development assistance
to Afghanistan, and we will continue to prioritize
and enhance support to Afghanistan in the decade of
transformation agreed at Bonn.
The aim of our overall strategy in Afghanistan
remains clear — supporting a successful transition
process in Afghanistan and partnering Afghanistan
beyond transition to become a self-reliant, peaceful,

26

Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): It gives
me great pleasure to address the Council today on the
situation in Afghanistan, which is an issue of great
significance to us, our region and the world.
I wish to express my thanks to the Secretary-General
for the report contained in document S/2012/907. Let me
convey my warm welcome to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš. We thank him
for presenting a comprehensive report on the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and for his analysis of the situation in
Afghanistan.
Recently, there have been notable political,
economic and development changes in Afghanistan, as
elaborated by Afghan Ambassador Zahir Tanin earlier
in the meeting. On the political scene, one important
development has been the reduction of foreign forces
as we head towards the target date for the complete
withdrawal of foreign combat troops.
On the issue of the national reconciliation process
in Afghanistan, we believe that it should be an Afghanowned and Afghan-led process. National reconciliation
is an important component in settling the internal
conflict in Afghanistan. In the light of resolutions
2082 (2012) and 2083 (2012), adopted by the Council
on Monday, 17 December, and while supporting the
Afghan Government’s peace and national reconciliation
efforts, we believe that there is a need to draw a fine
line with extreme diligence. The Afghan people have
endured a great deal of suffering, caused by extremist
policies and terrorist acts, for so many years. Rebuilding
Afghanistan and a new Afghan society requires, inter
alia, repudiating those policies and acts. Thus, any
efforts towards national reconciliation should be
undertaken without appearing to be rewarding the
perpetrators of those acts and policies.
In the economic field, international and regional
partners should concentrate their efforts on laying
the foundations for sustainable economic growth and
better employment conditions in Afghanistan. For that
purpose, there is a need for accelerated progress on
economic cooperation with regional and international
partners, in accordance with the national objectives set

12-65732

S/PV.6896

forth by the Afghan Government. It goes without saying
that the expansion of infrastructure and industrial,
agricultural and transportation projects have priority.
The Islamic Republic of Iran is ready, as before, to
undertake its share in implementation of such projects.
The production of and trade in narcotic drugs is
still rampant. According to the joint Afghanistan Opium
Survey 2012 carried out by the Afghanistan Ministry
of Counter Narcotics and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), opium cultivation in
Afghanistan has risen by 18 per cent in 2012. UNODC
warns that the rise in cultivation occurred despite the
Afghan Government’s recent increased efforts to destroy
poppy fields and help farmers find alternative sources
of income. The Survey sends a strong message that the
international community should not remain complacent
in the face of the problem. A strong commitment is
needed on the part of Afghan and international partners
alike to curb the menace of drug cultivation and drug
trafficking, which breed extremism. In that regard,
we commend the initiatives launched to fight drugs,
with the help of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, particularly because drug production has
been a major source of funding for terrorist activities
in Afghanistan.
The issue of refugees remains a challenge not only
for Afghanistan but for neighbouring States and the
international community as well. Additional efforts
must be undertaken to repatriate refugees and ensure that
they are reintegrated into Afghan society. At present,
more than 1 million Afghan refugees are registered
in Iran, while an even greater number of unregistered
Afghans are also living in our country. Afghan nationals
have continued to enjoy Iran’s educational and welfare
facilities, among others, and to benefit from the same
subsidies that our own people receive. We urge the
international community to continue to strengthen and
expedite its efforts to create the conditions conducive
to the sustainable repatriation of refugees and their full
rehabilitation and reintegration in their homeland.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has always firmly
supported Afghanistan in its efforts to maintain its
national sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity and to realize enduring peace and stability.
We hope that the international community will adhere
to the principle of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
process and continue to support the Government and
the people of Afghanistan in their efforts towards peace
and stability.

12-65732

In that regard we emphasize the United Nations
role in coordinating issues related to Afghanistan. As
our officials indicated in their meeting with Mr. Ján
Kubiš during his visit to Tehran, we support UNAMA
in fulfilling its mission to provide assistance for
peace and the reconstruction of the country within its
mandate and through a robust regional engagement
with neighbouring countries on issues such as border
security, immigration, refugees and drug control.
Building a sustainable, stable Afghanistan is
crucial not only for the future of the Afghan people but
also for peace and stability in the region, Asia and the
world. It is our sincere hope that we will soon witness
more development, progress and prosperity for the
people and Government of Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): First, I must thank
Ambassador Peter Wittig and the German Mission for
their leadership on Afghanistan in the Council over the
past two years. I also recognize Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš for his ongoing
leadership in-country at such a critical juncture and
also all the personnel of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I must also
acknowledge and thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for
his leadership, tenacity and collegiality here in New
York.
The year 2012 has seen serious progress in
strengthening the partnership between Afghanistan
and the international community and in establishing an
essential, comprehensive international framework for
supporting Afghanistan beyond 2014. The year 2013
will now bring important preparations for the period
after transition is complete and when the Government
of Afghanistan will have full responsibility for security.
International political and diplomatic efforts to support
peace and stability in Afghanistan and in its region will
be central to ensuring the irreversibility of progress
made during the transition.
I would like to highlight two key issues in the
Secretary-General’s quarterly report (S/2012/907) that
will be crucial to long-term stability in Afghanistan:
political settlement and the conduct of national
elections. The revitalization of the High Peace Council
and its efforts to work towards a political solution is
obviously very welcome. The international community
has made it clear over the past 12 months that it remains

27

S/PV.6896

absolutely committed to securing Afghanistan’s future
stability, a fact that we should underscore to all parties
in Afghanistan by emphasizing the need to end violence
and join a political settlement. We have said that before.
We have made it clear. The Council’s recent adoption of
resolution 2082 (2012), renewing the sanctions regime
on the Taliban, was a positive example of the Council
further enabling the reconciliation process.
Recent visits to Pakistan by High Peace Council
Chair Rabbani and Foreign Minister Rassoul
demonstrate promising cooperation and concrete
outcomes. It is worth recalling that both sides appealed
to the Taliban to participate in an Afghan-led, Afghanowned reconciliation process. It is essential that this
momentum be sustained to build the foundations
for reconciliation and a durable political settlement.
UNAMA itself has an important role to play in
facilitating an Afghan-led process, including through
its good offices and innovative track-two mechanisms.
The international community can and should assist
in preparing for elections. Credible, inclusive and
transparent elections in 2014 and 2015 will play a decisive
role in Afghanistan’s decade-long transformation.
As hard as they are, accelerated efforts and further
reform in preparation for the elections remain critical.
We encourage the Afghan Government to leverage as
much assistance as possible from UNAMA and the
international community, particularly following the
conclusion of the needs assessment mission, which
will help to define the areas where assistance is needed
more closely.
Despite progress, the Secretary-General’s report
does outline some worrying trends. While there has
been a decline in overall levels of violence, the rise
in civilian casualties is obviously of great concern,
particularly the significant increase in deaths from
insurgent attacks. That trend demonstrates the
ruthlessness of the insurgency. The Taliban remains
capable and determined. The continued targeting of
civilians remains a serious strategy of the Taliban and
highlights the need for in-depth training for the Afghan
security forces and sustained international support for
the Afghan Government.
Australia welcomes efforts to mitigate the threat
from insider attacks, which, as we know only too
well, have claimed lives recently, including those of
Australian personnel. The broader strategic threat of
insider attacks comes not from the attacks themselves,

28

but from the risk that we do not respond to them
correctly. The best evidence that we will prevail against
the threat from insider attacks is that we have not
allowed and must not allow them to disrupt our training
and operations in Afghanistan.
I must say that continued violence against women
remains a serious concern for all of us. We welcome
Afghan Government efforts to implement the Law on
the Elimination of Violence Against Women. Of course,
more remains to be done, and in that regard we look to
the recommendations of UNAMA’s recent report on the
Law on the Elimination of Violence Against Women.
The Secretary-General’s report notes the
establishment of a police women mentoring programme,
aimed at building the capacity of female police officers
to help address violence against women and raise
awareness among male officers of the importance
of integrating women into the police force as equal
members. Such initiatives are to be encouraged. They
will build a stronger police force, develop community
confidence and enhance equality.
Much progress has been made over the past
decade, and we are confident that international
resolve to support Afghanistan through transition and
beyond 2014 will remain strong. The United Nations
continues to play a critical role in that project. Australia
welcomes the ongoing commitment of the United
Nations and strongly supports UNAMA’s mandate. We
appreciate UNAMA’s efforts to right-size its mission
in the context of mandate review and significant fiscal
constraints, while maintaining an important network in
Afghanistan’s provinces. But we must ensure that those
constraints do not compromise the essential ongoing
work of UNAMA or of other United Nations agencies
in Afghanistan, such as the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees .
To conclude, as Australia itself prepares to serve on
the Security Council in 2013 and 2014, Afghanistan will
remain a major area of concern for us. We look forward
to working with all Council members and interested
parties during this critical time in Afghanistan’s
transition. Australia remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan in assuming full responsibility for its own
security, and to bringing enhanced opportunities for its
people to improve their livelihoods in a safe and secure
environment. One would expect no less, and that is
what we will try to do.

12-65732

S/PV.6896

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ján
Kubiš for his comprehensive briefing on the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2012/907).
We welcome all of the positive signs mentioned in
the report. On the other hand, as responsibilities are
handed over to the Afghan authorities at an accelerated
pace, significant political, economic and security
challenges remain, many of them highlighted in the
Special Representative’s insightful briefing. The
increase in the number of civilian casualties and attacks
on schools and health facilities, particularly those
targeting girls’ schools, are matters of grave concern.
The potential economic consequences of the transition
are worrisome.
While we are progressing towards the implementation
phase of the commitments put forward in Chicago and
Tokyo last year, we must remain in touch with the
realities on the ground. Tackling those challenges and
building a sustainable, stable Afghanistan is crucial not
only for the future of the Afghan people, but also for
peace and stability in the subcontinent, Asia and the
world.
In these challenging times, a continued display of
will on the part of the international community will
strengthen the hopes of the Afghan people for the future
and help ensure that a smooth transition is under way.
We are glad to see increased efforts on the part of the
Afghan Government and the international community
aimed at ensuring the concrete implementation of the
mutual pledges made in Tokyo, and we are ready to
support those efforts in any way we can.
The conduct of credible and inclusive elections
will be a key indicator for a smooth and viable political
transition process. The announcement of the date
of 5 April 2014 for the presidential and Provincial
Council elections is an important step forward. We
commend the efforts made by the Independent Election
Commission, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) to ensure that free
and fair elections are realized. We also welcome and
encourage the constructive participation of political
parties and civil society in the electoral process.

12-65732

The successful continuation of peace and
reconciliation efforts under the leadership and
ownership of Afghanistan will foster peace and stability
in Afghanistan and constitute another important step
towards a political transition. We congratulate the
recent progress made in this area under the successful
guidance of Mr. Rabbani, the head of the Peace Council.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2082 (2012).
Turkey will continue to support this process with the
best interests of the Afghan people in mind.
We cannot emphasize enough the importance of
regional cooperation for establishing and sustaining
a secure, prosperous and peaceful Afghanistan. The
constructive engagement of Afghanistan’s regional
partners will remain key to addressing common
challenges such as terrorism, barriers to trade and
investment, illicit drugs and refugees.
The trilateral summit process between Afghanistan,
Pakistan and Turkey has made a valuable contribution
towards dialogue and cooperation among the three
countries through seven meetings since 2007. The
summits provide a functional platform for cooperation
that is focused on political dialogue, military and
security issues, peace and reconciliation efforts, and
economic development and partnership.
The seventh trilateral summit, held on 11 and
12 December in Ankara, was convened under the theme
of connectivity, with the view that strengthening local
and regional networks of transportation will facilitate
connectivity for economic development, stability and
self-sustainability. The three countries reiterated their
determination to intensify their cooperation in the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation
efforts and to address the security challenges affecting
the region. A parallel meeting of the Istanbul Forum,
which comprises the apex organizations of the private
sectors of the three countries, was also held on the
sidelines of the summit.
We are also pleased to see that the Istanbul Process
is steadily moving towards the phase of development
and implementation, with several follow-up meetings
held based on the framework accepted at the Kabul
Ministerial Conference held on 14 June this year.
During the most recent senior officials’ meeting, held in
Ankara, we agreed to finalize all implementation plans
for confidence-building measures before the senior
officials’ meeting to be held in Baku on 6 February. We
would like to thank all Heart of Asia countries, regional

29

S/PV.6896

organizations, the United Nations and supporters for
their strong support for the process.
As Afghanistan’s regional and international
partners, we should spare no effort to contribute to
the vision of a secure, peaceful and self-sufficient
Afghanistan. That is our mutual interest. Turkey will
always remain in solidarity with the Afghan people and
continue to contribute to a safe, secure and prosperous
Afghanistan, as we have done for many decades.
In concluding, I would like to voice our strong
support for the crucial role played by the United

30

Nations in Afghanistan. I would particularly like to
commend the valuable efforts of the United Nations,
and UNAMA in particular, in taking the Istanbul
Process further and to express our heartfelt gratitude to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kubiš
and his hard-working team.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
speakers inscribed on my list. The Security Council has
thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

12-65732
