S/PV.7931

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7931st meeting

Thursday, 27 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
(S/2017/339)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-11403 (E)
*1711403*

S/PV.7931

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014),
2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016) (S/2017/339)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator,
to participate in this meeting.
Mr. O’Brien is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/339, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016).
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: On 15 April, the exhausted, oppressed
people of Syria suffered yet another horrendous attack.
Scared and starved, men, women and children from
the towns of Fo’ah and Kefraya were targeted by a car
bomb while stuck at a checkpoint in Rashidin. There
were 67 children among the 125 dead — such a terrible
price for those already robbed of so much.
Yet I do not raise the incident solely because of the
loss of life or depravity of the attackers. Rather, it was
the unity of the humanitarian response to the attack
that ought also to be in the headlines. Humanitarians
from all directions rushed in to save lives. Syrian
Arab Red Crescent workers, first responders, medical
staff of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
some 15 Syrian NGOs, along with countless civilians,
bound together to aid survivors as best they could.
Out of a deplorable terrorist act arose a testament to
the strength of the Syrian spirit — of ordinary civilian
Syrians coming together to help others, regardless of
their background.
2/20

27/04/2017

All too sadly, such glimmers of humanity, acts
that we see everyday at a local level across Syria,
are overshadowed by the sheer number and ferocity
of attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure,
such as hospitals, schools and markets. The past
months have seen fighting continue to intensify on
numerous fronts. The Secretary-General has said
time and again that there will be no military end to
this conflict. Yet, military might continues to be used
against civilians in a way that defies all reason, let
alone morality or law. The use of abhorrent chemical
weapons on 4 April in Khan Shaykhun was yet another
horrific account of such brutality. I wish I could say
it was mindless brutality — but no, it was deliberate,
planned, predetermined by other humans against their
own fellow human beings, sheer unbridled cruelty by
leaders and commanders and we await the investigation
to confirm which ones.
Just a few days ago, two more hospitals were
rendered inoperable after reported air strikes that also
led to the deaths and injury of civilians, including
children. At least six hospitals and three schools have
reportedly been impacted in April alone. I echo the call
of our humanitarian coordinators that attacks against
medical facilities are completely unacceptable and
must stop. What purpose can the use of such military
tactics bring? Certainly, they do not bring peace or any
benefit to any Syrian. These gross tactics will cause
only further human suffering, human suffering borne
primarily by the civilian population — and for which
perpetrators must, and on this we are determined, be held
to account — if not now, in the nearest future possible.
Beyond these attacks that have so shocked the world,
as I said to the Council last month (see S/PV.7909), I am
also gravely concerned about the situation in besieged
eastern Ghouta, outside Damascus, where civilians
remain trapped amid reports of relentless shelling, air
strikes and ground fighting. The last informal access
routes have reportedly been closed, further restricting
movement for some 400,000 people who live in the
area, and whom the United Nations has been unable
to access since October last year. Increased fighting
has also resulted in displacement in northern Hama,
where some 20,000 people have been displaced in
recent days. In Idlib, air strikes and shelling continue
to kill civilians and damage civilian infrastructure.
Just this week, a medical facility in Shinan village was
reportedly struck by air strikes, and in Khan Shaykhun,
where the chemical attack occurred earlier in the
17-11403

27/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

month, its market was taken out by aerial bombardment
that resulted in the deaths of seven civilians, including
a child, and the wounding of 30 more.
In Raqqa, ongoing fighting has also led to deaths,
injury and displacement. Some 39,000 newly displaced
people fled fighting to join the tens of thousands
already in camps outside Raqqa city, and more arrive
every day. The situation for those in the camps is
extremely difficult, with four out of five people lacking
appropriate shelter, and there are now reports of the
deaths of several children due to a lack of medical
care. The United Nations and our NGO partners are
responding from Qamishli, and there are plans to scale
up the response in the coming days.
While insecurity causes the humanitarian situation
to deteriorate for hundreds of thousands, access to
provide them with life-saving support is challenged
at every turn. I am concerned by the rise — I repeat
rise — in administrative and other bureaucratic
restrictions imposed by all parties. For example, in the
north-east of Syria, requirements for humanitarians
to register with local authorities have been in place
since March; these include provisions regarding
NGO recruitment policies and interference with
procurement processes, among others. Furthermore,
since 4 April local authorities have attempted to direct
where assistance could be delivered. Such directing of
assistance is contrary to the humanitarian principles.
These wrongful attempted coercions have resulted
in a pause in United Nations operations in Hasakah
governorate, affecting nearly 100,000 people. In Idlib,
similar restrictions — such as new registration demands
and requests for information on and interference in
the staffing, logistics and finances of NGOs — only
penalize those most in need.
I will not repeat again the bureaucratic delaying
tactics used by the Government of Syria to thwart
humanitarian assistance at every turn, beyond saying
that they continue to bring untold human suffering.
As a result of these tactics and the ongoing insecurity,
levels of access for inter-agency cross-line convoys are
no greater than they were at this time last year. Only
four convoys have deployed so far under the new twomonthly April-May plan, reaching 157,500 people. None
of those convoys reached besieged areas due to a lack
of necessary authorizations. In fact, the only besieged
people reached this year by land were the 6,000 trapped
in Khan al-Shih and the 60,000 in the four towns of
Madaya, Zabadani, Fo’ah and Kefraya, who were

S/PV.7931

accessed separately through the objectionable, tit-fortat four towns agreement. Deir ez-Zor, besieged by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, continues to be
reached by airdrops. I have said publicly that the failure
to deliver is a stain on not just the parties to the conflict,
but also on those in the international community,
including the Security Council, as well as the members
of the humanitarian task force of the International
Syria Support Group, who have committed themselves
to exercising their influence to improve humanitarian
access, particularly to besieged areas.
Despite this challenge, the United Nations
and humanitarian partners continue to relentlessly
negotiate access, as we have always done and wherever
it is possible. Real progress is needed now to stymie
the tide of death and suffering inflicted on people day
after day, month after month. For many, it is already too
late. Inaction has played a part in material changes to
the humanitarian landscape. As the noose has tightened
around eastern Ghouta, some 30,000 people in the
adjacent areas of Barza and Qabun have also come
under siege by the Government of Syria.
Significantly, however, we continue to see an
overall reduction in the number of people besieged due
to the starve-and-surrender tactics used primarily by
the Government of Syria. Among others, thousands
of people in Wadi Barada, Khan al-Shih, Al-Waer in
Homs city, and in the four towns referred to earlier have
now been displaced as part of local agreements, which
followed years of besiegement and intense air strikes,
shelling and sniping. Khan al-Shih and Zabadani have
now been removed from the list of besieged locations. In
fact, Zabadani is now devoid of its civilian population.
As a result of these changes, the number of people in
besieged areas now stands at just over 620,000.
Although the overall number of those besieged
is falling, this process of evacuation must not be
misconstrued as a positive development. These
evacuations are not in line with humanitarian principles
and are not conducted in consultation with the people.
Let us not pretend that those who evacuate move
to a location of safety. Many of those who displace
to Idlib or northern Aleppo continue to live in areas
where civilian structures, including hospitals, come
under regular aerial bombardment, and their access to
basic goods such as food and shelter is limited. These
civilians may no longer be besieged, but they have been
forced to leave their homes and they continue to suffer.

17-114033/20

S/PV.7931

The situation in the Middle East

Given the shifting front lines, all routes need to
remain open to allow people safe passage and for aid to
reach people in need throughout Syria through the most
direct routes via the brave humanitarian aid workers.
We have seen innovations of necessity successfully
implemented through air drops to Deir ez-Zor and the
air bridge to Qamishli. Now, with needs increasing
in north-east Syria and more traditional routes
inaccessible, an increasing number of United Nations
partners are looking for alternatives. The number of
international NGOs operating out of north-east Syria
has nearly quadrupled in the past year and is expected
to grow further as needs continue to outstrip the
assistance being provided. A land route from Aleppo
to Qamishli to provide support to Raqqa is also being
negotiated and explored.
I am sad to say that the humanitarian situation is
deteriorating, if that were possible, and the need for
the active engagement of members of the Council is
urgent. The core needs of the Syrian people from the
international community in general, and from those
Member States seated in the Council in particular,
remain largely unchanged. They include a consolidation
of the nationwide ceasefire, and in particular a pause in
fighting in eastern Ghouta, to enable the delivery of aid;
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure by
all parties to the conflict; and the lifting of arbitrary
and bureaucratic impediments by all parties throughout
Syria.
It is imperative that no country or group prevent
people from moving in safety or humanitarian
organizations from accessing people in need wherever
they are in Syria. A step change in access to besieged
and hard-to-reach locations is needed in order to ensure
full implementation of United Nations inter-agency
convoy plans, and to ensure delivery on the basis of
humanitarian needs assessments. There must also be an
end to the removal of medical items from convoys, and
immediate, unimpeded and sustained access to all in
need throughout Syria. In particular, there must be an
immediate lifting of all sieges.
Finally, there must be a political solution to the
conflict, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). As
long as military tactics are prioritized over political,
there can be no lasting peace, and it will be the civilian
population that is exposed to further needless suffering
as a result. I also wish to say that we need action now,
because now it is already too late for the more than
4/20

27/04/2017

250,000 Syrians who have died over the course of this
atrocious war. I would therefore tell the members of the
Security Council that it is action today that is going
to count.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing
and tell him how much we appreciate his reporting. I
think it is very insightful and will certainly help us
going forward.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Mr. O’Brien for
his briefing.
We have heard many times that the situation in Syria
cannot get any worse, yet this tragic crisis continues.
Thirteen and a half million people need humanitarian
assistance. Even the so-called improved access in
March allowed aid convoys to reach only 39 per cent
of people for whom access was requested. There has
been some progress on the hard-to-reach areas since
the 12 February agreement between the Syrian Higher
Relief Committee and the United Nations, but the
situation in the besieged areas is still devastating. And
we can only imagine the horror of the evacuees on
15 April who finally exited their besieged towns only
for their convoy to be brutally targeted in Al-Rashidin.
The many victims of the tragedy in Syria include
not only ordinary civilians, but also the people who are
trying to help them. Nearly one year has passed since
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), which called for
the protection of medical staff, yet countless medical
personnel and humanitarian workers are still being
killed in Syria. I would like to take this opportunity
to express our sorrow and gratitude to them and to pay
our respect to the brave men and women who continue
to work for those in need, under the most severe
of circumstances.
The Council and the International Syria Support
Group Humanitarian Taskforce have been making
strenuous efforts to achieve rapid, safe and unhindered
access throughout Syria, as mandated by resolution
2254 (2015). Our attention has been extensive, but
any progress is often hard-won. Over the past year,
we have worked to identify concrete measures,
obstacles and areas to be reached. Yet we have
constantly encountered bureaucratic impediments
and unreasonably delayed clearances from the Syrian
Government. Every inter-agency convoy’s departure
17-11403

27/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

or potential cancellation is a subject of worry, and
every item is potentially at risk of being removed from
convoys. Furthermore, it is clear that facilitation letters
issued by the Syrian Government are crucial. It is tragic
and unbelievable that one bureaucratic document can
be so critical for access to thousands of people. The
humanitarian co-penholders — Egypt, Sweden and
Japan — have discussed this matter directly with the
Permanent Mission of Syria in New York. We urged
Syria to make more efforts to issue letters immediately,
in line with the United Nations call for them to be issued
within two to three days. We believe that the Syrian
Mission conveyed our joint message to Damascus. The
co-penholders will try to achieve as much as possible
in this area.
One of our most urgent concerns at present is
eastern Ghouta. Mr. O’Brien explained that the United
Nations is requesting a cessation of hostilities to allow
humanitarian access. Japan supports that call. But the
need for a ceasefire is not limited to eastern Ghouta. We
are also concerned about the many reports of fighting
in various locations. The next Astana process meeting,
to be held at the beginning of May, will be crucial to
preserving the ceasefire mechanism, which allows for
humanitarian access.
While the details and logistics I have mentioned are
vitally important for Syria, we should also keep two
broader goals in mind.
The first is the importance of the political process.
Although the recent Geneva talks did not yield a
breakthrough, there was also no breakdown. That is an
implicit affirmation of the fact that there is no military
solution to the conflict. We must act on that progress
to gain commitments that translate into lifesaving
changes on the ground.
The second broad point is the need for truth and
accountability. We have seen so much destruction
and so many crimes during this six-year war, in
particular the use of chemical weapons. Justice may
not come immediately, but the United Nations and
other humanitarian actors must use their various tools,
including those granted by the Security Council, to
ascertain facts on the ground. Those facts will form the
basis for accountability and for addressing the suffering
of the Syrian people.
With those two broader goals in mind, we must
continue our efforts unabated to achieve good-faith

S/PV.7931

cooperation and humanitarian access from the Syrian
Government in order to serve those most in need.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien for his comprehensive briefing today.
Every month he returns to the Security Council to report
on the humanitarian situation in Syria. Every month the
situation becomes more acute. The number of people
driven from their homes increases. The number not
knowing where their next meal will come from grows.
And the number of people maimed or killed grows.
We have heard from Mr. O’Brien again today about
the worsening plight of the Syrian people: over 6 million
people brutalized, displaced and trapped in Syria in
need of humanitarian assistance, and 5 million people
wrenched from their homes and their loved ones to seek
refuge in the region and beyond — if they survive the
journey. Now they are waiting — in besieged towns and
villages and in refugee camps in Jordan, Lebanon and
Turkey — waiting for the assistance they need, waiting
for the war to end and waiting for the moment when
they can begin to rebuild their lives.
Unfortunately, it seems unlikely that their wait
will end soon. As we have heard today, rather than
decreasing, there is increased militarization and
violence on the ground, leading to large numbers of
civilian casualties and more internal displacement.
It seems that humanitarian considerations are wholly
subordinate to military objectives. There continues
to be a complete disregard for the laws of war and
obligations to protect civilians. Cynical military tactics
that blatantly violate international humanitarian law
by deliberately targeting civilians are being used to
gain military advantage, in particular by Government
forces. The upcoming Astana meeting on 3 May offers
an opportunity for the ceasefire guarantors to make
progress on de-escalation. We expect that they will
take that opportunity to deliver. A failure to do so also
threatens progress in the upcoming United Nations-led
talks in Geneva.
While emphasizing that the Syrian regime and
its allies bear the responsibility for the overwhelming
majority of violations of international humanitarian
law in Syria, we also note that recent airstrikes on
Raqqa allegedly led to civilian causalities and struck
civilian infrastructure. That compounds the suffering
of the people in Raqqa, who are already the victims of
senseless torture and murder at the hands of Da’esh. We

17-114035/20

S/PV.7931

The situation in the Middle East

urge the international coalition against Da’esh to take
greater care in order to protect civilians in Syria.
The reality for many of those who have been
forced to live under siege for years is that, when the
opportunity does arise to leave, they are cruelly moved
to areas scarcely more safe or stable than those they left.
The United Nations has repeatedly expressed concern
about local agreements preceded by besiegement,
starvation and bombardment, and resulting in the forced
displacement of civilians. That tactic of bombing and
laying siege so as to enable so-called local agreements
must stop. We recall the warning from the SecretaryGeneral that, under international humanitarian law,
forced displacement may constitute a war crime. We
reiterate his call that any evacuation of civilians must
be safe, voluntary and to a place of their choosing.
We urge parties to ensure the full compliance of any
new local agreements with international humanitarian
law. We encourage the United Nations, other relevant
organizations, and Member States with influence to
intensify dialogue with parties and actors, primarily
the Government of Syria and Russia.
We understand the predicament that local
agreements present for the United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies. They are not informed of
the terms, have no access, and the security situation
limits the possibility to be present during subsequent
relocations. However, we must make every effort to
avoid another catastrophe like the one in Al-Rashidin.
Until the fighting stops, we must continue to explore
options for increasing civilian safety by using cameras
or other tools as a form of protective vigilance,
for example.
The deplorable situation for those relocated to Idlib
is of grave concern. Regime air strikes on hospitals and
schools in Idlib must stop. Civilians must be protected
and humanitarian access must be granted. We call
on those with influence over armed groups in Idlib,
including Turkey, to use their influence to counter
restrictions on the ability of humanitarian agencies
and non-governmental organizations to do their work.
Until the situation improves, we might all want to
advocate alternative destinations for civilians, ones
with better protection and access. We encourage the
United Nations to inform the Council in its next report
about the situation in Jarabulus, which is another main
destination area.
6/20

27/04/2017

We want to take this opportunity to express
our strong support and admiration for the tireless
efforts of the United Nations and other humanitarian
organizations to deliver assistance to populations
in need in an extremely challenging context. They
continue to encounter unacceptable obstructions and
barriers to the access they need on a daily basis.
We renew our call on the Syrian regime to grant
safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access to
all those in need of assistance, including in locations
subject to local agreements. Access is a question of
political will. In many cases, a binary choice exists
between agreeing to provide lifesaving aid to women
and men, boys and girls, or not to do so. We fully
support Japan’s call, on behalf of the penholders, on the
Syrian authorities to implement the simplified approval
process of the United Nations.
Let me underline our deep concern about the
deteriorating situation in eastern Ghouta, which we also
raised with the Syrian Permanent Mission earlier this
week. We invite Council members to join us in calling
for a pause in the fighting so as to allow humanitarian
agencies to reach all in need through the routes they
prefer to use, as has been requested by the United
Nations since October. In addition to the well-known
access constraints, particularly to areas besieged by the
Government of Syria, we are also increasingly worried
about new access restrictions such as those now being
imposed in Idlib and by local authorities in Kurdishcontrolled areas.
Every additional day that the people of Syria wait
for assistance and an end to the conflict is an indication
of the failure of the international community and
of the Council to show the courage to take the tough
decisions necessary to put humanitarian needs above
political considerations; of our failure to live up to our
responsibility to protect the people of Syria by ensuring
a ceasefire and respect for international humanitarian
law; of our failure to deliver a peaceful end to the
suffering for the people of Syria. How much longer must
they wait? For many, including thousands of children,
their dreams for the future are already shattered; the
least we can do is give them the support they need to
end the nightmare they are living today.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is holding monthly meetings on
the situation in Syria to reaffirm members’ positions
vis-à-vis the unprecedented suffering of the Syrian
17-11403

27/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

people. We reiterate our words of condemnation and
regret to the media and our peoples. We have grown
used to it; the Syrian people has grown used to it; it
has become a part of the traditional practice that has
started to affect our outlook and our real engagement
with an interactive dialogue that seeks a common
ground to build upon to support a serious effort towards
a settlement.
It is important to give ourselves the opportunity
to review what the Security Council has achieved in
the past few months so that we can objectively judge
the approach it has adopted. Let us recall that these
meetings and their outcomes over these months have
not contributed to supporting the ceasefire. They have
brought no real pressure to bear on the parties to engage
in direct and serious political negotiations. They did not
even prevent the two horrific incidents that took place
this month — the first in Khan Shaykhun on 4 April
and the second, a terrorist explosion in the Al-Rashidin
neighbourhood on 15 April — claiming the lives of
more innocent men, women and children, in addition
to the hundreds of thousands who have lost their lives
during the past six years.
Reviewing the Security Council’s approach to the
situation in Syria and its impact on the reality on the
ground has become an urgent matter. We have warned,
time and again that the Council cannot become a media
outlet. The impact of its statements must go beyond
making newspaper headlines. It is evident that with the
heightened level of discord, the work of the Council
is moving steadily towards that fate. If in a crisis of
this magnitude, we cannot find a modicum of common
ground to confront it, what must happen before we
make the necessary effort to overcome the current state
of polarization and opposing narrow interests?

S/PV.7931

The practices have not changed; the impediments
remain. The factors that continue to fuel the crisis
have not changed and will not change if international,
regional and internal parties continue to seek any excuse
to prevaricate or if the Security Council continues to
reflect points of divergence rather than commonalities
or to focus on details without looking at the full picture.
I therefore call on all parties to support the efforts of
the Secretary-General through the United Nations
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. De Mistura, to reach an
agreement on starting a transitional period that meets
the aspirations of the Syrian people by establishing
democracy and freedoms in a unified sovereign
country, in accordance with the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).
I also reiterate our call on all parties to engage
in a serious manner to counter terrorism and the
spread of terrorist groups in Syria and to confront
the phenomenon of armed groups and militia that are
not governed by any reason or law and that continue
to receive covert support in the form of weapons and
funds without their sponsors being held accountable
for those practices. The funding and sponsoring of
terrorism in an organized and systematic way in Syria
and other countries in the region are not a figment of
our imagination; they are a fact. They pose a threat to
countries in the region and are being watched by the
countries of the region and throughout the wider world.
Those countries will continue to endure that threat if
some continue to bury their heads in the sand.

I would like to thank Mr. O’Brien for his focused
and clear briefing today. We reiterate our support for
the humanitarian efforts of the United Nations. We are
ready to support any effort to alleviate the suffering of
civilians in any Syrian town, be it by facilitating access
to humanitarian assistance or the evacuation of the sick
and injured. We urge the parties concerned to facilitate
the mission of the Organization and to work to remove
any impediment.

There is still some common ground among the
members of the Security Council that can be built upon
if there is a serious will to do so. We are committed
to a frank dialogue on the Syrian crisis that is free of
polarization. We remain mindful of the centrality and
importance of cooperation between the co-chairs of
the International Syria Support Group — the United
States and the Russian Federation — as it pertains to
Syria at the political level and on the ground. We also
believe that Council documents, the statements of the
Support Group and any previous consensus reached
could be a foundation that we can build upon to assist in
revitalizing the work of the International Syria Support
Group. We are fully prepared to support any efforts in
that regard.

I would like to express our deep regret that the
briefing, as expected, reflected the continued human
suffering in Syria. It was no different than previous
briefings, except in some details, locations and numbers.

The challenges of the crisis and its repercussions
on the region and the world loom large, and no country
can address them alone. The saboteurs of the political
process in Syria — Special Envoy Mr. De Mistura has

17-114037/20

S/PV.7931

The situation in the Middle East

mentioned them time and again — will seek to exploit
the divisions in the Council and among international
parties, continue to fuel the situation on the ground,
defeat any attempt at a political settlement and ensure
that the proxy war continues.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. O’Brien
for his important briefing today and for all of his
sterling work.
I would like to begin as Mr. O’Brien did by
wholeheartedly condemning the terrorist attack on
desperate civilians as they were being evacuated as
part of the four towns agreement. It is utterly tragic
that over 120 people, including a very high number of
children, were brutally killed. The United Kingdom
condemns that terrible attack. We will work to ensure
that whoever is responsible is held to account.
I also wish to salute the unity and bravery of the
humanitarian response, including the response of the
White Helmets. Despite a ceasefire being in place since
the end of 2016, we continue to witness terrible ongoing
violence. In April alone, we know that the regime or
its allies have carried out aerial attacks on at least six
hospitals and three schools in Syria — I repeat, six
hospitals and three schools. That is utterly deplorable.
I hope that others will join me in condemning all
such incidents. All of us need to do everything in our
power to bring the suffering to an end. I therefore ask
my Russian colleague: What is Russia doing with its
leverage to ensure that the regime stops attacking
schools and hospitals?
Once again, such attacks bring into laser focus the
urgent and desperate humanitarian needs of 13 million
people in Syria. I am especially concerned about the
difficulty in reaching the 1.5 million people who live
under siege-like conditions and the further 3.2 million in
other hard-to-reach areas in Syria. All of them urgently
require food, water and medicine. Roughly 5 million
Syrians live in besieged and hard-to-reach areas, but
the only regime-besieged area to be reached in 2017
was Khan al-Shih where 6,000 people were reached
with aid. The other besieged areas reached are Deir
ez-Zor, besieged by Da’esh, where the United Nations
carries out air drops and the four towns besieged by
the Iranian-backed Hizbullah and armed opposition
groups. That is a tiny proportion of aid reaching those
people who are in most need of it.
Let me be clear — the Syrian regime is using
starve-or-surrender tactics. That is abhorrent and a
8/20

27/04/2017

clear breach of international humanitarian law. I am
especially concerned about the 420,000 innocent
civilians in the besieged part of eastern Ghouta, where
supplies are rapidly running out. There are urgent
medical needs, shortages of basic food items and no
water or power supplies. I finally support Mr. O’Brien’s
call for a pause in fighting to allow the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners to safely enter
eastern Ghouta.
At the International Syria Support Group meeting
in Geneva on 20 April, Russia committed to pressing the
regime to allow the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners to access Duma, one part of eastern Ghouta.
What is the situation one week later? The regime has
not acted. There is still no convoy. We owe it to the
people of Duma to do everything we can to improve the
situation. The United Nations has received the requisite
assurances from the relevant armed opposition groups
to allow them to deliver assistance to Duma and it
has identified a safe route to enter. The only things
now lacking are for the Al-Assad regime to issue a
facilitation letter and to pause its aerial bombardment
of the area for long enough for the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners to enter. If Russia is unable
to ensure that the regime allows access, we call on
the Security Council to act to ensure that the United
Nations is able to deliver urgent supplies to Duma, in
the first instance.
I will reiterate now what I have said many times
before. There can be no sustainable peace until there
is a political transition. The Al-Assad regime bears
overwhelming responsibility for the suffering of the
Syrian people. I implore the whole of the Security
Council to work in unity to end the conflict for the sake
of the Syrian people.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): First and
foremost, I would like to thank Mr. Stephen O’Brien for
his excellent briefing and tireless efforts. Through him,
I would like to pay tribute once again to the medical and
humanitarian personnel for the sacrifices they make for
the Syrian people, who are sorely tested at this time.
Senegal remains deeply concerned about the
devastating impact of the Syrian conflict. My delegation
would therefore like to reiterate its firm condemnation
of the terrorist attack that occurred on 15 April in
Al-Rashidin, in western Aleppo, during the evacuation
of Fo’ah and Kefraya. That attack, which was denounced
by the Security Council, killed 130 people, including 67
17-11403

27/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

children and left hundreds injured. We believe that this
is yet another reason for giving as much priority as is
required to combating terrorism and violent extremism,
in particular the fight against Da’esh and the former
Al-Nusra Front, by employing a comprehensive
strategy that respects international humanitarian law
and relevant Security Council resolutions.
The conflict also highlights the suffering of Syrian
children, in particular the fate of 2.4 million who
left their homes and another 280,000 who still live in
besieged areas. Their plight therefore deserves our
concerted attention.
In that regard, we reiterate the call made by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child for an investigation
of crimes against children, including through active
collaboration with existing mechanisms, such as the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) Fact-Finding Mission in Syria, the United
Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism and the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 71/248.
My delegation accordingly renews its encouragement
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, in particular its Fact-Finding Mission, in its
efforts to shed light on the chemical-weapons attack in
Khan Shaykhun so as to bring to justice the perpetrators
of that despicable act, which resulted in many child
casualties among the victims.
Despite ongoing efforts, the cessation of hostilities
facilitated by Russia, Turkey and Iran — which we
welcome as part of the Astana process and once again
gave us cause for hope and optimism — has been
seriously put in question owing to the violence observed
throughout the country. Consequently, communities
such as Aleppo, Hama, Dar’a, Raqqa and Damascus
continue to record many civilian casualties and the
continued destruction of public infrastructure, such as
schools, health facilities and markets, all of which is in
violation of international humanitarian law.
The situation in eastern Ghouta, where approximately
400,000 people are besieged, remains of particular
concern. According to the World Health Organization,
the three public hospitals and the 17 health centres in

S/PV.7931

the locality are no longer functioning or accessible to
the population. Furthermore, the last United Nations
humanitarian convoy to reach that region was on
29 October 2016.
Nevertheless, despite extremely difficult conditions,
the United Nations and its partners have continued to
provide support to those in need among the population.
In that regard, my delegation commends the hardly
negligible progress made in late March involving
the assistance provided to 307,000 persons out of an
initial target of 787,500, within the framework of five
inter-agency convoys. That represents 39 per cent of
the target, as compared to 28 per cent for the previous
month of February. Given the Syrian authorities’
approval of 71.7 per cent of the United Nations requests
for April and May, we hope to see more progress in
successfully providing humanitarian assistance. We
nevertheless renew our call on those same Syrian
authorities to continue issuing the facilitation letters,
which are necessary for optimally carrying out the plans
conceptualized by the United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their partners.
We remind all parties to the Syrian conflict of their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
human rights law to ensure the population’s access to
assistance, including medical care, in total security,
without any restriction, precondition or hindrance,
through the most direct means possible in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We hope that the technical meetings of the Astana
process, held in Tehran and to be held in Astana in early
May, will contribute to strengthening and consolidating
the ceasefire. Even better, it is important that the
truce be reflected in a clear improvement in providing
humanitarian assistance under the direction of the
United Nations. In that vein, we welcome the work of the
Task Force on the Ceasefire of the International Syria
Support Group, co-chaired by the United States and the
Russian Federation, which, despite major constraints on
the ground, is pursuing its efforts to ensure providing
humanitarian assistance, particularly in besieged areas
where access to aid is rendered virtually impossible.
All those efforts must be continued and strengthened
to cover all the civilians concerned, especially those
living in besieged and difficultly accessed areas.
In conclusion, we reiterate our conviction that the
only way to end the crisis and its most devastating
humanitarian consequences is through a negotiated

17-114039/20

S/PV.7931

The situation in the Middle East

political solution based on the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015), under
the auspices of the United Nations.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): As
we do every month, we thank Under-Secretary-General
Stephen O’Brien not only for his comprehensive
briefing but also for his and his team’s work, including
that of the thousands of humanitarian workers deployed
in Syria, working under extremely difficult conditions.
We express our gratitude to all of them.
What more can we say at this stage in the Syrian
conflict that has not already been said? Frankly,
very little can be added. Uruguay’s position has been
clear and uniform since assuming its mandate as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council last
year. Our first goal is and must be to work towards
a political solution so as to end the crisis and move
towards a peaceful transition in Syria negotiated by all
Syrians and backed by the international community. To
that end, we have every confidence in the good offices
of Special Envoy De Mistura to move forward in the
next round of negotiations in Geneva among the parties
so as to gradually arrive at points of convergence and
give shape to a new chapter in Syria.
Let us avoid the duplicity of the stakeholders inside
and outside of the region who call for a negotiated
political solution while maintaing their support for
armed groups whose actions put them in the same
category as Da’esh and the former Al-Nusra Front.
Along with the Geneva process, the Astana process is
crucial to relaunching and strengthening the cessation
of hostilities across the entire Syrian territory, which
would lead to a significant reduction in violence in that
country. We commend the efforts of Russia, Turkey and
Kazakhstan, among others, and hope that they will be
able to continue on that path next week. Let us step
up the work of the International Syrian Support Group
in Geneva, so that we can help it forge a path leading
towards a negotiations, which is the only way out of that
tragedy. We recall that the Security Council adopted
resolution 2336 (2016) calling for such a cessation four
months ago. We support that resolution and demand
that it be implemented.
Of course, the political process and the cessation
of hostilities are only two of the stages that will ensure
turning a new page in Syria. The third concerns
the humanitarian dimension. We take note of the
improvement in humanitarian access in February and
10/20

27/04/2017

March in hard-to-access, besieged areas. However,
compared to a year ago, we are far from any encouraging
results. Let us continue to call for the immediate,
sustained and unfettered access to everyone, without
distinction, in order to provide for the needs of millions
of people.
For Uruguay, the protection of civilians in Syria
and any other area of conflict is an absolute priority.
It is immoral to make distinctions among civilians.
Unfortunately, over the past seven years, we have
seen the most serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law by all parties to the
conflict. Until there is accountability for those crimes,
those responsible will continue to enjoy impunity and
commit them. In that regard, we welcome the report
presented last Friday by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
during the Arria Formula meeting. We would like to
see further exchanges between the Commission and the
Security Council, which would be extremely useful to
the work of both.
Mid-April was particularly difficult for Syrian
civilians. To the continued and indiscriminate
bombings and attacks using all types of prohibited
weapons was added, on 4 April, the brutal chemical
attack in Khan Shaykhun, which all of us here
condemned unanimously. We are all aware of why we
were unable to adopt a draft resolution. This is a war
crime that needs to be comprehensively investigated
so as to identify the perpetrators. We are confident
in the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, and hope that it will soon be able
to present illuminating conclusions. We condemn the
term “staged”, which was used to qualify this cowardly
and disproportionate attack. That incident triggered
the unilateral use of force by some Member States. We
reiterate that this is the least appropriate way of dealing
with this kind of situation because it only increases the
tensions and undermines the reaching of a solution to
the conflict at the multilateral level.
The other incident that marked this month was the
brutal attack against civilians being evacuated from
Fo’ah and Kefraya in the framework of the agreement
of the four towns, which also includes Madaya and
Zabadani. Although we share the concerns about forced
displacement of the population, which could constitute
a war crime, we must also take into account that
there are scores of thousands that are still in difficult
conditions in besieged areas, and they are the victims
17-11403

27/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

of constant bombings and attacks. In many cases they
are dying of hunger. Any evacuation must ensure the
safety of civilians, ensure the provision of humanitarian
assistance and make efforts to ensure that they can
eventually return to their homes as soon as possible.
A year since the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016),
we continue to witness the destruction of hospitals and
other medical facilities in Syria. It is an outrage that
the parties have ignored their commitments, thereby
depriving thousands of people of their right to medical
assistance and causing hundreds of victims among
medical personnel. We see this practice repeated
in schools, markets and other places of civilian
infrastructure. We condemn such attacks in Syria,
Yemen and wherever else they occur. They are also war
crimes, and those responsible must be held accountable.
In conclusion, we would like to make several
requests. First, we must consolidate the cessation of
hostilities across the entire Syrian territory. Secondly,
we must call on all disputing parties to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including medical facilities.
Thirdly, we request that the Syrian authorities eliminate
or minimize bureaucratic restrictions to ensure that
supplies and humanitarian assistance can reach hardto-reach and besieged areas. Fourthly, there is already
a ceasefire in force, adopted through resolution 2336
(2016). We add our voice to the call made by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
to establish a humanitarian pause of 48 hours in
eastern Ghouta. That should be the practice in all areas
under siege.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank Mr. O’Brien for his
briefing. He and the humanitarian agencies have the
full support of Italy.
As we know, the Syrian conflict has already
caused unspeakable levels of human suffering, death
and displacement. International humanitarian law is
violated. Terrorists continue to kill scores of Syrians,
including children — like in the barbaric attack in
Al-Rashidin on 15 April. The carnage, which reached
new heights of horror with the chemical weapons attack
in Khan Shaykhun, offends our common humanity and
can undermine any path towards a credible end to the
Syrian conflict.
We take note of the increase in the number
of inter-agency convoys that have reached their
destinations in hard-to-reach areas since last month.
That demonstrates that humanitarian access can be

S/PV.7931

provided in Syria. But it is not enough. It is important
to focus on besieged areas, where the situation clearly
is worsening, especially in eastern Ghouta, where the
400,000 people under siege have no medical facilities
to rely upon since all has been destroyed. Convoys are
ready to deliver much-needed assistance to Douma and
elsewhere, but cannot proceed. The armed faction has
provided written guarantee for the convoys, whereas
the regime — despite Russian pressure — continues to
deny this authorization. We support the call, therefore,
for an immediate pause in the fighting to allow for
humanitarian aid to be delivered to eastern Ghouta,
which cannot become the next Aleppo. The Security
Council should closely monitor this issue and step up
the pressure on the relevant parties.
Local agreements between the parties to the
conflict, often reached after months of siege and
bombings — such as the agreement of the four
towns — are also cause for concern. They respond to
the military logic of the conflict rather than ensure the
protection of civilians. The evacuations that follow
such agreements, in which the United Nations is neither
involved nor an observer, have to respect humanitarian
principles. We encourage the United Nations to monitor
the evacuation in the four towns and Al-Waer in order
to ensure the protection of civilians and prevent further
violations of humanitarian law.
The consequences of the conflict have spread
across the region. Instability radiates far beyond
Syria, be it in the form of terrorism or in the form of
uncontrolled flows of refugees. Legal and safe ways to
ensure the movement of people fleeing from conflicts
are paramount. We commend neighbouring countries
that provide refuge to the millions of people who have
fled the fighting. In that regard, the Italian Government
is carrying out a programme called Humanitarian
Corridors, which allows safe and legal entry to Italy for
people fleeing the horrors of the combat. It is an act of
solidarity and a means to combat trafficking, a model
that other countries are following.
I also wish to highlight the contribution of the recent
Brussels conference. Italy confirmed its commitment
of humanitarian aid and longer-term assistance for
2017-2018; but of course humanitarian assistance
must be delivered to the population. The conference
also resulted in renewed efforts by the international
community, both in the response to the humanitarian
tragedy and also in the direction of a political solution
because. As we know, the humanitarian and political

17-1140311/20

S/PV.7931

The situation in the Middle East

27/04/2017

dimensions are deeply interconnected. Improving the
humanitarian situation is key to creating a constructive
environment in Geneva, where talks will resume
under the leadership of Staffan de Mistura. We cannot
allow that critical negotiation to be jeopardized by an
intensification of fighting on the ground or by continued
lack of humanitarian access to the population. The
co-guarantors of the ceasefire and the Special Envoy
have a responsibility in that respect, and we look
forward to the next Astana meeting.

tragedy took place in a very particular context, namely,
that of the cross-displacement of populations. So far,
more than 11,000 people have been evacuated from
the so-called four towns of Fo’ah, Kafraya, Zabadani
and Madaya. I would like to remind the Security
Council that civilian evacuations must be undertaken
on a voluntary basis. The Secretary-General has clearly
pointed out that the forced displacement of populations
may constitute war crimes, and the populations
concerned must be allowed to choose their destination.

What emerged also in the Group of Seven ministerial
meetings in Italy recently, which also included key
regional stakeholders, is that only a political settlement
to implement resolution 2254 (2015) will bring this
conflict and the dire humanitarian situation to an end.

In that context, we appeal again to those who support
the Syrian regime to exert all the pressure needed for it
to comply with its international obligations and allow
for full, secure, unconditional and unhindered access
by the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to
people in need throughout Syria. The lives of hundreds
of thousands of people hang in the balance, but United
Nations access to the population is still as hampered as
ever, especially for besieged cities. We recall that the
use of hunger as a weapon of war and obstacles to relief
are war crimes, and we reiterate with force our call for
the immediate lifting of all sieges.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the importance
of accountability for those responsible for the terrible
crimes we are witnessing in Syria. Italy will continue
to work with Council members to that end.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
sincerely thank Mr. Stephen O’Brien for his briefing
and his commitment. He has once again reminded us of
our responsibilities with regard to the Syrian tragedy.
Since our last humanitarian consultations,
one more step has been taken into the horror. The
chemical-weapons attack at Khan Shaykhun on 4 April
killed more than 80 people and injured more than
500. We expect the Secretary-General’s next report to
address very precisely the humanitarian consequences
of this tragedy.
Information that France has obtained, which the
French Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Marc
Ayrault, made public yesterday, provides evidence
of the use of sarin gas and the responsibility of the
regime, which will have to answer for these crimes.
Syria undertook in 2013 to never again use chemical
weapons and to destroy all of its chemical-weapons
capabilities. More than ever now, we must remind the
regime of its obligations. More broadly, the prohibition
of the use of chemical weapons must remain an absolute
and universal obligation, as it is one of the pillars of our
collective security.
Ten days after 4 April, a convoy of civilians was
attacked by a vehicle bomb in the Al-Rashidin transit
zone, killing at least 130 people, including 67 children.
Once again the Syrian population has been directly
targeted. The price it is paying is unbearable. This
12/20

The gap between the aid reaching the zones
controlled by the regime and the aid granted to areas
held by the opposition can only grow. Throughout
March, United Nations agencies submitted new
requests for access, but the Government’s refusals
deprived more than 68,000 people of food assistance in
Homs, Dar’a and rural Damascus. We are particularly
concerned about the humanitarian situation in eastern
Ghouta. Humanitarian convoys were planned by the
United Nations in this area. However, the facilitation
letters for the loading of the convoy have not yet been
issued by the regime, whereas the opposition has given
sufficient guarantees in terms of security for the letting
the convoys through. We therefore call on the parties
to take all necessary measures to enable aid workers to
proceed without delay and in complete safety with the
delivery of aid.
Moreover, the Syrian authorities persist in
refusing to authorize medicines and medical supplies
in humanitarian convoys. This is unacceptable. The
World Health Organization’s requests for access to
five areas of the country have remained unanswered.
This is simply not acceptable. France recalls the right
of the Syrian population to humanitarian assistance
and protection, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and Security Council resolutions.
The attacks on the hospitals and schools, in particular,
17-11403

27/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

to which Stephen O’Brien has referred, also calls for
our strongest condemnation.
The situation we are describing no longer has
anything to do with a cessation of hostilities. The
regime has consistently violated its commitments
methodically — systematically — while claiming to
carry out actions against Da’esh. Violence intensifies,
especially in the provinces of Hama, Damascus and
Dar’a. The air strikes of the regime against civilians
continue east of Qalamoun. Indiscriminate attacks
against civilians are taking place incessantly. The
guarantors of the truce concluded on 29 December took
responsibility for overseeing its implementation. We
therefore appeal to the States guarantors of the Astana
process, and in particular to Russia and Iran, to impose
on the Syrian regime a complete cessation of hostilities.
In that context, the establishment of an efficient
international mechanism for monitoring the ceasefire
is a necessity that France has regularly called for
and for which it has made concrete proposals. The
improvement of the situation on the ground is essential
for the resumption of the negotiations in Geneva during
the month of May with a view to a political transition,
and this, of course, under the auspices of the United
Nations. That is the only way to save Syria from the
abyss of violence, that of Da’esh and that of the regime,
which are feeding each other.
We all know that a tangible and lasting improvement
in the situation in Syria is possible only in the context
of a political settlement of the crisis based on a political
transition in the country, as provided for in resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex). To put it bluntly, any credible revival of political
negotiations presupposes much stronger pressure from
Russia on the Damascus regime, as well as on the
continuation of the recent American strikes, which we
have approved, and a real political re-engagement of
the United States in Syria in parallel with the efforts of
Europeans and other stakeholders. Rest assured, Madam
President, of the France’s determined commitment in
this direction.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We express our deep
appreciation for Under-Secretary-General O’Brien’s
update and commend him for his commitment and
that of the staff of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs to mitigating the grave
humanitarian suffering in Syria, which has reached
unprecedented proportions. We are concerned about the

S/PV.7931

grave humanitarian catastrophe in the country, which
must be addressed on various fronts. We believe that
the solution of the military problems requires serious
progress on the following issues.
First, we must see further advancement of the
political process facilitated by the Geneva and Astana
processes. The ceasefire agreement is crucial for
humanitarian action to be possible and should be
preserved. Secondly, countering terrorist groups needs
unified actions that will significantly improve the
humanitarian situation. Thirdly, we need to strengthen
the commendable efforts of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, the Syrian Red Crescent Society and
the relevant United Nation agencies. We pay tribute
to the large number of United Nations personnel and
humanitarian workers who labour in such hazardous
conditions, some of whom have sacrificed a great deal
for the noble cause of peace.
Equally important are the efforts of the international
community to restore the damaged infrastructure
and develop an integrated programme to rebuild the
country’s economic potential, by providing, inter alia,
electricity and water supplies and education for children
and by setting up schools and hospitals in areas liberated
from terrorists. These measures must commence
now and not wait until after reaching an agreement.
Undoubtedly the recovery process should serve as a
powerful impetus for the return of refugees and reduce
the social base of the armed and terrorist groups.
We welcome the humanitarian response plan
for Syria for 2017, with its budget of $3.4 billion for
comprehensive humanitarian assistance. We thank
the donors for their continued support and urge them
to honour their commitments and pledges so that the
United Nations can maintain operations on such a large
scale throughout the country.
We are concerned about the continuing indiscriminate
attacks that result in innocent civilians’ death or longterm injury and impairment. The parties to the conflict
should comply forthwith with their obligations under the
relevant international law and take all the appropriate
steps to protect those civilians who have ceased to take
part in the hostilities, including members of ethnic and
religious communities.
Political tensions that produce such a level of human
suffering can have no military solution. Kazakhstan
therefore calls on the members of the Security
Council and the parties to the conflict and those who

17-1140313/20

S/PV.7931

The situation in the Middle East

have influence on them to work to achieve a political
settlement of the conflict in Syria so as not to further
escalate those tensions and undo the progress that has
been made in Geneva and Astana.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Stephen
O’Brien for his briefing.
The conflict in Syria has resulted in massive
civilian casualties, and China sympathizes deeply
with the suffering of the Syrian people. We strongly
urge all the parties in Syria to reach a settlement
through dialogue and consultation. Recently, while the
intra-Syrian ceasefire has been holding, thanks to the
concerted efforts of the international community, in
some regions it allows for no optimism. China welcomes
the important role that the Astana dialogue is playing in
maintaining the ceasefire and hopes that the new round
of talks will help to consolidate the current momentum.
We commend the efforts of United Nations aid
agencies to continue to scale up their assistance and
send out more convoys to various parts of Syria. We
urge all the parties in Syria to work diligently to
implement the ceasefire agreement and take appropriate
measures to actively coordinate with the United Nations
humanitarian assistance efforts while providing speedy,
safe and unimpeded humanitarian access so as to create
the necessary conditions for United Nations action and
for reaching a political settlement of the issue.
China welcomed the recently held Brussels
conference on Syria and looks forward to seeing
concrete results from it as soon as possible. If the
country’s humanitarian situation is to be mitigated, the
international community must remain committed to
a political settlement in Syria. A new round of peace
talks will take place in Geneva in mid-May. All the
relevant parties must remain firmly committed to their
diplomatic efforts and continue to support both the work
of Special Envoy de Mistura and the United Nations as
a primary mediator. All of the parties in Syria must
participate constructively in the talks and on the basis
of the principle that the dialogue and negotiations
should be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, with the aim
of gradually reaching a complete and lasting solution
that is acceptable to all parties.
The terrorist attacks on Syrian territory are a
serious setback to international assistance efforts.
China condemns the recent terror attack in Al-Rashidin
that targeted the evacuation of civilians. We urge for
14/20

27/04/2017

the intensification of international coordination in
countering terrorism, unifying standards and firmly
combating all the terrorist organizations on the
Council’s list. China has supported efforts to mitigate
the humanitarian situation in Syria and arrive at a
political settlement of the crisis, and we are prepared to
continue playing a constructive role in a full, fair and
appropriate settlement without further delay.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Stephen O’Brien for his briefing today and for
his commitment to the work he has undertaken, which
we fully support.
The conflict in Syria is entering its seventh year
and the humanitarian situation there continues to be
very worrying. To date, according to a report from the
World Health Organization on 3 April, about 400,000
people have died and 1.5 million have been injured
since the conflict began. According to reports from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
3.5 million people are in need of humanitarian aid.
We are very concerned about the fact that, despite the
ceasefire that has been implemented in accordance
with resolution 2336 (2016), attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure by some of the parties involved
in the conflict have continued. It is deeply regrettable
that more than half of the public hospitals and primarycare centres in Syria have closed or are functioning
only partially and have found their capacity reduced
even further by indiscriminate attacks on civilian
infrastructure. We reiterate firmly that the agreements
reached under the ceasefire must be complied with and
respected, and that all the parties involved are under an
obligation to ensure the safety and integrity of those
caught up in the conflict.
We commend the fact that in the inter-agency
humanitarian assistance plan for April and May, 71.7 per
cent of the places to which admission was requested
were approved, and we urge all parties to make every
effort to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches all
the people provided for in the plan, without obstacles
or restrictions and whether or not the areas are easy or
difficult to access. We are very disturbed by the fact
that the security forces of the parties to the conflict
continue to remove first-aid, obstetric and paediatric
equipment and other items from the medical supplies in
the humanitarian assistance convoys, thereby reducing
their capacity and effectiveness and hurting those who
are in urgent need. We would like to remind them that
17-11403

27/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

they must allow unconditional access to humanitarian
assistance, guarantee and safeguard the convoys’
security and integrity and refrain from considering
them as military objectives.
We would like to acknowledge the important work
that the Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing
Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic has been doing,
both as a guarantor of security in the deployment of
humanitarian assistance and in evacuating people from
areas where armed clashes have occurred. We would
also like to acknowledge and commend the work being
done to alleviate the humanitarian crisis facing the
Syrian people by the staff of the various humanitarian
agencies and entities such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the Syrian Red Crescent,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, UNICEF and the International Organization
for Migration, among others.
We deplore the fact that in March more than 450
people, including women and children, died and
hundreds more were injured in Da’esh’s dastardly
attacks, in clashes between the parties to the conflict,
and in military operations of the forces on the ground
that are fighting Da’esh. We also condemn the criminal
and cowardly car-bomb attack of 15 April on the town
of Al-Rashidin, which killed more than 120 people,
including innocent women and children, who were
part of a group of 5,000 civilians being evacuated to
Aleppo. The perpetrators of that terrible act should
be duly investigated, prosecuted and punished. With
regard to the attacks on 4 April in Khan Shaykhun, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia firmly condemns the use of
chemical weapons or of chemicals as weapons, acts that
are unjustifiable and criminal regardless of their motive
or where, when and by whom they are committed. The
use of chemical weapons is a violation of our obligations
under international law. We demand that the attacks be
subject to an independent, impartial, unpoliticized, full
and conclusive investigation and that those responsible
be duly prosecuted and severely punished.
In that regard, we reiterate our firm condemnation
of all acts of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable.
It is our unequivocal belief that any counter-terrorism
action should be carried out in coordination with the
Government so as to prevent the death of innocent
civilians, in full respect for all the provisions of
resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2336 (2016). In that context,
we recognize the tremendous effort being made by the
Government and the Syrian people in their struggle

S/PV.7931

against Da’esh, which is a war they are waging on
behalf of all of us.
Finally, we reiterate that the Plurinational State
of Bolivia firmly and clearly believes that the only
option for resolving this conflict is through a political
process that is inclusive, orderly and led by the Syrian
people, and we reaffirm our support for the progress
made at the Astana and Geneva meetings, which will
continue in May. We have high expectations that these
forums for dialogue will help us achieve definitive and
lasting peace.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me thank UnderSecretary-General Stephen O’Brien for his briefing and
continued leadership in addressing the humanitarian
crisis in Syria and other places, including in our
region. We would like to express our gratitude to the
United Nations and its partners for the courageous
humanitarian services they provide to millions of
Syrians under extremely challenging circumstances.
We remain seriously concerned about the
humanitarian conditions in Syria. The continued
fighting in multiple areas around the country and the
increased militarization on the ground, as the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/339) demonstrates, is
deeply troubling. The continued fighting has resulted
in civilian death, injuries and displacement, as well
as the destruction of civilian infrastructure, including
schools and medical facilities. We also condemned all
terrorist attacks, including the heinous terrorist attack
in Al-Rashidin on 15 April, which took the lives of more
than 126 people many of them children and injured
dozens. Unfortunately, it is civilians who continue to
bear the brunt of the armed conflict. Hence the protection
of civilians remains of paramount importance.
Despite the continued humanitarian deliveries in
the first two months of the inter-agency plan, reaching
out to those in need for urgent humanitarian assistance
remains a critical challenge owing to insecurity and
administrative impediments. In that regard, ensuring
safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access
is indispensable to providing the much-needed
humanitarian relief to all Syrians throughout the country.
In that connection, we encourage the United Nations to
continue its engagement with the Syrian Government to
facilitate and improve the approval process.
More than 13 million Syrians require humanitarian
assistance every day. Without achieving a Syrian-led
political settlement, the tragedy of the Syrian people

17-1140315/20

S/PV.7931

The situation in the Middle East

will continue with adverse human, political, economic
and social consequences. As we have been consistently
saying, and we reiterate, that the only lasting solution
to put an end to the daily miseries of Syrians is a
comprehensive political dialogue based on resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) under the auspices of the United Nations.
While it is the Syrians themselves who have the
responsibility to ensure sustainable and inclusive
peace, the international community, particularly the
Security Council, has an essential role to support
them in achieving a political solution in stabilizing
and reconstructing Syria. In that regard, the Brussels
conference, which pledged financial support for the
humanitarian work in Syria, is an important initiative,
which contributes to addressing the conflict and its
regional impact.
We also believe that strengthening the ceasefire
guaranteed by Russia, Turkey and Iran, and ensuring
its full compliance, is important for the creation
of a supporting environment for the next round
of intra-Syrian political negotiations, which should
take place as quickly as possible with constructive and
serious engagements of all parties.
In conclusion, it is an undeniable fact that the armed
conflict has caused a long-term humanitarian crisis that
will continue to have a damaging impact on Syrians
for years to come. The continued worrying situation on
the ground and the scale of the suffering of the Syrians
makes the search for a political solution more urgent
than ever.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I wish to thank the United
States presidency for organizing today’s meeting. Let
me also join my colleagues and thank Stephen O’Brien
for his briefing and his devoted position.
Syria continues to suffer from a terrible six-yearlong war which has left unhealing scars on the Syrian
people and has presented an immense challenge to the
entire world. It is clear from the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2017/339) and Stephen O’Brien’s briefing
that negative trends in the humanitarian domain are
increasing. Though March was a somewhat better
month in terms of United Nations humanitarian access,
we need to bear in mind that progress is limited mostly
to the hard-to-reach areas, while the besieged ones,
where more than 600,000 people live, need assistance
the most.
16/20

27/04/2017

The Council has stated time and again that the
sieges must be lifted and that access must be granted
and maintained in a sustainable manner. Yet, here
we are with practically no progress to report. The
reason is simple enough. Continuing the sieges is a
deliberate tactic of the Al-Assad regime and his allies
that supplements and feeds his military strategy. The
essence of this tactic is starve or surrender. When
people surrender, they put them on the bus and send
them to Idlib, where they continue to bomb them again
and again.
We are dismayed by recent reports of Syrian or
Russian air strikes on a hospital in a rebel-held Idlib
province two days ago that killed more than a dozen
people, including patients. The recent terrorist attack
against evacuees who were being carried by buses from
the besieged towns in Syria, which led to the death of
more than 100 people, including children, is another
terrible crime and a demonstration of shameless
disregard for human life, which we have seen so many
times throughout the conflict. We strongly condemn
the continuing violence against the civilian population
in Syria, which has suffered immensely during this
brutal war.
The situation in eastern Ghouta, where approximately
400,000 people are besieged in a number of towns and
surrounding rural areas, is particularly worrisome.
Of the 3 public hospitals and 17 health-care centres in
eastern Ghouta, not one is functioning. Hitting medical
facilities and schools is also part of the aforementioned
deliberate tactics of the Al-Assad regime and his allies.
In March alone, the United Nations received credible
reports of 19 attacks against medical facilities. Such a
reckless and deliberate strategy carries fundamental
risks for the long-term stability not only of Syria
and the Levant, but also of the entire Middle East
and North Africa region. The six-year war keeps
1.75 million children out of school, with 7,000 schools
completely destroyed and 85 per cent of Syrians living
in poverty. As long as there is no progress on this and
other humanitarian issues, we can rest assured that the
Al-Assad regime is in no mood to seriously engage in
political talks.
Against that backdrop, there is still an active and
aggressive recruitment campaign being carried out in
Syria by Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. Leaving Syrians without hope any longer
will create a long-term terrorist safe heaven in the very
heart of the region. The stakes are really high. There is
17-11403

27/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

no more time for lip service or subversive strategies.
Serious and responsible political engagement in Geneva
and immediate humanitarian relief efforts are long past
due. The Council should finally react to the numerous
desperate calls of Stephen O’Brien and his colleagues.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
In general, in Syria, the cessation of hostilities that
began on 30 December 2016 is holding. At the same
time, there have been incidents in which it has been
undermined and there have been actions carried out by
terrororists and armed groups. Their offensive actions,
including those taken in Damascus, which undermined
the most recent round of inter-Syrian talks in Geneva,
are fresh in our memory. These types of escalations
have an adverse impact on the humanitarian situation.
The ongoing criticism of the Syrian Government
and the emotional calls to the country’s guarantors,
including Russia, do not help matters.
We are carrying out our obligations in good faith.
There are other influential players who are unfortunately
in no in hurry to meet us halfway. In that regard, the
only approach that can have a positive impact is a
collective one. And we should not forget the ongoing
importance of the task of separating the constructively
disposed opposition from the terrorists. The first steps
in that direction succeeded only thanks to the joint
efforts of the countries that are the guarantors of the
Astana process, but much remains to be done.
In many cases, the cessation of hostilities regime
has enabled the various humanitarian convoys agreed
on with the Syrian Government to proceed successfully,
and the progress made in the past few months is
evident. Painstaking efforts to establish the parameters
for humanitarian access and a medical evacuation in
eastern Ghouta are ongoing. Given the delicate nature
and operational constraints of that effort, we should not
count on getting instant results. Brash public-relations
campaigns will not help. To start with, it is not as simple
as some would like to imagine, and the problem is not
just about facilitation letters, but also because one key
reason for the difficulties is the provocative actions of
the fighters.
Furthermore, we do not fully share the concerns
about the situation in this area. Rural Damascus is
an ancient farming region that provides the capital
with food. It is no accident that the report of the

S/PV.7931

Secretary-General (S/2017/339) notes that the supply of
agricultural products from eastern Ghouta to Damascus
has been halted as a result of the worsening situation.
We understand that sending humanitarian convoys
in a time of conflict is always fraught with risk, and
not everything goes according to plan. Our military
specialists often accompany caravans, which is why,
unlike the humanitarian theoreticians, we know firsthand the cost of those operations. In order to draw up
optimal parameters for them, we still need the platform
of the humanitarian task force of the International Syria
Support Group.
In spite of all this, however, the reconciliation
process is under way in a number of Syrian
neighbourhoods. Thanks to the activities of the Russian
Centre in Hmeimim, at least 1,500 towns have joined
the process. Such agreements also take the form of local
truces, in which appropriate agreements are signed by
representatives of the authorities and militia leaders.
For instance, we are close to concluding a local truce
in the problematic area of Al-Waer in the city of Homs.
While members of the illegal armed groups and their
families are leaving for areas of Syria that have not gone
along with the cessation of hostilities regime, many of
the rebels have decided to return to a peaceful life by
accepting the Government’s amnesty. we hope that the
problem of the four towns can be addressed when the
regional power centres reach a firm agreement.
The treacherous terrorist attack in Al-Rashidin
on residents evacuated from Fo’ah and Kefraya rightly
aroused outrage across the globe. In that connection,
we do not agree with the criticism of the practice of
concluding local truces. It may not be ideal, but it is
a practical instrument for bringing normalcy to the
situation and saving lives on a temporary basis, as
experience has shown in eastern Aleppo and other
urban areas. Now Syrians need help in restoring decent
living conditions in liberated areas so they can return
to their homes.
We were surprised by the statements of our United
Kingdom and French colleagues regarding local
truces, which are the result of agreements between
the Government and relevant opposition groups. They
represent another option for avoiding the greater
numbers of casualties that would occur without such
agreements. In that regard, double standards are still
at work. When Muslim populations in the Central
African Republic were moved from the capital and
western areas to the north-east, with the participation

17-1140317/20

S/PV.7931

The situation in the Middle East

of the United Nations and the French operation, it was
justified as an attempt to save human lives. We all
know what happened. The Muslim population in the
capital of Bangui was reduced by 99 per cent and the
consequences of the move are still being felt today. The
destabilization we are now seeing now in the centre
of the country is being provoked specifically from the
north-East, where the Muslims were moved. Let us
refrain from distinguishing between the dignity of the
lives of Syrians and of people in other countries where
we have to act from the best motives to try to save lives.
We are seriously concerned about the situation in
the north of Syria, where several military operations
are breaking out simultaneously. The majority of the
participants, including the so-called coalition, were
not invited in by the Syrian Government. This is a
clear violation of the sovereignty of the country and
encroaches on its territorial integrity. Peaceful civilians
are being killed in the bombing and vital infrastructure
is being destroyed. The strikes on the Kurdish militias
who have been fighting the terrorists this entire time are
in total contradiction to the international community’s
professed determined resistance to this evil.
We must never allow ourselves to ignore the fact
that we have no idea of what is going on in the areas
that are still controlled by terrorists or how hundreds
of thousands of people are living. Neither the United
Nations nor most of its partners have access to these
areas. We are not talking just about Deir ez-Zor, where
at least humanitarian assistance is being provided via air
drops. We have to point out here that the humanitarian
reports on Syria sometimes retouch facts that support
criticism of the fighters of armed groups. Unverified
information circulates. The Syrian Government trusts
external participants very little, for obvious reasons,
since against the backdrop of an anti-Damascus
campaign all they see is provocation. Why would we
want to aggravate that feeling rather than restore the
prospects for cooperation with Damascus?
It is disappointing that there is once again a lack
of data about the stocks of medicines used to support
terrorist fighters that were discovered in eastern
Aleppo after it was liberated. We demanded that the
circumstances be investigated and brought to light
and for more than a month now have been waiting for
results that were supposed to be officially reported to
the Security Council. Incidentally, similar stocks of
medicines were discovered in Zabadani and Madaya
after they were liberated.
18/20

27/04/2017

We call attention once again to the urgent issue of
demining Syria, including its cultural heritage sites.
While the Russian and Syrian specialists have worked
well together and have demined thousands of hectares
of residential areas in Aleppo and done major sapper
work in Palmyra, we need a united effort in this area.
In that regard, we call for establishing an international
demining coalition for Syria from among the interested
countries and hope to includ\\ the relevant United
Nations agencies in that. We also believe that it would
be appropriate to create a fund to finance commercial
companies that could participate in the demining.
The United Nations humanitarian bodies, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Syria Red Crescent have been working furiously for
the past two weeks to restore normal life to the people.
We should not forget that despite unfair externally
imposed sanctions, the Syrian Government has also
been making massive efforts — a fact about which the
reports are usually silent. Help is also being provided by
international and local non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). However, we should emphasize that we take
a critical view of certain NGOs that are obeying the
orders of their foreign sponsors and violating Syria’s
sovereignty by working exclusively in areas that are
not controlled by the Government. The White Helmets,
who have been heaped with praise in Western capitals,
are a prime example, frequently displaying a lack of
conscience in publishing false information and staging
film footage designed to blacken the Syrian Government
and army’s reputation. There are multiple examples of
evidence of their direct ties to terrorists and extremists.
Russia is providing Syrians with humanitarian
assistance on an almost daily basis, in some cases
with the participation of our foreign partners. Medical
assistance is being provided, and more than 12,000
Syrians have received care from qualified personnel.
We underscore our unstinting support for a
peaceful solution in Syria, guided by the idea that the
country’s fate should be decided by Syrians themselves.
Furthermore, Russia in in the front lines of those efforts.
We do not see any reason to diverge from agreed-upon
parameters for the political process guided by the United
Nations. Syrian sides have already taken on board the
United Nations-formulated proposal on the basis of
the four baskets, including building a constitution and
counter-terrorism activities. The processes in Astana
and Geneva are vital working forums that complement
17-11403

27/04/2017

The situation in the Middle East

one another. Progress on all negotiating tracks is the
best way to improve the humanitarian situation.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
It has been just three weeks since the world was
horrified by pictures of poisoned children in Syria,
the result of deadly nerve agents dropped from the
sky. Those images of suffering and dying children
will never be forgotten. But there is a quieter, slower
kind of death occurring in Syria today. It is even more
deliberate, more labour-intensive and more widespread
then dropping chemical weapons from thousands
of feet in the air. The Syrian regime is engaged in a
purposeful strategy of siege and surrender. Civilians
stranded inside are literally kept as prisoners until
they die or kneel before the Government. They are
denied food. They are also denied lifesaving medical
supplies. That campaign of holding humanitarian
relief hostage to Al-Assad’s political goals is not new,
but it is worsening. More humanitarian assistance is
being denied to besieged areas today than at this time
last year. More Syrian men, women and children are
suffering and dying because aid is not being allowed
through. That is what the Syrian dictator means when
he says that “the only option is victory”.
Al-Assad will tighten the noose around the necks
of his own people until they give in. The Syrian
Government’s slow strangulation of its people happens
so frequently and so similarly that it has almost
become textbook. First Government forces or their
allies surround a city, town or village. They cut off all
commercial routes in and out. Then the United Nations
requests access to bring relief to the people as food and
medical supplies vanish. The United Nations mission is
a humanitarian one: they do not care who the people are
or whether they are pro-Government or pro-opposition.
They just want to save human lives.
But the Syrian regime does not let them. They hide
behind bureaucracy and deny requests for humanitarian
access. That is permission the Government could easily
give if it actually wanted to do so. The few convoys
that manage to get approvals are often held up at
checkpoints. They are stopped by Al-Assad’s soldiers,
or by rogue militias that the Al-Assad regime cannot,
or will not, control. The aid they carry does not reach
those who need it. And month after month we sit in the
Security Council and talk about these very issues, and
nothing changes.

S/PV.7931

Even more bone-chilling is the fact that convoys
that do get through are increasingly looted of medical
supplies — items that have no military purpose but
are essential to saving the lives of civilians who do not
bow to the regime. Syrian Government forces and proGovernment militias remove baby formula, vaccines
and forceps from midwifery kits. They raid paediatric
kits of antibiotics, needles and gauze. They remove
dialysis equipment, family hygiene kits and burn kits
from trucks. There is no reason I can conceivably
think of for that to happen. Maybe my colleagues from
Russia and other allies of the Syrian regime can help
me out. What possible definition of humanitarian relief
does not include antibiotics and dialysis equipment?
What possible justification is there for preventing
malnourished women and their children from receiving
baby formula from the United Nations and its partners?
Of course there is no justification, but there is a
reason. With impunity, Syrian regime troops on the
ground work to prevent United Nations aid from going
to the men, women and children who need it. At the
same time, they operate black markets and they sell
many of the same products. Medical supplies that
desperate people should be getting for free are instead
sold at inflated prices or extorted through bribes at
checkpoints. This is a major business in Syria, and yet
another reason that the sieges have not been lifted.
People are profiting off the suffering and dying of
the Syrian people, and none of this is prevented or even
opposed by Russia. According to the United Nations
latest report, medical items that would have provided
36,000 lifesaving and life-sustaining treatment were
removed from humanitarian convoys in March. As we
speak, 450,000 people in the Damascus suburbs are
being slowly squeezed by the Syrian regime. Those
areas have been under siege since 2012, but recently
Government forces closed the last routes for even black
markets to get into the city. They have blocked all
humanitarian aid deliveries since last October.
The people in the Damascus, suburbs just like in
other besieged areas of Syria, are slowly dying. Cancer
patients are dying from lack of chemotherapy. Kidney
patients are dying from lack of dialysis. And children
are suffering most of all: nearly one third of all warrelated injuries are two children under the age of 15.
But because the Syrian military has bombed all the
hospitals in the area, they cannot receive professional
treatment for their injuries.

17-1140319/20

S/PV.7931

The situation in the Middle East

Those are the atrocities occurring in Syria every
day that do not make the headlines. A resident doctor in
one of the only cancer centres serving the besieged areas
summed up the condition of her patients tragically well
when she said, “death is coming at them from every
direction”. When death surrounds you, words mean very
little. Al-Assad has proven he will act only to increase
the suffering of his people, not ease it. And so it falls to
others to do what basic human decency requires.
Russia must live up to its promise to deliver real
peace talks and a real political solution. The sieges of
the Syrian people must be lifted. The war profiteering
and the theft of medical supplies must be stopped.
Syrians in desperate need of humanitarian assistance
must receive it. Bashar Al-Assad clearly believes it is
necessary to starve hundreds of thousands of people in
order to remain in power.
When I asked the Council, as we talked about
everything that is happening here, I heard from each and
every member some word of desperation and of defeat
because we talk about this so much, and every time we
talk about it more people continue to die. I listened to
my Russian colleague, and he talked about task forces
and diplomacy and less criticism of the Syrian regime.
Where has that gotten us? It has not gotten us anywhere.
On the times where we could actually do something
as a Security Council, who is the one Member State
that continues to protect the regime that is keeping
humanitarian assistance from going through?
Many members have said that we need to put
pressure on the Syrian regime. That is actually not
the case. We need to put pressure on Russia, because
Russia continues to cover for the Syrian regime. Russia
continues to allow them to keep humanitarian aid
from the people that need it. Russia continues to cover
for a leader who uses chemical weapons against his
own people. Russia continues to veto. And Al-Assad
continues to do those things because they know that
Russia will continue to cover for them.
Sitting in this Chamber, I appreciate all the
comments that members have made. But all eyes and

20/20

27/04/2017

all pressure now need to go to Russia, because they
are the ones that can stop this if they want to. Do not
listen to the distractions of what they are trying to say
while pointing to other conflicts. Do not listen to the
fact that they claim the reports now are wrong. First
it was the Security Council that was wrong; now it is
Mr. O’Brien’s report that is wrong. But the images do
not lie. The humanitarian workers do not lie. The fact
that they cannot get the assistance they need — that is
not lying. What is is to continue to give Russia a pass
for allowing this terrible situation to occur.
I will continue to press the Security Council to act
to do something, regardless of whether the Russians
continue to veto it, because it is our voice that needs to be
heard. The Syrian people do not care about diplomacy.
They do not care about any sort of task force. They do
not care about any of the things we said today. They are
just trying to live their very last day.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
No surprise, the representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): With regard to your statement, Madam
President, allow me to once again call your attention
to the fact — stressed by many who took the floor
today — that Russia, Turkey and Iran are doing
their part to ensure that there is compliance with the
cessation of hostilities, which is the best way to bring
about an improvement in the humanitarian situation
in Syria. Neither you, Madam, or Western colleagues
said a single word about what they are doing to improve
the situation. How are they bringing pressure to bear
on the moderate or non-moderate opposition that they
have influence over? Mr. O’Brien, in his briefing, did
directly touch upon those areas that are surrounded or
controlled by terrorists.
The meeting rose at noon.

17-11403
