meeting, on 24 September 1990, the Council, recalling
its resolution 661 (1990) of 6 August 1990, entrusted the
Security Council Committee established by resolution
661 (1990) concerning the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait with the task of examining requests for assistance under the provisions of Article SO of the Charter of
the United Nations, and making recommendations to the
President of the Council for appropriate action.
"By letters dated 19 and 21 December 1990, 114 the
Chairman of the Committee transmitted the recommendations of the Committee with regard to the following
18 States: Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, India,
Lebanon, Mauritania, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland,
Romania, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tunisia, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen and Yugoslavia.
"At consultations of the whole of the Security Council
held on 20 December 1990, It was decided to inform you
of the above-mentioned recommendations of the Committee pursuant to resolution 669 (1990) in connection
with requests for assistance under the provisions of
Article 50 of the Charter and to request you to implement
the actions contained in the recommendations."

means to uphold and implement resolution 660 (1990) and
all subsequent relevant resolutions and to restore International peace and security in the area;
3. Requests all States to provide appropriate support
for the actions undertaken in pursuance of paragraph 2
above;
4. Requests the States concerned to keep the Security
Council regularly Informed on the progress of actions
undertaken pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 3 above;
S. Decides to remain seized of the matter.
Adopted at the 2963rd meeting by
12 votes to 2 (Cuba and Yemen),
with I abstention (China).

Decision
In a letter dated 21 December 1990, 113 the President of
the Security Council informed the Secretary-General as
follows:
"By resolution 669 (1990), adopted at its 2942nd
113

114

S/22033.

S/22021 and Add. I.

THE SITUATION IN CAMBODIA
Decision

ference on Cambodia and of all participants in the Conference to facilitate the restoration of peace to Cambodia,
Noting that these efforts are aimed at enabling the Cambodian people to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination through free and fair elections organized and
conducted by the United Nations in a neutral political
environment with full respect for the national sovereignty
of Cambodia,

At its 2941st meeting, on 20 September 1990, the Council discussed the item entitled "The situation in Cambodia".

Resolution 668 (1990)

1. Endorses the framework for a comr,rehensive political settlement of the Cambodia conflict 1 5 and encourages
the continuing efforts of China, France, the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America in this regard;
2, Welcomes the acceptance of this framework in its
entirety by all the Cambodian parties, as the basis for
settling the Cambodia conflict, at the informal meeting of
the Cambodian parties at Jakarta on 10 September 1990
and their commitment to it;
3. Also welcomes the commitment of the Cambodian
parties, in full co-operation with all other participants in
the Paris Conference on Cambodia, to elaborating this
framework into a comprehensive political settlement
through the processes of the Conference;
4. Welcomes, in particular, the agreement reached by
all Cambodian rarties at Jakarta 116 to form a Supreme
National Counci as the unique legitimate body and source
of authority in which, throughout the transitional period,
the independence, national sovereignty and unity of Cambodia is embodied;
5. Urges the members of the Supreme National Coun-

or 20 September 1990
The Security Council,
Convinced of the need to find an early, just and lasting
peaceful solution of the Cambodia conflict,
Noting that the Paris Conference on Cambodia, which
met from 30 July to 30 August 1989, made progress in
elaborating a wide variety of elements necessary for reaching a comprehensive political settlement,
Taking note with appreciation of the continuing efforts
of China, France, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America, which have resulted in
the framework for a comprehensive political settlement of
the Cambodia conflict, 11 -'
Also taking note with appreciation of the effo1ts of the
countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations
and other countries involved in promoting the search for a
comprehensive political settlement,
Further taking note with appreciation of the efforts of
Indonesia and France as Co-Presidents of the Paris ConIIS Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-fifth Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1990, document S/21689, annex.

116

28

/hid., tlocumc111 S/2 l 732, unncx.

up a detailed plan of implementation in accord with the
above-mentioned framework;
9. Urges the Supreme National Council, all Cambodians and all parties to the conflict to co-operate fully in this
process;
10. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue,
within the context of preparations for reconvening the
Paris Conference and on the basis of the present resolution,
preparatory studies to assess the resource implications,
timing and other considerations relevant to the United
Nations role;
11. Calls upon all States to support the achievement of
a comprehensive political settlement as outlined in the
above-mentioned framework.

cil, in full accord with the framework document, to elect
the Chairman of the Council as soon as possible, so as to
implement the agreement referred to in paragraph 4 above;
6. Notes that the Supreme National Council will therefore represent Cambodia externally and it is to designate
its representatives to occupy the seat of Cambodia at the
United Nations, in the United Nations specialized agencies
and in other international institutions and international
conferences;
7. Urges all parties to the conflict to exercise maximum self-restraint so as to create the peaceful climate
required to facilitate the achievement and the implementation of a comprehensive political settlement;
8. Calls upon the Co-Presidents of the Paris Conference to intensify their consultations with a view to reconvening the Conference, whose task will be to elaborate and
adopt the comprehensive political settlement and to draw

Adopted unanimously at the
2491st meeting.

LETTER DATED 7 DECEMBER 1990 FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
Decision

the particular circumstances of the Trust Territory and its
peoples and the freely expressed wishes of the peoples
concerned,
Aware that, towards this end, negotiations between the
Administering Authority and representatives of the Trust
Territory began in 1969 and resulted in the conclusion of
a Compact of Free Association in the case of the Federated
States of Micronesia and the Marshall Islands, and a Com-monwea lth Covenant in the case of the Northern Mariana
Islands,
Satisfied that the peoples of the Federated States of
Micronesia, the Marshall Islands and the Northern Mari-ana Islands have freely exercised their right to self-determination in approving their respective new status agreements in plebiscites observed by visiting missions of the
Trusteeship Council and that, in addition to these plebiscites, the duly constituted legislatures of these entities
have adopted resolutions approving the respective new
status agreements, thereby freely expressing their wish to
terminate the status of these entities as parts of the Trust
Territory,
Hoping that the people of Palau will be able in due
course to complete the process of freely exercising their
right to self-determination,
Taking note of Trusteeship Council resolution 2183
(LIII) of 28 May 1986 and of subsequent reports of the
Trusteeship Council to the Security Council,
Determines, in the light of the entry into force of the new
status agreements for the Federated States of Micronesia,
the Marshall Islands and the Northern Mariana Islands,
that the objectives of the Trusteeship Agreement have been
fully attained, and that the applicability of the Trusteeship
Agreement has terminated, with respect to those entities.

At its 2972nd meeting, on 22 December 1990, the Council decided to invite the representative of New Zealand to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled "Letter dated 7 December 1990 from the President
of the Trusteeship Council addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/22008)". 117

Resolution 683 (1990)
of22 December 1990

The Security Council,
Recalling Chapter XII of the Charter of the United
Nations, which established an international trusteeship
system,
Conscious of its responsibility relating to strategic areas
as set forth in Article 83, paragraph 1, of the Charter,
Recalling its resolution 21 (1947) of 2 April 1947, by
which it approved the Trusteeship Agreement for the former Japanese Mandated Islands,1 18 since known as the
Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands,
Noting that the Trusteeship Agreement designated the
United States of America as Administering Authority of
the Trust Territory,
Mindful that article 6 of the Trusteeship Agreement, in
conformity with Article 76 of the Charter, obligated the
Administering Authority, inter alia, to promote the development of the inhabitants of the Trust Territory toward
self-government or independence as may be appropriate to
117
See Official Records of the Security Council. Forty-fifth Year,
Suffilementfor October, November and December 1990.
8
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 8, No. 123

Adopted at the 2972nd meeting
by 14 votes to I (Cuba).

29
