A /73/PV.20

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

20

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 16 October 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/73/L.5)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.5.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt): Since its inception, the
Group of 77 (G-77) and China has been championing
multilateralism and global solidarity, as they are among
the key means for fostering cooperative and harmonious
relations towards the achievement of equity, equality
and prosperity for all. On that basis, we have strived to
promote the collective economic interests of developing
countries and enhance their joint negotiating capacity
on all major international economic and development
issues within the United Nations system, and we have
effectively contributed to international cooperation on
those issues, of which there are many.
As we have stressed before, the legacy of the Group
of 77 and China is inextricable from that of the United
Nations. It would be no exaggeration to state and remind
ourselves that so much of what the United Nations has
achieved in the past half-century in the development
sphere has been in one way or another inspired, founded,
shaped and supported towards fruition through the
Group of 77 and China.
On 27 September, the Group of 77 and China elected
the State of Palestine as Chair of the Group for the year

2019, following the endorsement by the Group of AsiaPacific States of its candidature in November 2017.
While the State of Palestine has been a full-fledged
member of the Group of 77 and China since January
1976, Palestine remains a non-member observer State of
the United Nations. Therefore, the rights and privileges
enjoyed by the State of Palestine vary from one United
Nations organ to another, based Organizationn the
respective rules of procedure, the resolutions adopted
by those organs and their established practices.
In that context, following consultations with
the Secretariat, it has been assessed that a General
Assembly resolution would be required to avail the
State of Palestine with the rights and capacity required
to be able to perform the functions and usual practices
undertaken by the Chair of the G-77 and China in the
General Assembly, other organs, entities and certain
conferences for the duration of its chairmanship of
the G-77 and China in the year 2019, thereby enabling
its effective chairmanship and the continuity of the
positive role played by the Group within the United
Nations system.
The Group of 77 and China therefore introduces
today draft resolution A/73/L.5, entitled “Chair of
the Group of 77 for 2019”. The rights I mentioned are
enumerated in the annex of that document. The adoption
of this draft resolution, which we consider to be
technical and procedural in nature, will enable the next
Chair of the Group to effectively fulfil its duties and
responsibilities to the Group and the wider membership
during the year 2019, without prejudice to the existing

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-31786 (E)

*1831786*

A/73/PV.20

rights and privileges of the State of Palestine as per the
relevant resolutions.
On behalf of the G-77 and China, I invite all Member
States to positively consider the draft resolution now
before them, taking into consideration its technical
nature but also its importance to the work of the Group,
and also noting that Egypt, in its capacity as Chair of
the Group, and the State of Palestine were engaged
in the process in full transparency within the Group
and the wider membership, with a view to enabling
a smooth transition and the continued efficacy of the
Group’s work in the coming year.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly will now consider draft resolution A/73/L.5.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): For decades,
the United States has been committed to achieving a
comprehensive end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Only through direct negotiations between the parties
can the Israelis and the Palestinians achieve the peace
that they both deserve, which remains our goal today.
We cannot support the efforts of the Palestinians to
enhance their status outside of direct negotiations.
The United States does not recognize that there is a
Palestinian State and notes that no such State has been
admitted as a State Member of the United Nations. We
therefore strongly oppose the election of Palestine as
Chair of the Group of 77 (G-77), as well as the so-called
enabling draft resolution (A/73/L.5).
If that misguided draft resolution is adopted, the
United States will leave no doubt about where it stands.
When the Palestinians speak as Chair of the G-77 in the
General Assembly, we will remind our fellow Member
States that the United States does not recognize that
there is a Palestinian State and that no such State has
been admitted as a State Member of the United Nations.
Only States Members of the United Nations should be
entitled to speak and act on behalf of major groups of
States — such as the Group of 77 and China — at the
United Nations.
It is entirely inappropriate for an observer State to
play the role of representing a group of States in the
General Assembly or elsewhere in the United Nations
system. The United States has long opposed the
2/4

16/10/2018

enhancements of the Palestinian status at the United
Nations. We voted against resolution 67/19, designating
the Palestinian delegation as a non-member observer
State. We have consistently and formally objected to
Palestinian accession to treaties to which we are party.
That is because, as I have already said, the United
States does not recognize that there is a Palestinian
State and we do not consider ourselves to be in a treaty
relationship with the “State of Palestine”.
Achieving real peace requires the courage to
sit down at the table and make compromises. This
initiative does the opposite of that. We therefore ask
that all delegations vote against this draft resolution.
We also urge Palestinian leaders to do the right thing
for their people and re-engage in peace talks. When
they are ready, rest assured that the United States will
be ready too.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): The Group of 77 (G-77) is
an important player in the development work here at the
United Nations. It handles issues that are of the utmost
importance to us all, especially now as the United
Nations and Member States engage in development
reform. It should be a matter of concern for everyone
if the Group is exploited for non-development issues
and is used to advance the political interests of one
delegation. The draft resolution before us (A/73/L.5),
as drafted, makes it clear that that is indeed the case.
Despite the claim that this is a G-77 draft resolution that
is technical in nature, it was drafted by the Palestinian
delegation and goes beyond what is necessary for the
Chair to execute its functions on behalf of the Group.
Unfortunately, that pattern of manipulative behaviour
is not new.
The established rules of procedure of the United
Nations are important and set the framework in which
we conduct our business. Constant attempts to change
the rules of procedure to accommodate one observer
delegation in a manner that would not be tolerated for
any Member State only weakens this institution. How
ironic is it that this draft resolution is being considered
under the agenda item entitled “Strengthening of the
United Nations system”, when it clearly weakens and
undermines the United Nations? We will therefore vote
against the draft resolution. Looking towards 2019,
we sincerely hope that the same professional manner
in which the current Chair handled the coordination
and deliberations of the G-77 will be maintained and
that the Group will not be used cynically to score
political points.
18-31786

16/10/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.5, entitled “Chair of the Group of 77
for 2019”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gambia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guinea,
Guyana, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovenia, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Israel, United States of America

A/73/PV.20

Abstaining:
Andorra, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Honduras, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Monaco,
Poland, Slovakia, Tuvalu
Draft resolution A/73/L.5 was adopted by 146 votes
to 3, with 15 abstentions (resolution 73/5).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Seychelles
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of vote after the
voting, may I remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Germany voted in favour
of resolution 73/5 in order to enable the Palestinian
Chair of the Group of 77 to carry out its responsibilities
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. We welcome
the fact that the resolution limits additional rights and
privileges to the duration of the Palestinian Chair’s role
in 2019 and to functions required to carry out that role.
With reference to our explanation of vote on resolution
67/19, entitled “Status of Palestine in the United
Nations” of 29 November 2012 (see A/67/PV.44), our
vote today should not be construed as recognition of a
State of Palestine. It should also not be construed as a
statement on its status in the United Nations. We look
forward to working closely with a Palestinian Chair of
the Group of 77 in 2019.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands voted in favour of resolution
73/5, on the Palestinian leadership of the Group of 77,
in order to enable the Palestinian delegation to carry
out its responsibilities as Chair of the Group of 77. We
welcome the fact that the resolution is limited in time to
the duration of the Palestinian leadership of the Group of
77 and limited in scope to only the functions necessary
to carry out that role. With reference to our statement
of 29 November 2012 (see A/67/PV.44) in respect to
resolution 67/19, our vote should not be construed as
recognition of a State of Palestine by the Kingdom of
the Netherlands. We look forward to cooperating with
the Group of 77 and its chairmanship in an open and
constructive way and in the spirit of this resolution.
Mr. Bird (Australia): Australia’s decision to vote
against resolution 73/5 reflects its long-standing position

18-317863/4

A/73/PV.20

that Palestinian attempts to seek recognition as a State
in international forums are deeply unhelpful to efforts
towards a two-State solution. Unilateral recognition of
Palestinian statehood will not resolve outstanding issues
or create the conditions for enduring stability. That will
be realized only from a directly negotiated agreement
between Israel and the Palestinians. Australia remains
firmly committed to a two-State solution that allows
Israel and a future Palestinian State to exist side by side
in peace and security within internationally recognized
borders. We urge all parties to take the courageous
decisions needed to return to, and make progress in,
negotiations. It is critical that no party seek to exploit
the outcome of today’s voting in ways that could further
undermine prospects for a just and lasting settlement.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
welcomes the fact that resolution 73/5 is limited in time
to the duration of the Palestinian leadership of the
Group of 77 (G-77) and limited in scope to the functions
necessary to carry out that role. For those reasons, we
voted in favour. Our vote today is to enable the effective
Palestinian chairmanship of the G-77 and should not
be misconstrued as recognition of a Palestinian State.
We reserve the right to recognize a Palestinian State
bilaterally at a time when it best serves the objective of
peace. Ultimately, the only way to give the Palestinian
people the State that they need and deserve and give the
Israeli people the security and peace to which they are
entitled is through a negotiated two-State solution.

4/4

16/10/2018

The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
I now give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, allow
us to express our appreciation to all those who voted
in favour of resolution 73/5. There were 146 votes in
favour and three against. The voting today represents
multilateralism at its best, with the broader membership
supporting a resolution to enable the elected Chair
of a group to perform its duties effectively. It is an
expression of respect for the decision of the Group of 77
and China to elect the State of Palestine as its Chair for
the year 2019 by acclamation, following the consensus
endorsement by the Group of Asia-Pacific States of the
State of Palestine’s candidature.
The State of Palestine will spare no effort to prove
itself worthy of that trust in its capacity to represent
and defend the interests of the Group of 77 and
China, while also engaging constructively and in an
inclusive and transparent manner with all partners in
order to advance cooperation and mutually beneficial
agreements, for the common good of humankind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker on this item.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 125.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

18-31786
