S/PV.8660

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8660

th meeting
Wednesday, 6 November 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Simcock

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-35467 (E)
*1935467*

S/PV.8660

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I would remind Council members that this meeting
will be followed by consultations on the same agenda
item. It would therefore be most helpful if we could
move expeditiously through both.
I give the floor to Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I welcome the opportunity to
engage with the Security Council once again as I present
my eighteenth report on the situation in Libya, pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011). Before I begin, I would like
to congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. I wish the presidency and the wider Council
success in the important work before them.
At the outset, I must observe with serious concern
that there was an escalation of violence in Libya during
the reporting period. Reports indicate that there have
been a high number of civilian deaths, thousands of
persons internally displaced and a sharp increase in
abductions, disappearances and arbitrary arrests across
the country. As recently highlighted by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, without the unequivocal support
of the Council and the broader international community
for an immediate end to the Libyan conflict, Libya will
be at risk of being embroiled in persistent and protracted
conflict and continued fratricide (see S/PV.8611).
The implosion of Libya must carry a heavy burden
on the conscience of the international community
and galvanize meaningful action to assist the Libyan
authorities in bringing stability to the country and an
end to the cycle of violence, atrocities and impunity.
2/14

06/11/2019

Impunity serves as both an obstacle and a threat to
stability and must be checked through the force of
law. My Office continues to strive to do its part to
ensure justice for victims and hold accountable those
alleged to be responsible for committing Rome Statute
crimes in Libya. I am pleased to inform the Council
that my Office has made further progress in its existing
investigations and is continuing to work on applications
for new warrants of arrest.
Regarding recent developments in the case
against the suspect Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, the
Council will recall that Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s challenge to
the admissibility of his case was rejected earlier this
year. Mr. Al-Qadhafi had filed an appeal against this
decision. The Appeals Chamber recently ordered that a
hearing be scheduled before it on 11 and 12 November to
hear submissions and observations in Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s
appeal. The Appeals Chamber has invited the State of
Libya to submit observations on issues arising from
the appeal by tomorrow, 7 November. The Appeals
Chamber had previously also invited the Council to
submit observations on the appeal by 24 October. The
Council did not elect to do so. Nonetheless, both the
State of Libya and the Council are invited to attend
the scheduled hearing next week in The Hague. Let
me stress that irrespective of the current admissibility
proceedings, Libya remains under an obligation to
arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
The failure to execute warrants of arrest is not
limited to Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s case. The ICC arrest warrant
against Mr. Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled has remained
outstanding for more than six years. Furthermore, the
two arrest warrants against Mr. Mahmoud Mustafa
Busayf Al-Werfalli have remained unexecuted for
more than two years since the first warrant was issued.
The three cited ICC fugitives stand accused of grave
international crimes. These crimes include the war
crimes of murder, torture, cruel treatment and outrages
upon personal dignity, and the crimes against humanity
of persecution, imprisonment, torture and other
inhumane acts. My Office has reliable information
on the current whereabouts of all three suspects. Yet,
Mr. Al-Qadhafi, Mr. Al-Tuhamy and Mr. Al-Werfalli
remain at large, and justice remains elusive for the
victims of their alleged crimes.
First, Mr. Al-Qadhafi is believed to be in Zintan,
Libya. Secondly, when the warrant for Mr. Al-Tuhamy’s
arrest was issued, he was believed to be residing in
19-35467

06/11/2019

The situation in Libya

Cairo, Egypt. This was reflected in the arrest warrant
itself, which was unsealed on 24 April 2017. The
information currently available to my Office indicates
that Mr. Al-Tuhamy still resides in Cairo. Thirdly,
Mr. Al-Werfalli — a suspect we allege to be individually
criminally responsible for war crimes under the
Rome Statute — continues to enjoy his liberty in the
Benghazi area.
Furthermore, credible reports investigated by my
Office indicate that the General Command of the Libyan
National Army recently — on 8 July — promoted
Mr. Al-Werfalli from the rank of Major to Lieutenant
Colonel. This promotion sends a clear message that
General Khalifa Haftar, Commander of the Libyan
National Army, has no intention to genuinely prosecute
Mr. Al-Werfalli for the crimes alleged against him
in the ICC arrest warrants. On the contrary, it seems
that Mr. Al-Werfalli continues to be rewarded for his
behaviour. In this respect, I note that this is the second
time that the General Command of the Libyan National
Army has promoted Mr. Al-Werfalli. The first promotion
took place on 25 May 2017, after videos depicting the
first four unlawful executions allegedly perpetrated by
Mr. Al-Werfalli had already been posted online.
During the reporting period, my Office also
continued to investigate allegations against other
perpetrators with a view to potential applications for
additional warrants of arrest. The effective power to
arrest and surrender ICC suspects rests solely with
States. However, my Office is working to increase
opportunities for outstanding arrest warrants to be
executed. To this end, in line with its strategic goals,
my Office is developing, in coordination with States,
enhanced strategies and methodologies to track and
arrest suspects. In accordance with resolution 1970
(2011), I urge all States, including Libya and Egypt,
to facilitate the immediate arrest and surrender of the
Libyan fugitives to the Court.
The situation in Libya continues to be grave. I am
deeply alarmed by reports indicating that, since early
April, more than 100 civilians have been killed, 300
have been injured and 120,000 have been displaced as
a result of the armed conflict. As detailed in my report,
several events of particular concern have occurred
over the past six months. I strongly condemn the car
bomb attack in Benghazi on 10 August that killed five
people, including three United Nations staff members,
and injured multiple other civilians. I also note reports
of the indiscriminate shelling of the Mitiga airport in

S/PV. 8660

Tripoli and the multiple attacks perpetrated against
health workers and medical facilities. On 2 July, air
strikes on a migrant detention centre in Tajoura, east
of Tripoli, reportedly killed 53 people and injured
130. In addition, there have been reports of an alleged
summary execution of Libyan National Army-affiliated
fighters and some civilians at Gharyan Hospital.
My Office is also following events in southern
Libya, where violent clashes and air strikes in Murzuq
have reportedly claimed many lives. I reiterate my
previous calls to all parties to the armed conflict to
heed the rules of international humanitarian law. My
team continues to examine allegations against all
parties to the conflict in order to assess whether they
bear criminal responsibility under the Rome Statute. I
condemn all unlawful violence in Libya resulting in the
loss of life and injury. My Office remains seized of the
situation in Libya, and if the actions of any party amount
to war crimes or crimes against humanity and all the
required elements of the Rome Statute are satisfied,
they may be liable to prosecution. Let me be clear. I will
not hesitate to bring new applications for warrants of
arrest against those most responsible for alleged crimes
that fall under the jurisdiction of the ICC.
With regard to alleged crimes committed against
migrants in Libya, the Council will recall that my Office
has adopted a two-pronged approach aimed at closing
the impunity gap. My team continues to collect and
analyse documentary, digital and testimonial evidence
relating to alleged crimes committed in detention
centres. We are assessing the viability of bringing cases
before the ICC in relation to migrant-related crimes
in Libya, based on that evidence-driven process. It is
worth recalling that the ICC is a court of last resort,
in accordance with the principle of complementarity. It
acts only when States do not genuinely investigate and
prosecute serious international crimes or are unable
to do so. Consistent with that principle, my Office is
concentrating its efforts on positive complementarity.
Pursuant to goal 6 of my Office’s strategic plan, my team
is actively assisting States that are investigating and
prosecuting individuals who have allegedly committed
crimes against migrants in Libya. My Office’s
collaborative efforts with national law-enforcement
authorities have helped to identify which of the judicial
actors are best placed to investigate and prosecute
migrant-related crimes in Libya, and I am pleased to
inform the Council that this strategy of cooperation has
borne fruit. My Office has provided key evidence and

19-354673/14

S/PV.8660

The situation in Libya

information to national authorities that has facilitated
progress in a number of investigations and prosecutions
related to crimes against migrants in Libya.
I would be remiss if I did not recognize the ongoing
cooperation of the Office of Libya’s ProsecutorGeneral. I commend the Libyan authorities for their
continued commitment to implementing the November
2013 memorandum of understanding concluded
between the Government of Libya and my Office. I also
greatly appreciate the support offered by many States,
including Italy, the Netherlands, Tunisia, the United
Kingdom, Lithuania, Ireland, Spain and France. I note
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya and look forward to our
continued valuable collaboration.
The perpetrators of serious international crimes
are emboldened when they believe they will never face
justice. The cycle of impunity has provided a breeding
ground for the committing of atrocities in Libya.
Breaking that cycle requires a concerted international
effort in order to ensure accountability for atrocity
crimes. Through the arrest and surrender of ICC
fugitives, the international community can begin to
bring justice to the victims in Libya and help prevent
future crimes and victimization. I reiterate my call to
General Haftar and those working with him to facilitate
the arrest and surrender to the ICC of Mr. Al-Werfalli
without further delay, so that he can answer for his
crimes in a court of law and in order for the truth to
be established.
I call on all States to do everything in their power
to ensure the surrender to the Court of all three Libyan
fugitives. I also call on all parties to immediately cease
all indiscriminate attacks and to comply with their
duties under international humanitarian law. Libya
will continue to be a priority situation for my Office
in 2020. I remain committed to fulfilling my mandate
with the aim of holding to account those responsible
for the most serious crimes of international concern.
The Council, as well as State and non-State parties,
is once again urged to provide full support to the ICC
with a view to achieving its mandate in Libya and in
order to break the cycle of impunity. It will soon be a
decade since the Council referred the situation in Libya
to my Office. The people of Libya deserve peace and
stability. Bringing to justice those responsible for war
crimes and crimes against humanity facilitates that
coveted outcome.
4/14

06/11/2019

The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The eighteenth report of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) on this issue is extremely short
on information regarding the outcomes and dynamics
of the work of the Court on the investigation in Libya.
There is nothing to comment on. I should like simply
to reiterate the words with which the Prosecutor of the
ICC concluded her briefing today:
(spoke in English)
“It will soon be a decade since the Council referred
the situation in Libya to my Office. The people of
Libya deserve peace and stability.”
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her written report and the very informative briefing
she has just given us.
Belgium welcomes the progress made by the Office
of the Prosecutor in its ongoing investigations and its
work aimed at submitting applications for new arrest
warrants. We also welcome the Office’s monitoring
of the current hostilities in order to determine
whether crimes have been committed that fall within
the jurisdiction of the Court. At the same time, it is
regrettable that the three arrest warrants issued by
the Court have still not been executed. The resulting
impunity is an affront to the victims and their loved
ones, as it undermines any hope of achieving a lasting
peaceful solution to the crisis in Libya, of which justice
is an essential element.
The Council cannot remain indifferent to this
situation, since it was the Council itself that triggered
the ongoing cases before the ICC through its adoption
in 2011 of resolution 1970 (2011). In that resolution,
the Council called on all States Members of the United
Nations, whether States parties to the Rome Statute or
not, to cooperate fully with the Court and the Prosecutor.
We note that the Office of the Prosecutor still has
information on the location of the three suspects, as
Ms. Bensouda just explained to us — Mr. Al-Qadhafi in
Zintan, whose brigades are allies of the Government of
National Accord; Mr. Al-Werfalli in the Benghazi area,
which is under the control of General Haftar’s Libyan
19-35467

06/11/2019

The situation in Libya

National Army; and Mr. Al-Tuhamy in Cairo. The
Court, which is entirely dependent on the cooperation
of States for the execution of its arrest warrants, once
again urges all of the relevant authorities to facilitate
the immediate surrender of each of those individuals to
the ICC. Failing that, Belgium believes that the Council
should assume its responsibilities by examining every
possible measure to facilitate the arrest and surrender
to the Court of the three suspects. In that regard, I
would like to point out that the Council could consider
including on the sanctions list those persons against
whom the Court has issued arrest warrants, for example.
In its report, the Office of the Prosecutor also
discusses its two-pronged approach to allegations
of crimes committed against migrants in Libya.
Belgium especially welcomes the Office’s strategy for
cooperating with Libya and the other States concerned
in order to support investigations and prosecutions
at the national level. As the Prosecutor reminded us,
the ICC has never been called on to prosecute all the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes. In accordance
with the Rome Statute, it is complementary to national
criminal jurisdictions and intervenes only if the
State is unwilling or unable to effectively carry out
investigations or prosecutions. In the circumstances,
we should welcome the fact that the Court’s cooperation
strategy has already produced positive and concrete
results in national investigations and prosecutions.
Lastly, I would like to highlight the continued
cooperation of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya with the ICC and its willingness to provide it
with certain kinds of information on events related to
the ongoing armed conflict. We should welcome this
kind of collaboration between a United Nations special
political mission and the Court as a model that could be
followed in other, similar cases.
Ms. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report
and briefing.
A permanent criminal court with a universal
jurisdiction is more essential than ever if we are to
prosecute the perpetrators of the most serious crimes
and break the cycles of impunity and violence that
operate in too many crisis situations. France considers
that the International Criminal Court is a pillar in the
fight against impunity at the international level. In order
to fulfil that task, the Court must be able to act and
exercise its prerogatives without hindrance and within

S/PV. 8660

the framework established by the Rome Statute. In that
regard, France reiterates its support for the Prosecutor
and her Office in implementing resolution 1970 (2011).
The current situation weakens the peace efforts
going on in Libya. As the Prosecutor notes in her
report, violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law have increased in recent months.
Attacks on civilians, the trafficking of migrants,
arbitrary detention, enforced disappearances and
sexual violence are unacceptable. We also reiterate our
concern about the disappearance in Benghazi in July of
Ms. Siham Sergewa, a member of Parliament. We call
on the competent authorities to investigate this as soon
as possible and to obtain information on her location.
It is a matter of urgency to ensure that the Libyan
parties resume dialogue and work without delay on
both the signing of a ceasefire agreement and a lasting
political solution, based on the principles agreed on in
Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi. That political settlement
should pave the way for credible parliamentary and
presidential elections. In that regard, we reiterate our
support for Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ghassan Salamé and his three-point plan
established at the ministerial meeting co-chaired by
Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, France’s Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs, and his Italian counterpart
on the margins of the high-level segment of the
General Assembly. We also support the holding of
an international conference in Berlin, which should
enable the international community to give clear and
unanimous support to a resumption of a political
dialogue between the Libyan parties, before the holding
of an inter-Libyan conference that is truly inclusive and
representative of Libyan society today, particularly its
women and young people. As recalled in the statement
of the Heads of State and Government at the Group of
Seven Summit in Biarritz, the United Nations and the
African Union could organize such a conference.
In that context, combating impunity is one of the
keys to resolving the conflict. The prosecution and
conviction of criminals are essential to rebuilding
the State and restoring democratic life in Libya. The
establishment of strong and independent judicial
institutions is a guarantee of stability for the country that
the International Criminal Court should complement. I
would like to make three specific points.
First, the fight against impunity requires the full and
complete cooperation of all stakeholders and the Libyan

19-354675/14

S/PV.8660

The situation in Libya

parties first and foremost. We note that the Prosecutor is
pleased with the cooperation of the Libyan ProsecutorGeneral. Besides that, the cooperation of all the States
concerned is necessary whether or not they are parties
to the Rome Statute. The Court’s arrest warrants must
be executed, which would send a strong message about
the impartiality of justice in Libya. Furthermore, the
effective cooperation established between the Office of
the Prosecutor and the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, as well as with various other organizations,
including INTERPOL, should continue.
Secondly, all the most serious crimes committed
in Libya since 2011 and that continue to be committed
today must be investigated and prosecuted, including
those committed by Da’esh. In that regard, we have
taken note of the Prosecutor’s statement of 16 April and
her announcement today regarding the possibility of
issuing new arrest warrants.
Lastly, we welcome the attention of the Prosecutor
to crimes committed against migrants. Once again,
the facts and findings that she mentioned in her report
remind us of the seriousness and magnitude of that
intolerable situation. We welcome her Office’s rigorous
approach, based on the principles of cooperation
and complementarity with Libyan jurisdictions. We
welcome the fact that the sharing of some evidence and
information with local authorities operationally has
pushed forward investigations at the national level.
In conclusion, the vicious circle of impunity and
instability in Libya that benefits only terrorist groups,
criminal organizations and militias must be broken.
That is why we must provide immediate responses
to the challenges facing Libya, which cannot be met
without the effective assistance of the Court and the
support of the Security Council. France will continue to
cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court
and to mobilize the Security Council in that regard.
Mr. Simcock (United States of America): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her briefing. It is shameful that several of the most
notorious perpetrators of crimes against the Libyan
people this past decade continue to enjoy impunity.
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, Mahmoud Al-Werfalli,
Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled and Abdullah Al-Senussi
must face justice for their alleged crimes. We call on
the individual Libyans or groups that are harbouring
Al-Qadhafi and Al-Werfalli to deliver them to Libyan
authorities immediately. We also call on those who are
6/14

06/11/2019

sheltering Al-Tuhamy, former head of Libya’s notorious
Internal Security Agency, to end their protection of that
perpetrator. We are also closely watching the Libyan
Supreme Court’s case against Abdullah Al-Senussi.
Accountability for those architects of Libya’s
darkest days would ensure that the Libyan victims of
their atrocities are not forgotten. It would also deliver a
powerful message of deterrence to future abusers and
to those involved in the current conflict who may be
guilty of atrocities. We regret that collectively we have
little to show in the service of justice for the Libyan
people and remedying the suffering that they have
endured at the hands of those individuals. Beyond those
four cases, violence and abuses continue in Libya today.
Human traffickers and smugglers prey on the most
vulnerable, especially migrants, refugees and asylumseekers in Libya. A civil war continues to rage, and the
number of civilian casualties and injuries is escalating.
We strongly support accountability for any crimes that
have been committed, including by officials and senior
leaders involved in those networks.
The United States Government continues to receive
other reports of potential human rights abuses in
Libya, including accounts of arbitrary killings, forced
disappearances, unlawful detention, torture and sexual
violence perpetrated by multiple militia groups and
security forces, including people in leadership and
command positions. The current conflict in Libya has
had a destabilizing humanitarian effect, resulting in an
increased number of displaced persons, including the
migrant and refugee population. Prolonging that conflict
will further strain the provision of basic services to the
population and will contribute to political insecurity
and instability.
Libya’s political and security instability has created
an environment conducive to human rights abuses. In
an effort to address the root causes of these atrocities,
the United States continues to support a rapid return
to a political process. We thank Special Representative
Salamé for his ongoing efforts to secure a negotiated
political solution to this crisis. Mr. Salamé and the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya team face
great physical risk in the work they are doing. We were
reminded of this by the terrorist attack that killed three
United Nations employees in Benghazi a few months
ago, as well as by the recent air strike, in violation of
the United Nations arms embargo, that nearly hit the
United Nations compound in Tripoli. We continue to
call for de-escalation, a ceasefire, economic reforms
19-35467

06/11/2019

The situation in Libya

and an improvement in the security environment, and
we condemn all acts of violence against the Libyan
people and the United Nations workers who are trying
to help the country achieve stability.
The United States has historically been and
will continue to be a strong supporter of meaningful
accountability and justice for victims of atrocities
through appropriate mechanisms. The perpetrators of
atrocity crimes must face justice, but we must also be
careful to recognize the right tool for each situation. I
must reiterate our long-standing and principled objection
to any assertion of the ICC’s jurisdiction over nationals
of States that are not party to the Rome Statute, in the
absence of a Security Council referral or the consent of
such States. Our concerns regarding the ICC and the
situation in Afghanistan are well known. Our position
in no way diminishes the commitment of the United
States to supporting accountability for atrocity crimes,
violations of international humanitarian law and gross
violations of human rights.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing
to consider the biannual report on the activities of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) in Libya. We
commend Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
Court, for her detailed briefing. Côte d’Ivoire would
like to assure her of our full support and to urge all
States, including States that are not party to the Rome
Statute, to fully cooperate with the ICC in order to
end impunity.
My delegation notes with concern that since the
previous report of the Prosecutor (see S/PV.8523), the
security situation in Libya has deteriorated considerably,
owing to the ongoing violence that began on 4 April
between the forces of General Khalifa Haftar and those
of the Government of National Accord led by Prime
Minister Faiez Serraj. The deterioration in the security
situation has allowed the Libyan branch of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant to take root. The attack
in Benghazi on 10 August that claimed the lives of
three members of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) demonstrates the need to draw
the attention of both the Council and the International
Criminal Court to the activities of that terrorist group.
My country is therefore concerned about the
decision taken by the European Union, in a context
marked by continued violations of the arms embargo
on Libya, to temporarily suspend the deployment of its

S/PV. 8660

naval assets in Operation Sophia, starting on 27 March
of this year. It is also troubling that the efforts to secure
a ceasefire and bring the parties to the conflict back
to the negotiating table may be futile. In that regard,
Côte d’Ivoire hopes that the upcoming international
conference on Libya to be held in Berlin will help to
silence the guns and sustainably revive the political
process with a view to ending the crisis. A stable
security environment is key to ensuring more effective
cooperation between Libya and the ICC.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with regret that the ICC’s
arrest warrants for Libyan nationals have not yet been
executed, due mainly to the current security situation,
which is affecting the institutional capacity of the
Government of Nation Accord to fulfil its obligations
under the Rome Statute. We therefore call on the Libyan
parties to remove all the obstacles to full cooperation
with the ICC in order to bring the alleged criminals
to justice before the relevant international tribunals.
My country continues to believe that the fight against
impunity must be an integral part of the process of
national reconciliation if we are to create the conditions
for lasting peace in Libya. In that connection, we
welcome the statement by the Prosecutor on 8 May
(see S/PV.8523) with regard to continuing to search for
evidence of alleged crimes against migrants, since the
extension of the ICC’s jurisdiction to crimes committed
against migrants is proving crucial. We welcome the
progress made by the Office of the Prosecutor in
that area.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its
commendation and support to Prosecutor Bensouda
and her Office for their perseverance in implementing
the principle of accountability for crimes under the
Court’s jurisdiction. We also commend the excellent
work done by UNSMIL, which has provided valuable
assistance to the investigations of the ICC. Finally, my
country calls on the United Nations, and the Council in
particular, and the African Union to join forces in order
to achieve a swift end to the clashes in Tripoli and the
surrounding areas, and to enable peace to be restored in
Libya and the Sahel.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the valuable briefing delivered by the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda.
Peru deplores the continuing armed conflict in
Libya, including the indiscriminate and deliberate

19-354677/14

S/PV.8660

The situation in Libya

attacks on the people and on civilian infrastructure,
which have resulted in numerous civilian casualties
and the displacement of thousands. We reiterate
our strong condemnation of the many signs of the
commission of atrocity crimes and the grave situation
caused by violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
Almost nine years ago, as part of its concrete
efforts to tackle impunity, the Council expressed its
confidence in the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court by referring the situation in Libya to
it (see S/PV.6491). In that connection, we reaffirm
the validity of the values of the Rome Statute and the
importance of ensuring that States cooperate with the
Court. In particular, we call on the Libyan authorities,
as well as those of any other States concerned, to
execute the arrest warrants ordered by the Court,
especially those against Mahmoud Al-Werfalli and
in the other cases mentioned by the Prosecutor,
whose multiple and despicable crimes continue to go
unpunished and undermine the confidence that judicial
institutions need if they are to be an effective deterrent.
The Council must consider measures to tackle these
situations, as the representative of Belgium mentioned.
In that context, we reiterate our firm support for the
mandate of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court. All cooperation with her work, particularly by
States parties, must be understood as an opportunity to
strengthen justice and the rule of law in the domestic
and international arenas.
The armed conflict in Libya has also increased the
space available to terrorist organizations such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and its affiliates,
as well as Boko Haram, which is taking advantage
of the power vacuum to control territory, carry out
heinous attacks and associate with organized crime. We
welcome the fact that in accordance with the principle
of complementarity, the Office of the Prosecutor is also
considering such situations, as well as others that we
have mentioned, as atrocity crimes, including their
possible link to ongoing investigations.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize that confidence
in justice, the rule of law and the institutions responsible
for guaranteeing it is key to resolving and preventing the
conflicts affecting a growing number of countries. The
International Criminal Court must therefore continue
to play the vital role for which it was created, that is,
fulfilling its responsibility to protect populations and
ensure accountability for atrocity crimes, as a central
8/14

06/11/2019

element of the international rules-based order that we
all defend.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I thank the Prosecutor for
her briefing.
Poland remains supportive of the efforts of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to fight impunity
and ensure accountability for those responsible for the
most serious crimes of international concern committed
in Libya. We are grateful for the commitment of the
Prosecutor and her team in that regard, despite the
difficult situation on the ground and the limited
resources available.
Poland welcomes the cooperation of States and
other stakeholders, including civil society, with the
Office of the Prosecutor regarding its investigations
of the situation in Libya and encourages its
further development. At the same time, we echo the
Prosecutor’s request for cooperation from the relevant
authorities in executing the outstanding arrest warrants
issued by the Court in connection with the situation
in Libya. We also endorse Ms. Bensouda’s call on the
relevant States to take all steps within their power to
ensure the arrest and surrender of the suspects to the
ICC without further delay. We recognize the latter as a
crucial step not only in fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability, but also in strengthening the rule of
law and deterring further crimes, which is crucial
for achieving peace, security, stability and prosperity
in Libya.
Cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor is
most important, given the multiple serious violations
of international human rights and international
humanitarian law that have reportedly been committed
since the previous report of the Prosecutor was issued.
Poland condemns such acts and calls on all parties and
armed groups involved in the fighting to fully respect
the relevant laws. We remain deeply concerned about the
situation of both the people of Libya and the migrants
and refugees living there. At the same time, we are
grateful for the Office’s monitoring, investigative and
analytical activities related to such crimes and its focus
on the strategy of cooperation and coordination with
Libya and other relevant States in support of nationally
led investigations and prosecutions.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the call for
an end to all violations, for respect for international
law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law, for support for the ICC’s ever more
19-35467

06/11/2019

The situation in Libya

vital work and for the political process in Libya, and for
sparing no effort to achieve peace and justice there. The
people of Libya deserve no less.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her valuable
briefing on her eighteenth report to the Security
Council, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). We renew
our support for the efforts of the ICC to achieve justice
and combat impunity under international law.
We commend the ongoing role of the Office of
the Prosecutor despite the many challenges it faces in
fulfilling its responsibilities to track down and bring
to justice the perpetrators of crimes and violations
under difficult and tenuous security conditions in
Libya, along with the military operations that have
been ongoing around the capital of Tripoli since the
beginning of April. We share Ms. Bensouda’s concern
about the increasing frequency of armed clashes that
have led to the deaths and injuries of many people and
the displacement of thousands of civilians from the
areas of clashes.
We also commend the important role of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) at the
helm of which is the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé
who presented a three-step proposal. We reaffirm our
support for his efforts, and we hope that they yield
results soon. We call once again on the Libyan parties
to show restraint, respect international humanitarian
law, not target civilians or civilian infrastructure and
resume the political dialogue under the auspices of the
United Nations.
We also express our concern with regard to the
observations made in the report of the Prosecutor in
connection with the suffering of migrants in detention
centres, which constitutes a violation of international
humanitarian law and has been exacerbated by the
recent launch of military operations and the mounting
activities of the terrorist group of Da’esh in many parts
of Libya.
We reiterate our position that the primary
responsibility for achieving justice across Libya falls
on the shoulders of the Libyan authorities by exercising
their sovereign jurisdiction, pursuant to article 1 of
the Rome Statute. The ICC must take into account
Libya’s national criminal jurisdiction concerning cases
under the consideration of Libyan courts to achieve

S/PV. 8660

complementarity between the ICC, which complements
national criminal jurisdiction, and the Libyan judiciary.
We recognize the scope of the security challenges
in Libya affecting the work of Court experts in carrying
out the necessary investigations, and we welcome
the assistance provided by States, international and
regional organizations, civil society organizations
and the relevant Libyan authorities and UNSMIL to
the Office of the ICC Prosecutor. That will contribute
to increasing the effectiveness of the investigations
carried out by the Office in fulfilling its mandate.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing.
The conflict in Libya has been raging for more
than eight years, wreaking havoc on the country and its
neighbours, bringing enormous suffering to the Libyan
people and threatening international peace and security.
China has always believed that the issue of Libya must
be resolved through a political process. We hope that
all parties to the conflict will focus on the interests of
the country and the people, achieve a ceasefire as soon
as possible, ease tensions, return to political dialogue
and consultations, and actively promote the process
of reaching a political settlement in Libya. China
supports all efforts that will help stabilize the situation
in the country and promote a political solution to the
Libyan issue.
In late July, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
proposed a three-point plan, which provides ideas for
resolving the Libyan crisis. The international community
should play a constructive role in implementing the
relevant recommendations. China supports a Libyanowned and Libyan-lad political-settlement process
and encourages Special Representative Salamé and
such regional organizations as the African Union and
the League of Arab States to continue their mediation
efforts and form synergies.
While respecting Libya’s independence, unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, the international
community should continue to provide support for and
assistance to Libya so that the country achieves peace,
stability and development as soon as possible. China’s
position with regard to the International Criminal Court
remains unchanged.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, let me
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court

19-354679/14

S/PV.8660

The situation in Libya

(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Libya.
South Africa continues to support resolution 1970
(2011), which calls for a cessation of violence against
civilians and mandates the ICC to investigate war crimes
and crimes against humanity. We also urge non-State
parties to the Rome Statute to support the Prosecutor
of the ICC in discharging her responsibilities. While
South Africa is concerned about the apparent lack of
movement in some of the cases, it is encouraged by
Libya’s efforts to try cases domestically and urges that
justice be carried out as expeditiously as possible.
South Africa welcomes the Office of the Prosecutor’s
increased focus on cooperation and coordination with
Libya and other relevant States in order to support
national investigations and prosecutions. South Africa
ardently supports strengthening complementarity
through the development of domestic institutions to
investigate and prosecute crimes.
South Africa remains concerned about the current
ongoing fighting in Libya, which is not conducive
to finding a political settlement that will bring an
end to Libya’s long transitional period. We condemn
the continued loss of civilian lives and crimes being
perpetrated against migrants. We call on all parties to
fully respect international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
We appreciate the commitment of the Office of the
Prosecutor to monitor and expand its investigations,
with a view to potentially prosecuting new crimes within
its jurisdiction. At the same time, we call on all parties
and stakeholders to recommit to building durable peace
in Libya on the basis of inclusive political dialogue as
the only viable means to achieving sustainable peace
in Libya. We also acknowledge and emphasize the role
of the Security Council in promoting political dialogue
and supporting all efforts to bring about a peaceful
settlement of this conflict.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me also at the
outset thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing.
The ICC is, and remains, a crucial pillar of a strong
rules-based international order. We fully support the
ICC. its impartial work and the values enshrined in the
Rome Statute. In 2011, the Council referred the situation
in Libya to the ICC so as to ensure accountability for
the most serious crimes. We commend the Prosecutor
10/14

06/11/2019

for her commitment to ensure justice for the victims of
atrocities in Libya. However, as we again heard in her
briefing this morning, the security and human rights
situation in Libya is extremely worrisome and her
work is far from done. More needs to happen to fully
implement the mandate of the ICC as well as her own
mandate. We therefore encourage the ICC to step up its
activities with regard to Libya and urge Member States
to execute the arrest warrants.
The full cooperation and assistance of Member
States remain essential for the Office of the Prosecutor
to fulfil its mandate. The fact that arrest warrants for
Libyan nationals have not yet been executed is deeply
worrisome. It is important to execute them in order to
provide justice to the victims as well as to prevent such
crimes from being perpetrated again.
We are also highly concerned about the systematic
use of sexual violence against refugees and migrants in
Libya, as reported by the Prosecutor. Let me therefore
again recall the sanctions listing criteria introduced
by the Council on sexual and gender-based violence,
which clearly recognize the devastating effects of such
heinous crimes on peace and reconciliation in Libya.
We welcome Libya’s commitment to justice and
call for the further strengthening of its cooperation
with the Court. The competent authorities must ensure
accountability for all crimes. Until such time as the
Libyan authorities can prosecute all international
crimes, the ICC must be there to ensure accountability.
Let me also speak very briefly about the violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
to which the Prosecutor referred in her briefing this
morning. As the fighting in Libya persists, the human
cost continues to rise. We have heard about that many
times. To take just one example, the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) reports that there
have been 57 attacks on health-care facilities in 2019.
Attacks on civilians constitute a breach of international
humanitarian law. Accountability for crimes under the
Rome Statute and full respect for international law
are prerequisites to sustainable peace in Libya. It is
the duty of the international community to ensure that
there will be consequences for the perpetrators. The
absence of accountability encourages the repetition of
crimes and impunity.
Let me also say that the enormous influx of arms,
despite the United Nations arms embargo, is one of
the core causes of the humanitarian disaster in Libya.
19-35467

06/11/2019

The situation in Libya

We have discussed this many times. Nevertheless,
the flow of weapons and the fighting continue, all of
which must stop immediately. Observing and actually
implementing the arms embargo require the support of
a unified international community that rallies behind
the efforts of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Salamé and UNSMIL and a Council that unites
behind its own decisions.
In conclusion, let me express once again our full,
continued and steadfast support for the ICC and the
efforts of the Prosecutor in establishing accountability
to enforce urgently needed respect for the rule of law.
We call on the members of the Council and, indeed, on
all United Nations Member States to support the Court
in order to end impunity and ensure accountability. Let
me also again call on those that have not yet joined the
Rome Statute to consider doing so.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her usual enlightening words and applaud the efforts
of her Office to bring about justice and peace for the
victims in Libya.
We would like to begin by expressing our deepest
condolences to the families of the civilians who died
in recent months, in particular the families of United
Nations staff, victims of the heinous acts in Benghazi.
The loss of innocent lives affects us all. We therefore
reaffirm our commitment to cooperating with the
Court in order to ensure that justice is done and that
due reparations take place.
The Dominican Republic supports and echoes
the call by Prosecutor Bensouda on the parties to
the conflict to respect the norms of international
humanitarian law, emphasizing the need to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals,
schools and detention centres.
We would also like to express our deep concern
with regard to the migrants and refugees in Libya.
Incidents such as the horrific bombing of the detention
centre in Tajoura must be stopped and those responsible
brought to justice. In that regard, we encourage further
investigation and review of evidence relating to crimes
committed against migrants and refugees in official
and unofficial detention centres in order to bring a
case before the Court if the relevant legal requirements
are met.

S/PV. 8660

In that regard, the Dominican Republic wishes to
emphasize the importance that countries recognize the
complementary role played by the International Criminal
Court in ensuring the prosecution, investigation
and punishment of crimes against humanity and war
crimes. We therefore welcome the focus on strategic
cooperation and coordination with Libya and other
States, in line with the Strategic Plan for 2019-2021 of
the Office of the Prosecutor of the Court.
In addition, we welcome updates on the progress
in the trial of Mr. Saif Al-Islam Gaddafi. We await the
outcome of the upcoming hearings.
We regret the fact that there has not been progress
with respect to the cases against Mr. Al-Werfalli,
Mr. Al-Tuhamy and Mr. Al-Senussi. However, above
all, we regret receiving the news that Mr. Al-Werfalli,
despite having been accused of having murdered 43
people, has been promoted to the rank of Lieutenant
Colonel in the Libyan National Army, which
is unbelievable.
We wish to once again reiterate the urgent need for
the Libyan authorities to cooperate with the Office of
the Prosecutor. Without that commitment, we will not
be able to see the desired results of her term. We call on
Council members to continue to encourage cooperation
between the Libyan authorities and the International
Criminal Court so as to execute outstanding
arrest warrants.
As the international community, we are committed
to maintaining international peace and security. We
must therefore rally behind the efforts of Prosecutor
Bensouda to end impunity in Libya. Furthermore,
we should not forget the preventive and deterrent
role of the Court, which is fundamental to reducing
violations of fundamental rights and restoring peace to
Libyan society.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Before I begin my statement, I would like to
express the Republic of Equatorial Guinea’s full support
for the brotherly Libyan people. We also welcome the
presence of Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is deeply
concerned about the situation in Libya, particularly
with regard to the humanitarian and security situation,
which continues to deteriorate.

19-3546711/14

S/PV.8660

The situation in Libya

We note that, since April this year, violence and
growing instability have resulted in hundreds of
civilian deaths and thousands of displaced persons.
That situation benefits not the Libyan people but those
who prefer to maintain the status quo in order to keep
control of the country and principally of its resources.
For that reason, we call once again for unity on the
part of the Libyan people, and we encourage them to
bring about understanding and peace, which will make
possible stability throughout the country and make the
Libyans themselves the owners and masters of their own
destiny. We call on the parties to establish a ceasefire to
that end and to allow access of humanitarian assistance.
We invite them to return to the path of political dialogue
as the only solution and to resume the United Nationsled process.
In that vein, we would like once again to praise the
work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
headed by Mr. Ghassan Salamé, as well as that of the
African Union. We also demand that the parties to and
participants in the conflict respect human rights and
international humanitarian law.
We emphatically condemn the attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including those on health
centres, medical personnel and related facilities, and
on schools and detention centres. We reiterate that
such actions represent violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law and could constitute
war crimes. We are also concerned at the situation
of the migrants and refugees who are trapped in the
country and who are victims of inhumane treatment.
All of these issues require in-depth consideration by the
Security Council with the utmost objectivity in order to
seek a real and practical solution to this conflict, which
could have been averted.
To conclude, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
wishes to reiterate its non-recognition of the jurisdiction
of the International Criminal Court for reasons that are
known to all.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing.
We have taken note of the Prosecutor’s eighteenth
report to the Security Council pursuant to its resolution
1970 (2011), on Libya.
Indonesia joins others in expressing deep concern
at the situation in Libya. Today I would like to make the
following points.
12/14

06/11/2019

First, like others, Indonesia calls for the immediate
cessation of hostilities in Libya. We welcome the efforts
made by the United Nations and other partners to bring
the parties to the conflict back to political negotiations.
To that end, we reiterate our full support for Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salamé and the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya.
The international community, including the
Council, needs to show that we are united in our support
for the Libyan people and refrain from taking actions
that will push peace further out of our reach.
Secondly, like others, we, too, are concerned at
the large number of grave violations of international
law and of serious multidimensional crimes, as we just
heard in Prosecutor Bensouda’s update. We join the
Prosecutor’s call, in her statement of 16 April, on all
parties and armed groups involved in the fighting to
fully respect international humanitarian law and take
measures to protect civilians.
That leads me to my last point, which relates to the
ICC proceedings. Indonesia is committed to pursuing
justice in Libya. The efforts to pursue it are part of the
wider efforts to achieve long-lasting and sustainable
peace in Libya, including the current ongoing effort by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Salamé
and in particular his three steps of mediation effort.
The rule of law must be respected; peace cannot
be complete and sustainable without justice; and justice
cannot prosper in the absence of peace. For Indonesia,
the priority at hand is to cease all remaining hostilities
and return to the political dialogue. Action by the
international community must be taken on the basis
of careful decisions so as to avoid provoking further
violence, endangering lives and jeopardizing the quest
for peace.
I join the Prosecutor in stating that it is Libya’s
obligation, first and foremost, to ensure accountability
for crimes committed on its territory. We therefore must
empower the Libyan judicial authorities to enable them
to exercise their sovereignty. That is why the referral
of the situation in Libya to the ICC should not dissuade
the competent Libyan authorities from invoking its
jurisdiction to investigate gross violations of human
rights and bring the perpetrators to justice.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
19-35467

06/11/2019

The situation in Libya

I, too, would like to thank the Prosecutor for
briefing the Council in her eighteenth report on the
situation in Libya. The United Kingdom strongly
supports the work of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). Its role in holding accountable those responsible
for the most serious crimes in Libya is of paramount
importance, and this is especially so given recent
flagrant breaches of international humanitarian law
and human rights violations and abuses, including the
targeting of civilian infrastructure such as the Tajoura
detention centre in July, as she set out.
The conflict is having an unacceptable impact on
civilians, including migrants and refugees. The United
Kingdom is clear that civilians should be protected
and that those responsible for violations should be held
accountable. The ICC is crucial to this.
International criminal justice is a collective effort.
States should ensure cooperation and fulfil their
obligations. We support the Prosecutor’s call for all
relevant States, including State parties and non-State
parties, to cooperate with the ICC in the arrest and
surrender of warranted individuals. We share concerns
over reports of Mr. Al-Werfalli’s promotion within the
Libyan National Army and the ICC’s call on General
Haftar to facilitate his immediate surrender.
It is clear that the ongoing conflict is having an
unacceptable impact on the humanitarian and human
rights situation in Libya. We call on all Member States
to continue to engage with United Nations-led efforts
to secure greater security and stability. We all know
that there is no military solution to Libya’s problems.
All parties to the conflict should commit to an
immediate ceasefire and respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law.
The indiscriminate shelling of civilian infrastructure
such as Mitiga airport threatens Libyan lives and
livelihoods. This is unacceptable. The United Kingdom
remains particularly concerned over the disappearance
of House of Representatives member Siham Sergewa
in July, and we reiterate our condolences following the
car-bomb attack in Benghazi, which killed five people,
including three United Nations staff members.
Support for international criminal justice is a
fundamental part of our foreign policy, and the British
Government strongly supports the ICC’s role in
pursuing accountability in Libya. The United Kingdom
has always been and remains a strong supporter of the
mission of the ICC to hold accountable those accused

S/PV. 8660

of the most serious crimes, to uphold the rule of law
and to achieve justice for victims. We will continue
to support the Prosecutor and her team as they pursue
their investigations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Ms. Bensouda to respond to the
questions posed or comments made.
Ms. Bensouda: There will be no further comments
from me.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Madam, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month, and I wish you every success in the discharge
of your mandate. I also thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her eighteenth report and her briefing today as
well as her relentless efforts to pursue justice and to
fight impunity.
The pursuit of justice across Libya is an issue of
sovereign and national jurisdiction.
However, that does not mean that we will
not cooperate with the ICC. The Libyan national
judicial authorities view the work of the ICC as the
complementary judicial efforts of a partner that
embody a spirit of cooperation and integration between
the national judiciary and international justice. The
Prosecutor has repeatedly underscored that cooperation
on many occasions and in her reports. My Government
understands the Prosecutor’s statements regarding the
slow pace of the Libyan judiciary in its prosecution of
certain suspects. That is thanks to the security situation
in Libya, resulting from military confrontations that
alternately escalate and de-escalate in a vicious circle
of violence, as well as the unlawful offensive conducted
by the Haftar forces against Tripoli and its suburbs.
We should point out that some of the suspects being
pursued by the national judiciary and the ICC no longer
reside on Libyan territory.
With regard to the judicial aspect, we want to
emphasize the ability of our national judicial system
to prosecute all who have committed crimes on
Libyan territory, which are not subject to the statute
of limitations. We should take into account the fact

19-3546713/14

S/PV.8660

The situation in Libya

that the security situation in Libya continues to enable
the perpetration of many crimes against civilians. We
therefore emphasize that the Libyan judiciary has been
monitoring all of these violations, including an air
strike by Haftar forces on 6 October on an equestrian
club in the Janzour area of Tripoli, which injured many
innocent children, and another carried out in the Farnaj
area of Tripoli on 14 October, which killed three girls
from one family, as well as considerable military
operations targeting many innocent people in more
than one area. Those incidents must be followed up on
and investigated.
In that respect, the Government of National Accord
has repeatedly asked the Council to dispatch a factfinding mission to investigate the many violations
and irresponsible actions that have been taken against
innocent people, with a view to establishing the
facts, pursuing their perpetrators and holding them
accountable. In that connection, we reiterate that our
judiciary is capable of carrying out such a mission
if it is given the opportunity to do so. That will be
possible when there is political and security stability
in the country, which the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is pursuing through his efforts to
hold an international conference, followed by a national
congress attended by all the political parties in Libya,
aimed at reaching an agreement that is acceptable to
all parties.
With regard to the concern expressed in the
Prosecutor’s report about the situation of illegal migrants,
the Government of National Accord reiterates that it has
taken speedy measures to protect them. In cooperation
with the International Organization for Migration, we
have moved migrants from the areas of confrontation,
but in spite of that, aircraft of the aggressor force

14/14

06/11/2019

carried out an air strike on a migrant centre in Tajura,
in Tripoli, killing 53 people and injured 130. We once
again reiterate that the Government then requested that
the Council set up a fact-finding mission to investigate
the matter and to hold the perpetrators to account. The
Government is monitoring all such violations against
hospitals, public facilities and civilian infrastructure,
and we have taken all the necessary measures to protect
civilians and keep them out of harm’s way, especially in
areas of military confrontation.
Abductions,
disappearances
and
arbitrary
detentions have accompanied the aggressor force’s
aggression against Tripoli, including the disappearance
of Ms. Siham Sergewa, a member of Parliament, from
her house in Benghazi. Many Libyan and international
parties, including the United Nations, have demanded
that her whereabouts be disclosed and that she
be released.
In conclusion, the Government of National Accord
reiterates its full commitment to resolution 1970 (2011),
especially with regard to the mandate of the ICC. We
hope that the Council will consider the Libyan issue
a priority and will not ignore it, ensuring continued
cooperation with Special Representative Ghassan
Salamé in order to achieve peace and stability and end
this impasse. That will require a concerted effort on
the part of all the members of the Council to overcome
their differences, with a view to adopting a binding
resolution to end the hostilities, compel the forces of
aggression to return to where they came from as soon
as possible and seize the opportunity to achieve peace
in my country, Libya, so that we can rebuild the country
and relaunch its development.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

19-35467
