VI.

ration on the Elimination of Ali Forros of Intolerance and
of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief, in all the
official languages ofthe United Nations, and to take all appropriate measures to make the text available for use by
United Nations information centres, as well as by other interested bodies;
8. Requests the Secretary-General in this context to invite interested non-governmental organizations to consider what further role they could envisage playing in the
implementation of the Declaration and in its dissemination in national and local languages;
9. Urges ali States to consider disseminating the text of
the Declaration in their respective national languages and
to facilitate its dissemination in national and local languages;
10. Welcomes the renewal of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur appointed to examine incidents and governmental actions in all parts of the world that are incompatible with the provisions of the Declaration and to
recommend remedia! measures as appropriate;
l l. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
forty-fourth session to consider the study of the current dimensions of the problems of intolerance and discrimination on the grounds of religion or belief in the light of the
observations transmitted to it by the Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities;
12. Notes that the Commission on Human Rights intends to consider also at its forty-fourth session the question of a binding international instrument in this field and
emphasizes, in this connection, the relevance of General
Assembly resolution 41/120 of 4 December 1986 entitled
"Setting international standards in the field of human
rights";
13. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
continue its consideration of measures to implement the
Declaration and to report, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its forty-third
session;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the itero entitled "Elimination of all
forros of religious intolerance" and to consider the report
of the Commission on Human Rights under that itero.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/98.

lmplications of scientific and technological developments for human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/53 of 14 December 1978, in
which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to
urge the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection ofMinorities to undertake, as a matter
of priority, a study of the question of the protection of
those detained on the grounds of mental ill-health, with a
view to formulating guidelines,
Mindful of the Principies of Medica! Ethics relevant to
the role ofhealth personnel, particularly physicians, in the
protection of prisoners and detainees against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, 80

80 Resolution 37 /194, annex.

199

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling also its resolution 41/114 of 4 December 1986,
in which it again urged the Commission on Human Rights
and the Sub-Commission to expedite their consideration
of this question, so that the Commission could submit its
views and recommendations, including a draft body of
guidelines, principies and guarantees, to the General A~sembly at its forty-third session, through the Econom1c
and Social Council,
Reaffirming Commission on Human Rights resolution
1986/12 of 10 March 1986,61
Taking note of resolution 1987/22 of 3 September 1987
of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities, 81
Expressing deep concern at the repeated evidence of the
misuse of psychiatry to detain persons on non-medica!
grounds, as reflected in the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Sub-Commission, 112
Reaffirming its conviction that detention of persons in
mental institutions on account of their political views or
on other non-medica! grounds is a violation of their human rights,
Noting that, because the Working Group of the SubCommission has made only limited progress so far, the
Sub-Commission is still far from concluding its consideration of the draft body of guidelines, principies and guarantees,
1. Again urges the Commission on Human Rights and,
through it, the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to expedite their
consideration of the draft body of guidelines, principies
and guarantees, so that the Commission can submit its
views and recommendations, including a draft body of
guidelines, principies and guarantees, to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the Economic
and Social Council;
2. Invites the Commissión on Human Rights at its
forty-fourth session to consider the question ofthe emphasis to be attached to the Working Group, in the light of the
Sub-Commission's discussion at its thirty-ninth session.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/99.

Human rights and use of scientific and technological developments

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, to reaffirm faith in the dignity and worth
of the human person, to maintain international peace and
security and to develop friendly relations among peoples
and international co-operation in promoting and encouraging universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recallingthe relevant provisions ofthe Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 the Intemational Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 13 and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 13
Recalling further the Declaration on the Strengthening
oflntemational Security, 83 the Declaration on the Use of
Scientific and Technological Progress in the Interests of
81
See E/CN.4/1988/37-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1987/42
chap. II, sect. A.
82
E/CN.4/Sub.2/1983/17.
83
Resolution 2734 (XXV).

and

Corr.1,
