UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/24
30 April 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3773rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 April 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in the Great Lakes region", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council reaffirms the statement of its President of
24 April 1997 (S/PRST/1997/22) and welcomes the recent agreement by the
President of Zaire and the leader of the Alliance of Democratic Forces for
the Liberation of Congo/Zaire (ADFL) on a time and venue for a meeting to
discuss a peaceful and negotiated settlement of the conflict in Zaire. It
reiterates its full support for the United Nations five-point peace plan,
endorsed by its resolution 1097 (1997) of 18 February 1997, calls for an
immediate cessation of hostilities, and especially calls for both parties
to reach a rapid agreement on peaceful transitional arrangements leading to
the holding of democratic and free elections with the participation of all
parties.
"The Security Council notes the commitment by the leader of the ADFL
to allow United Nations and other humanitarian agencies access to refugees
in eastern Zaire in order to provide humanitarian assistance and to
implement the repatriation plan of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), including the use of both airports in Kisangani. It also
notes his commitment to be flexible regarding the duration of the
repatriation operation, which should move ahead as quickly as possible. It
expresses concern at reports of obstruction of humanitarian assistance
efforts but notes that humanitarian access has improved recently. It calls
on the ADFL to abide by these commitments and to enable the UNHCR
repatriation plan to be implemented without conditions or delay.
"The Security Council also expresses its deep concern regarding the
continuing reports of massacres, other atrocities and violations of
international humanitarian law in eastern Zaire. In this context, it
reiterates its call upon the ADFL and others concerned in the region to
cooperate fully with the recently established United Nations investigative
mission by ensuring unimpeded access to all areas and sites under
investigation, as well as the security of the members of the mission. It

97-11531 (E)

300497

/...

S/PRST/1997/24
English
Page 2

attaches great importance to the commitment of the leader of the ADFL to
take appropriate action against members of the ADFL who violate the rules
of international humanitarian law concerning the treatment of refugees and
civilians.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
