204

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

I. Commends the Special Rapporteur for his report
on the situation of human rights in Chile, prepared in
accordance with Commission on Human Rights resolution 21 (XXX VI) of 29 February 1980: 1 1 '
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
thirty-seventh session to study thoroughly the report of
the Special Rapporteur:
3. Expresses its grave concern at the deterioration of
the human rights situation in Chile as reported by the
Special Rapporteur, in comparison with the same period
last year, in particular concerning the alteration of the
traditional democratic legal system and its institutions
and the repression of the human rights activities of the
Catholic Church and of academic life:
4. Strongly urges the Chilean authorities to respect
and promote human rights in accordance with their obligations under various international instruments and, in
particular, to take concrete steps as outlined in Commission on Human Rights resolution 21 (XXXVI);
5. Concludes, on the basis of the report of the
Special Rapporteur, that continued vigilance with regard to the human rights situation in Chile is warranted;
6. Expresses its deep concern about the lack of information on the numerous persons who have disappeared, which continues to be a gross and flagrant violation of human rights:
7. Urges once more the Chilean authorities to investigate and clarify the fate of persons who have disappeared for political reasons, to inform relatives of the
outcome and to institute criminal proceedings against
those responsible for such disappearances:
8. Urges the Chilean authorities scrupulously to
respect the right and duty of the Chilean judiciary to employ fully and without restriction its constitutional
power under habeas corpus and amparo:
9. Urges once more the Chilean authorities to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur and to submit their
comments on the findings of his report to the Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-seventh session;
10. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to extend the mandate of the Special Rapporteur for another
year and requests the Commission to report on the
human rights situation in Chile, through the Economic
and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/189.

Protection of human rights of certain categories
of prisoners

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/121 of 16 December 1977
regarding the protection of the human rights of persons
who are detained either in respect of offences which they
committed, or are suspected of having committed, by
reason 0f their political opinions or convictions, or as a
result of their struggle against colonialism, aggression
and foreign occupation and for self-determination, independence, the elimination of apartheid and all forms
of racial discrimination and racism, and the termination of all these violations of human rights,
''' See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. I 980.
Supplement No. J (E/1980/11 and Corr I), chap. XXVI. sect. A.

Recalling also its resolution 33 / 169 of 20 December
1978 regarding the protection of the human rights of
persons who have been arrested or detained as a result
of their trade union activities,
Noting, however, that, although certain prisoners
belonging to the above-mentioned categories may have
been duly convicted of common-law offences, which
may justify their arrest, detention or imprisonment, or
may be detained pending a trial in respect of such offences, the arrest, detention or imprisonment for commonlaw offences cannot be justified when it is based on
laws which are of a discriminatory nature or involve
other serious violations of human rights, including
apartheid.
Realizing that persons belonging to these categories
are exposed to special dangers as regards the protection
of their human rights and freedoms,
Noting that violations of their human rights and fundamental freedoms may consist in the arrest or detention itself. or in the treatment to which they are subjected,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights 11 " and the International Covenants on Human
Rights, 11 '
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 1 11• which states that any act of torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is
an offence to human dignity, that no State may permit
or tolerate torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, and that exceptional circumstances such as a state of war or a threat of war, internal political instability or any other public emergency may not be invoked as a justification of torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling also the Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners, 11 '
Emphasizing the particular importance of protecting
the right of prisoners not to be subjected to torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and their right to receive a fair hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal in the determination of any criminal charge against them,
A ware of the fact that, despite releases of prisoners in
some countries, the general situation as regards the arrest and detention of persons belonging to the abovementioned categories remains as serious as before,
I. Recognizes that the arrest and detention, in many
parts of the world, of numerous persons on the abovementioned grounds often give rise to serious human
rights problems and that effective measures should be
taken to eliminate these problems;
2. Reiterates. therefore, the requests to Member
States in General Assembly resolutions 32/121 and
3 3 / 169 regarding the release of such persons and the assurance that their fundamental human rights are protected during their arrest or detention.
96th plenary meeting
I 5 December 1980
'" Resolution 217 A (Ill).
"' Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
'"· Resolution 3452 (XXX). annex.
" First United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of' Offenders.· report prepared by the Secretariat (United
Nat ions publication. Sales No. 1956. IV .4). annex I.A.
