TWENTY-SZXTH

YEAR

tll
MEETING:

15 OCTOBER

1971

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda(S/Agenda/l 595) . . . . , . , . . . . , . , . , . . . . . , . . . , . , . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . , , , . . .
The situation in Namibia:
(al Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic; Chad, the Congo (Democratic Republic of),
Dahomey, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea,
Kenya, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritama,
Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/10326);
(b) Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia (S/l 0330 and Corr. 1) . . .

I

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 15 October 1971, at 3.30 p.m.
hesident: Mr. Guillermo SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua).
Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

shall invite the representatives participating in this debate
to take their places in the Council chamber.
2. AS there is no objection, I invite the representatives of
Sudan, Ethiopia, South Africa, Liberia, Guyana, Chad,
Nigeria, Mauritius and Saudi Arabia to take the places
reserved for them in the Council chamber, it being
understood that they will be seated at the Council table
when they make their respective statements,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 595)
3. I likewise invite the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to be seated at the Council table.

1, Adoption of the agenda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. 0. Ogbu,
President of the United Nations Council fir Namibia, took
a place at the table; and Mr. Y. Tseglze (Ethiopiu);
Mr. C. F. G. von Hirschberg fSouth Afn’ca); Mr, J. R.
Grimes (Liberia); Mr, P. Mousse (CJ?ad); Mr. R. RamphuJ
(Mauritius); and ha. J. Baroodv (Saudi Arabia) took the
places reserved for them.

2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 197 1 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representativcs
of
Algeria, Botswana,
Burundi,
Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, the
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Egypt,
Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic,
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
the Niger, Nigeria, the People’s Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, the
United Republic of ‘I’anzama, the Upper Volta and
Zambia (S/l 0326);
lb/ Report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/l 0330 and Corr.1).

4. The PaS1DEN-f
(illtcrpretfZtiOll
fk?r?l
~pullidl).’
1 have
received letters from the representatives of Uganda
/S/10374] and India [S/10373] in which they request to
be allowed to participate in this debate. In accordance with
the provisional rules of procedure of the Council and with
the consent of the representatives, I intend to invite the
representatives of Uganda and India to participate in our
debate, without the right to vote.
5. Since there is no objection, I invite the representatives
of Uganda and India to take the places reserved for them in
this chamber, it being understood that they will be seated
at the Council table when they make their statements.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 Seutember 1971 addressed to the
President of the S&urity Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya,
Liberia, the Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, the Niger, Nigeria, the
People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Upper Volta and Zambia (S/10326);
(bl Report of the Ad i%c Sub-Committee on Namibia
(S/10330 and Corr.1)

7. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, for some time it has been the custom in the
Security Council not to congratulate the President, but in
this case, and in regard to yourself, I am strongly tempted
to do so. I therefore wish to express the gratitude which
Africa owes you.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from SpanisJl): In
accordance with previous decisions taken by the Council I

8. More than a year ago, under your Presidency, this
Council decided to refer the problem of Namibia to the

At tJte invitation of the President, Mr. G. S. K. Ibingira
(Uganda) and Mr. S. Sen (India) took the places reserved
for them,
6. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
Council will now continue its discussion of the agenda item.
The first speaker on the list is the representative of
Burundi, on whom I now call.

1

International Court of Justice, and the happy outcome of
the deliberations in that Court must in large measure be
attributed to you. In that regard I must also congratulate
you, because the Council is called upon to endorse the
Advisory Ophi~n of the Court1 under your Presidency. 1
should like to .add that, while you represent a small
country, Nicaragua, your contribution to the Security
Council and to the interests’ of Africa and therefore of the
United Nations in general, since Africa is an integral part of
this Organization, is of the highest calibre, and we arc most
grateful to you.
9. This statement may be followed by others which my
delegation contemplates making, depending on the attitude
of the Government of South Africa on the subject. The
contradictory activities of the South African Governments
in the Namibian affair, from the establishment of the
League of Nations until the historic date of 21 June 1971,
reveal Pretoria has become a fertile breeding-ground of
contradictions. A wealth of facts corroborates that strange
reality. Let us highlight some of the most outstanding
characteristics in that land of sophistries,
10. First, the Government of South Africa was a fervent
advocate of the Mandates system instituted in 1919, At the
Versailles Conference, General Smuts was an ardent champion of the theory of advocating international administration for all colonial possessionstaken from Germany, Now
the League of Nations Covenant imposed on the mandatory
Power the obligation to respect the territorial integrity of
the territory under mandate. In other words, it prohibited
any annexation by the mandatory Power and prohibited it
from yielding any territory to third States. In a singular
about-face, after having been the zealous promoter of that
institution, the Pretoria Government has not ceased to
claim for itself the annexation of the former Territory of
South West Africa.
11, Second, on 11 July 1950 an Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice stipulated that “the General
Assembly of the United Nations is legally qualified to
exercise the supervisory functions previously exercised by
the League of Nations with regard to the administration of
the Territory, and that the Union of South Africa is under
an obligation to submit to supervision and control of the
General Assembly supervision and to render annual reports
to it”.2 That decision of the Court was challenged and
rejected by Pretoria.

and officials were delirious in acclaiming the decision. In
brief, at that time the value and authority of the Court
were, so far as South Africa was concerned, beyond
dispute.
13. Almost exactly five years later, on 21 June 1971, the
same supreme legal organ of our Organization defeated
Pretoria-not by so close a margin as in 1966 but by the
quasi-unanimous vote of the jurists. This time South
Africa’s reaction was the very opposite of the jubilation and
general acclaim which had welcomed the outcome, which it
considered to be just, of the previous deliberations at The
Hague. Violent diatribes against the Court replaced the
earlier paeans of praise for that same body, South Africa’s
virulent criticisms went so far that Mr. Vorster accused the
jurists of engaging in ‘an international political vendetta”
against his regime. Yet those honourable jurists were vested
with the same powers and the same authority as in 1966,
when South Africa enthusiastically welcomed their
decision.
14. Fourth, South Africa has until now vehemently
objected to all United Nations organs whenever they took
decisions or adopted resolutions running counter to the
point of view or interests of Pretoria. This attitude, negative
as it is militant, has been demonstrated towards all the
principal organs of the United Nations: the General
Assembly, the Security Council and, incidentally, the
Secretary-General. The Court, which had previously been
spared South African insolence, in turn suffers the same
fate as the other bodies I have mentioned.
15. The humanism of the Western world, like the other
cultures and civilizations of Africa, Eastern Europe and
Asia, offer undeniable values which have largely contributed to the initiation of many countries into modern life.
These continents are indeed the cradles of today’s conception of universal humanism and modern civilization.
16. The apostles of apartheid are once again cornered in a
strange paradox. It is astonishing to hear them profess their
mission of preserving Western civllization and to note that
the champions of such an ideal have for centuries tried to
isolate the civllization in question in watertight compartments. The most varied witnesses agree in affirming that
education in several is restricted to the whites and reaches
the other races only in trickles.
17. The policy of Pretoria in Namibia being a servile
replica of apartheid in South Africa, it would suffice to
point out that $333 million are spent on education for
whites against $20 million on education for Africans. The
taxes paid by the latter must cover the additional expenses
for the education of the blacks.

12. Third, on 18 July 1966 the Court, by an infinitesimal
majority, pronounced itself in favour of South Africa,3
which won its case only becauseof the casting vote of the
President, At that time, all the information media controlled by the racist regime vied with one another in
highlighting the event. Newspapers announced in Iarge
headlines the victory of South Africa. Governmental bodies

18. In 1969 there were 68,549 white university students
in South Africa, as against 3,911 Africans, of whom 2,144 ’
were registered only for correspondence courses. From
1960 to 1971 the number of African students at separate
colleges increased from less than 500 to 1,586. The number
of students pursuing graduate studies rose fro? less than 50
to approximately 150. Two thirds of the 1,586 students
specialized in purely artistic professions or in teaching. The
ratio of white teachers to Africans wasmore than 10 to one
for professors and 12 to one for lecturers.

1 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Secun’ty Council resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, I.C.J.
Reports 1971, p. 16.
2 International Status of South West Apica, Advisory Opinion,
1.C.J.Reports 1950, p, 128.
3 Set South West Africa, Second Phase, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports

1966, p. 6.

3

19.
These figures are eioquent in themselves, and the
difference in schooling for the two races is shocking: I
invite members to read the articles appearing in the
Johannesburg Star of 15 and 17 December 1969. The
disproportion in the schooling of Namibians is by far the
most flagrant. Despite the contiguity of Namibia to South
Africa, Pretoria has been unable to achieve any progress in
teaching or in social conditions. You will realize to what
degree the civilizing crusade of the white South Africans
has borne its fruit in scope and in depth.

20. In his statement before this Council on 27 September
last /1584th meeting/, Mr. Muller predicted administrative
scourges and sociai ills which would invade Namibia if
Pretoria were to withdraw from it, attributing these
predictions to George Kennan.
21. Without seeking to authenticate the author or the
source of such a pessimistic prophecy, I believe it imperative to reemphasige the philosophy of the Organization of
African Unity. First, it seems strange that Pretoria should
fear the consequences of independence. During a period of
more than half a century, how is it that the South African
genius did not succeed in training political, administrative,
technical and other personnel which could take over, as was
the casewith other colonial Powers such as France, Belgium
and the United Kingdom, which, after their departure,left
skilled personnel who could replace them, or who could
work in collaboration with citizens of the former colonial
Powers?
22. According to the thesis developed by Mr. Muller,
Namibia can only be a tempting paradise on earth, where
schools, roads, industries, resources and so on, bear witness
to a flourishing economy and to a people who have reached
a level of advanced training in every field. If that were the
case, then the concern felt by Mr. Muller is groundless,
since the white South Africans have so generously dispensed academic training and developed the economy so
that the conduct of public affairs by Namibians at the
command levers could not fail to proceed with the
smoothness of well-oiled machinery.
23. Certainly the inhuman fate imposed on the Africans
by the white leaders inspired in the latter an obsessional
phobia with regard to the blacks. Obviously in these
conditions the oppressors picture the independence of
Namibia as an event that would leave them no choice but to
flee for their lives, and believe that sovereignty would
sound the knell of the present masters. It is this same sick
panic which instills in white South Africans the exaggerated
propensity towards fragmentation of the territory of
Namibia.

ante to the liberation movements decided upon by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government in June of this
year.4 The assistance given to the decolonization groups
can in no way be imputed either to military dilettantism or
to any horror of the white man as such; It is a questian of
the participation of Africa in efforts directed against racial
and colonial fanaticism in southern Africa. This contribution of the States members of the Organlzation of African
Unity, far from being irreconcilat$e with, South Africa, is
intended rather to restore the most sacred human rights of
Africans. If the leaders in Pretoria were to renounce their
policy of colonial domination in Namibia and of degradation in South Africa, the African Governments would not
only accept peaceful coexistence, but would apply themselves to create conditions for close co-operation in every
field.
26. The supreme magnanimity of our African Govemmerits can find no better illustration than in the Lusaka
Manifesto on Southern Africa5 and in the peace pilgrimage
undertaken last year by President Kenneth Kaunda, which
is now being continued by President Ould Daddah. Such
initiatives, both on the diplomatic and on the political level,
give striking proof that Africa will not resolve to take up
arms except as a last resort, if all paths to independence, all
other alternatives, prove impossible.
27. For the bellicose rdgimes which dominate South
Africa, the mission entrusted to the current President of the
Organization of African Unity might be construed asbeing
equivalent to the impotence, or indeed the capitulation, of
the Africans. On the contrary, it is proof of the sagacity
and the political and diplomatic skill, the greatness and the
moral force of the African leaders. Accordingly, Pretoria
should not misjudge the situation. Because the Organization
of Africai! Unity has urged concerted plans with the
European and American States which exercise some influence on the Government of South Africa in order to try by
every means to bend the arrogant intransigence of the
latter.
28. The mediating role of the Western Powers would
succeed both in safeguarding Afro-European co-operation
and ensuring the peaceful coexistence of the African States
themselves. This cooperation, governed by historical requisites and reciprocal needs, must be a matter of priority for
the former Metropolitan cbuntries, including Portugal and
South Africa, and for the new States. Otherwise, the
privileged links which shoul~d unite the two partners will be
threatened if independence has to be won by force against
the colonial or racist Power.
29. The harm caused by the Siamese twins of segregation
and colonial subjection is not limited only to those directly
affected, who are the Africans. They represent a serious
blow and an immovable obstacle to the final reconciliation
which should take place between Africa and Europe. The
determination of the European leaders to eliminate the
mechanisms of apartheid and colonization from our con-

24. Africa will be ready to offer the hopes and the
guarantees. It is on record on an international level that the
law of revenge is repugnant to the African, Examples
abound in many of the newly independent countries to
prove the diligence with which Africans form ties of
friendship with their former colonizers and excellent
relations with citizens of the former metropolis.

4 Eighth Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Ncads of State and

Government of the Organization of African Unity, held at Addis
Ababa, 21-23 June 1971.
5 See Official Records of the General Assembly, nvenry-fourth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 106, document A/7154.

25. Perhaps it may be well to remove once again the
misunderstanding concerning the increased military assist3

tinent would therefore contribute to the restoration of
harmonious relations between the two great partners,
namely Africa and Europe. Apart from the moral and
political obligation Incumbent upon them, the Europeans
even out of simple foresight-if not indeed out of seifinterest-should revise and change their system of alliance
with South Africa, The safeguarding of future relations
between Europeans and Africans commands that the
former rally to the quest for total independence. A totally
liberated and independent Africa, far from falling back
upon itself, would devote itself to universal co.operation
and solidarity. This co-operation and solidarity would be
extended both to socialist Europe and to capitalist Europe,
to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and to the
United States of America, to Latin America and to Asia.
30. This African offensive for cooperation and solidarity
is not intended to except, far lessexclude, South Africa. If
the white South Africans, instead of barring the way to
political and racial emancipation, were to resolve to
promote that emancipation, the vocation for co-operation
and solidarity which Africa has embraced would give
priority to close relations with South Africa because of
political proximity and an affinity steeped in history with
the Namibians, thus ensuring the relations which should be
established between the new independent States and the
former metropolitan countries. The African continent is
but on the eve of an economic affluence which it is
prepared to share with the rest of the world. That is why, in
the final analysis, the elimination of racialism and colonialism in southern Africa comes within the framework of the
strengthening of international security and economic inierdependence.

on grounds of illegality, and far from affirming the right of
the General Assembly to revoke the Mandate, Pretoria’s
arguments have sought to distort the nature of the problem.
In certain versions they have sought to vindicate the
humane character of the administration of Namibia so as
not to face the legal responsibilities.
35. E$tmdning the question as it really is, it is clear that,
of the Mandate and the Trusteeship
system which succeeded one another, the people of
Namibia claim the right to self-determination and total
independence.
quite independently

36. Accission to independence is an innate, fundamental
and inalienable right. By virtue of this alone the Security
Council is bound to resist the flood of often contradictory
arguments advanced by South Africa, In its vast campaign
of counter-truths, Pretoria does not hesitate to spend
astronomical sums of money throughout the world. For
three weeks now it has endeavoured before the Security
Council to sugar-coat the pill of a situation which is
nevertheless indefensible.
37. I should like to quote from the work of John
Laurence in his work entitled Seeds of Disasfer:
“This year South Africa is devoting approximately
&4 million or $9.6 million just to carry out throughout
the world a persuasive and attractive propaganda campaign on the following themes: human races are so
different that they must be kept separate; specifically, the
method used by South Africa is at the same time just,
honest, generous and Christian. These L4 million only
represent expenditures directly committed-business
groups, trade organizations and tourist associations will
spend more millions to organize their public relations and
their pressure groups and lobbies, to give lectures and
conferences on this subject; and even certain British and
American groups like banks and transport companies will
devote large sums of money to make known among their
friends and customers, perhaps at times without even
being really aware of it, the official propaganda on

31. The representatives of Pretoria, in their frequent
exculpations to United Nations organs or other bodies,
invariably plead a stereotyped and feeble argument. ACcording to their eternal plea, our Organisation has no
authority to revoke the mandate over Namibia. By means
of this argument the Pretoria regime has since 1934 sought
every occasion to annex &hat country and to incorporate it
into South Africa. The attempts made to this end have
multiplied and the process to achieve it is being accelerated
from year to year.

apartheid.

“To speak about propaganda is perhaps a euphemism.
The facts, the figures, the arguments and the affirmations
in regard to races which white South Africa pours out
over the entire world are much more than the expression
of a simple point of view. This is a whole tissue of
enormous and deliberate counter-truths, subtle halftruths, exaggerations and fundamental omissions comparable in their scope to the anti-semitic propaganda
waged by Nazi Germany.“6

32. Let us assume that Article 22 of the Covenant of the
League of Nations constitutes the legal weapon on which
the Government of South Africa bases its refusal to
withdraw from the Territory; nevertheless, no clause in the
Treaty of Versailles authorized the partitioning nor a
forfiori the absorption of the Territory under Mandate, and
for a good reason: even the members of the Supreme
Council who had mandates under their aegis had to
renounce this under conditions which are different from
those to which South Africa obstinately clings.

38. That is the situation as it exists, I am grateful to the
Council for having listened to me patiently and attentively,
until, as I have already said, I may speak again, on another
occasion, depending on the way the statements made by
the representatives of South Africa evolve.

33. The South African authorities have succeeded in
throwing dust in the eyes of some circles by combining a
legal infatuation with ingenuity in the choice of words.

39. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
thank the representative of Burundi for his kind words in

34. The arguments advanced by Pretoria are full of
references to obsolete texts. Far from affirming the right of
the International Court of Justice to decide on the
obligation of South Africa to withdraw from the Territory

6 J. Lawrence,
Ltd., 1968).
4

Seeds of Diwsfer, (London,

Victor Gollancz

regard to me and in regard to my Presidency of the Council.
I am honoured and pleased.
40. 1 invite the representatjve of Uganda to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement,
41. Mr. IBINGIRA (Uganda): Mr. President, first I thank
YOU for having given me this opportunity of addressing you
and the other members of the Council on one of the most
Critical issues of our time, although 1 do not 1ldVethe rjght
to vote. Also allow me, Sir, to extend to you my sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the Presidency. My
delegation is confident that, with your experienced leadership, the Council will transact its business purposefully and
fruitfully.
42. We have followed closelythe debate on the issue of
Namibia in the Council and in other forums, A lot of
facts-sufficient for any unprejudiced, uncommitted person
to pass a reasonable judgement-have been put before the
Council year after year; but it is astonishing that because of
vested interests some Powers backing South Africa have
refused to accept thtit Namibia must be free as all the
Territories under the old League of Nations Mandates
system came to be free, as the former French Empire in
Africa came to be free, and as the BeIgian and the British
Empires in Africa came to be free.
43. It is almost unbelievable that the British authorities,
which for generations have claimed-and I should say not
without some justification--that Britain stood for selfdetermination of subject peoples, should now turn around
towards the end of the twentieth century and reject the
Advisory Opinion on Namibia of the highest international
tribunal, the International Court of Justice. My Government welcomes the Opinion’ of that Court on Namibia. We
further welcome the stand which the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the United States and some other
States have taken in accepting and recognizing the legality
of the Advisory Opinion on this question. We hold that,
beyond any reasonable doubt, it removes every legal
impediment in the way of the liberation of Namibia. We
shall have no option but to hold that those who reject it are
moved not by humanitarian or democratic commitments,
but rather are motivated by the colossal economic investments that have been, are being, and perhaps may continue
to be poured into Namibia.
L’
44. It is the view of the Government of the Second
Republic of Uganda that the racist minority @me of
South Africa has neither a legal nor a moral duty in
Namibia, and it is therefore a commitment on our part to
support all means directed at liberating Namibia.

Government of the Second Republic of Uganda to join
those who wish to liberate Namibia, but rather to engage in
a dialogue with the South AfriCan r&hne. That impression
has been consistently maintained in Ieading newspapers of
various capitals in the world. We have no doubt that this is
a campaign desperately conducted to win support for the
South African rt?gime among foreign nations-a campaign
which is bound ultimately to fail.
46. When the President of the Second Republic of Uganda
offered a challenge to Prime Minister Vorster to accept a
fact-finding mission of Ugandans to have unfettered access
in examining the conditions of our African brothers ln
South Africa, it was most significant that Mr.Vorster
openly refused to accept such a mission because, he alleged,
it would constitute interference in the internal affairs of
South Africa. The very refusal by Vorster to permit such an
inquiry from an African State into the conditions of our
brothers in South Africa and Namibia is outstanding
testimony that he has something to hide; indeed, not just
something, but a lot to hide. He has to hide apartheid not
oply in South Africa but also in Namibia.
47. In this connexion I wish to quote from an editorial of
a London newspaper, of 12 October 1970:

The Guardian,

‘L,4parlheid is not some little local difficulty, a bit of
petty discrimination, or the ludicrous public notices
which white British visitors of whatever political persuasion see and deplore in South Africa. It is far more
than that. It is the systematic denial of trade union rights,
of voting rights, a deliberate disparity in wage rates, the
forced separation of families, the mass removal of over
2 million people from arable to barren land, the to:eratiori of an infant mortality rate in which in some
communities every other child never becomes an adult
and the terrorizing or imprisonment of opposition. No
other country in the world practises so deliberate a policy
of suppression of the majority as South Africa does.”

48. And, of course, we all know that this situation obtains
in substance in Namibia because, to quote from a speech by
a stalwart of apartheid, former Prime Minister of South
Africa, Hendrik Verwoerd: “We want to make South Africa
while”-and this goes for Namibia. “Keeping it white can
mean only one thing, namely, white domination not
leadership, not guidance, but control and superiority.” The
policies that obtain in South Africa, I cannot overemphasize, obtain in Namibia.
49. How then, given these facts, can we speak of dialogue
with the racist rkgime in regard to Namibia, a dialogue in
which we must accept apartheid as a basis of government,
in which we must accept the plundering of the resources of
Namibia by foreigners without due regard to the masters of
the country, who are the Africans; in which we must, above
all, endorse the denial of the right to self-determination to
the people of Namibia. 7 ‘I%.is indeed would not be dialogue.
This is a requirement on the part of the South African
regime that the African States must be prepared to make a
pilgrimage to the oracle in Pretoria where they would be
briefed as to how the sons of Africa in Namibia, and indeed
in other parts, should best be governed, probably with the
aid of external forces.

45. But when I speak of “all means” let me not give the
impression of a commitment to dialogue with South Africa.
The Government of the Second Republic of Uganda in its
foreign policy statement of 15 March 1971 made it clear
that the liberation of Namibia and, indeed, of the whole of
the southern African Territories may, in the ultimate
analysis, have to depend on the use of military force. The
impression has been mischievously created by those who
have so much to protect that it is not the intention pf the
5

Hence, we entirely agree with the representative of France
and, many others, that we can determine what Namibia
wants only after we have consulted the Namibians. Such
consultation obviously cannot take place until South Africa
has totally temtinated its illegal occupation of Namibia,
61. I do not think it necessaryfor the Indian delegation to
express once again its repugnance and total rejection of
apartheid and all that it stands for. I would, however, add
that no law or legal argument which would perpetuate any
system or situation contrary to human civilizstion could be
acceptable to the United Nations. Although the concept of
civilization may have changed between the time Article 22
of the Mandate was written and today, it has always been
accepted that the principal purpose of any legal system
must be to serve the human values, and not to put them in
distress or destroy them. Some 4,000 years ago? before
Christ, this prime consideration of humanism behind all
laws was emphasized in a scriptural text of my country
which reads as follows:
‘The object of law and life is not merely the enjoyment
of the pleasures of this world and those of the heavens
beyond, but it is to relieve humanity in dire distress by
removing human suffering, whereverit exists.”
62. We consider that the occupation of Namibia by South
Africa is not onIy totally illegal but immora1. We consider
also that the white @me of South Africa is wholly
uncivilized, unchristian and unfit to carry out its obligations under the Charter. After having disposed of these
legal, political and moral considerations-very briefly, no
doubt-the question arises: what should the Council or the
United Nations as a whole do now? In our view, the
Council should first accept and endorse the Advisory
Opinion of the Court and as a consequencecall upon South
Africa to terminate its illegal occupation of Namibia
forthwith. Secondly, again as a consequence of the Court’s
decision, all States, be they Members of the United Nations
or not, should recognize the illegality of South Africa’s
presence in Namibia and the invalidity of its acts on behalf
of and concerning Namibia, and take all actions which
follow from such recognition and invalidation. The question has been raised whether Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter can apply in the circumstances of the
illegal occupation by South Africa. The heading of that
Chapter reads: “Action with respectto threats to the peace,
breaches of the peace, and acts of aggression”. Recent
events-1 have in mind the complaint the Council received a
few days ago from Za&bia [#/103S2f -have proved that
there is a constant threat to the peace, following South
Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia. Thirdly, let us recall
what the South African delegation said before the General
Assembly on 5 October 1966: “South Africa’s right to
administer the territory is not derived from Mandate but
from military conquest.“9 Not only has the United
Nations, including the General Assembly and the Security
Council, time and agai.n declared South Africa’s occupation
as illegal; this assertion of military conquest and continued
occupation of Namibia places South Africa, in our view, in
the status of a perpetual aggressor. Therefore we believe
9 Official Records of the General Assembly,
Plenary Meetings, 1431st meeting, para.264.

Twenty-sixth Session,

7

that as regards Namibia the provisions of Chapter VII of the
Charter can and ihould be applied, and that such applicah
tian is mandatory for all States, 3ncluding the permanent
members of the Security Council, and also including States
which are not Members of the United Nations.
I,
63. We think it would be wrong tci take political decisions
first and then try to find legal justifications for them. It
should be the other way round. We should take our
political decisions in the light of law and morality and in
the interests of peace and security. We further believe that
the arguments which have been given by the South African
delegation for economic advancement are irrelevant and
misleading. If we had the time to discuss these details, we
could prove conclusively that most of the money that
South Africa claims it has spent in improving the economic
conditions of Namibia has been spent in order, first, to
benefit the white settlers, secondly, to encourage further
white immigration and, thirdly, for military purposes.
To
give just one example, commenting on some figures for
education, Mr. Muller claims that “the system in South
West Africa is directly in line with the modern approach to
schooling in Africa” /1584th meeting, para. 1591. The
World Council of Churches, however, says in a report this
month :
“These figures, moreover, conceal the fact that only
two out of every ten African children of schoolgoing age
attend school, and very seldom for more than five
years. . . . When South Africa states that there are 472
schools for non-Whites in Namibia, it must be understood
that about half of these ‘schools’ meet under a tree
without the most rudimentary tools of instruction like
books, pencils and writing paper.”
64. We consider these claims irrelevant, because the
Namibians are not in a zoo in their own country, where the
zoo-keeper would simply take credit for having fed them
and looked after them well. They are human beings with a
right to Iive in their own way, and this is what South
Africa, by its inhuman policies of apartheid and by its
illegal occupation of Namibia, is preventing, with the sole
object of increasing its political power and its tribal
privileges on behalf of the whites. I do not think that any
country in the United Nations can tolerate this. Namibia is
neither a zoo nor a personal property of the South African
Government or of the white tribes in that area.
65. In concrete terms, apart from the lega measures which
we have suggested can be taken, the Security Council, by a
formal declaration, should put the administration of
Namibia under the Trusteeship Council, to be administered
through the United Nations Council for Namibia. If South
Africa refuses to withdraw and hand over the administra.
tion, the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter will be
adduced, and the Council can then take all necessary action
to ensure that South African withdrawal does take place,
and effectively. This will not solve the probiem of apartheid
and other repressions in South Africa itself, but at least
South Africa will know that it cannot continue intolerable
acts of injustice not only to the people of Namibia but to
the total membership of the United Nations, the principles
and purposes of which it is determined to violate and
continues to violate with impunity and a measure of

sneering SXC~S~.
Expulsion of South Africa from the
United Nations may become inevitable, but civilizing jts
white tribes may prove much more difficult.
66. How pleasant and comforting it must have been for
elderly gentlemen in 1919, brought up in the Victorian
tradition of im$erial charm, arrogance and ignorance, to
think of civilizing the natives and the heathens, Today it Is
bad taste to speak of civilizing anyone, even the whites of
South Africa; but I would rather be guilty of bad taste than
of inhuman injustice, and I would not write anything Iike
Article 22 of the Mandate in any United Nations document.
This is how the times have changed, and so must our Iaws
and our attitudes.
67. The PRESIDENT (intrrpretution from Spatlish): I
thank the representative of India for his kind words
concerning me, which I greatly appreciate.
68. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated Porn Russian): In a statement made on
5 October /158&h meetirtgj the Soviet delegation explained its position of principle on the question of the
situation in Namibia under discussion in the Security
Council. In our statement today we should like to dwell
briefly on certain questions touched on by various delegations during the present discussion.
69. First of all I should like to stress the importance of the
question submitted to the Security Council for consideration by nearly 40 African States. t think that never before
in the proceedings of the Security Council, throughout the
26 years of the existence of our Organization, has such an
impressive number of such high-ranking reprcsentativcs of
States Members of the LJnited Nations-a t-tcad of State,
Ministers of Foreign Affairs of a number or‘ States, and
many other leading figures-participated in the discussion
of any specific question. Nl this points to one thing,
namely the exceptional urgency of the question of the
situation in Namibia. We can agree whole-heartedly with
those representatives of African States who have linked the
question of Namibia with Qe strengthening of international
security and with the advancement of Africa as a whole.
The Soviet delegation fully understands the position of the
African States. It is no accident, therefore, that draft
resolution A/C.l/L.56610 on the implementation of the
Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security
submitted in tlie First Committee by eight States, including
the Soviet Union, contains a separate provision having a
direct bearing on the question we are now discussing.
70. I should like to remind my colleagues on the Council
that in operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly condemns acts of those States which, in
contravention of the provisions of the United Nations
Charter and of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security, continue to resort to coercive acts
which deprive the peoples of their inalienable right to
selfdetermination, freedom and independence, obstruct the
full implementation of the United Nations decisions on the
elimination of colonialism and racism, and threaten thi!
sovereignty of newly independent States.
10 Ibid.,

Thwnty-sixth

mentA/8676,para.7.

Session, Arrnexes,

71. The Soviet delegation,which at all times consistently
and firmly advocatesthe adoption of all measureslikely to
strengthen international security, has supported and still
supports the decisionsof the United Nations concerning
Namibia.
72. Many questions have been touched on at recent
meetingsat the Security Council and in statementsmadeby
its membersand by representativesof States participating
In the work of the Council, and the delegation of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republicshas formed the impression
that in the heat of the debate people have somehow lost
sight of the fundamentalquestionand of the fundamental
purpose for which this special meeting of the Security
Council wasconvened.
73. J! is apparent from fhe letter from the group of
African Statesthat the Councilwasconvened at the request
of the Organisationof African Unity “to discussways and
means of enforcing the past decisions of the United
Nations”-1 cmphasizethe word “past”-% the light of the
legal obligation imposedon the world community by the
decision of the International Court of Justice /S/10326].
74. What decisionsare referred to here? PrimariIy the
decisionsof the General Assembly of the United Nations
and of the Security Council terminating South Africa’s
Mandate over Namibia, recognizing that the presence of
South Africa in Namibiais unlawful and invalid, and calling
upon South Africa to withdraw from Namibia. I do not
think there is any needto enumeratethe many resolutions,
which are well known to thosesitting around this table. I
shall meniion only Security Council resolution 269 (1969),
which even set a time-limit for the withdrawal of South
Africa’s administration from Namibia. That time-limit has,
however, tong since expired as a result of South Africa’s
defiant disregardfor the Council’sdecisions.Very practical
and very specific ways and means of implementing the
United Nationsdecisionson Namibiahave beenproposed in
the statement of Mr. Ould Dad&h /1583rd meeting/,
President of Mauritania and Chairmanof the Organization
of African Unity, in the statementsof members of the
delegation headedby him and in the statements of many
members of the Security Council representing African
countries. It was, as we al1 know, on the basisof these
proposals that the group of members of the Security
Council repres&ting African and Asian Statesprepared the
draft resolution/S/10372] on which the consultations with
which atJof usare familiar havetaken place.
75. The Soviet delegationhas already announced that it
agreeswith the representativesof the African countries that
the time has come for the Security Council, in dealing with
the question of Namibia,to go beyond declarations, not to
mention hypothetical discussions,and to take effective
measuresas provided in the United Nations Charter, in
order to makethe racistsof Pretoria respectand implement
the decisionsof the United Nations.
76. It is, of course,perfectly natural that somedelegations
should wish to express their views on the proposals
submitted by the African delegations,proposalswhich are
contained in the report of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on
Namibia. In so doing, however, they should not lose sight

agendaitem 34, docu8

of the essence of the question, the reason for which the
Security Council was convened. It does seem to our
delegation that at some of its recent meetings the Council
has departed somewhat from its agenda and that at times
the discussion has tended to acquire a rather academic
character. We can become involved in a dense tangle of
contradictory views and concepts from which it will be
fairly difficult to extricate ourselves.
77, For many years I myself was engaged in research in
the field of political sciences, and I must admit that I
should be delighted to take part in a discussion on the
meaning of the principle of self-determination, especially as
the experience of the October Revolution in my country
and the manner in which the very complex question of
nationalities in Russia has been solved on the basis of the
granting to all peoples of the right to self-determination
would provide me with excellent material for participation
in such a discussion.
78. At the 1594th meeting of the Security Council,
Ambassador Baroody mentioned my native country,
Armenia, and the Caucasus, and I should like to add the
following to what he said. In the Caucasusalone, which is a
small part of the Soviet Union, dozens of different
nationalities, with different languages, different ways of
writing and a different history, many of them Moslem,
many of them Christian and many of them Orthodox, all
live together. In this region, as in other regions of the Soviet
Union, the question of nationalit,ies has been settled, and
settled once and for all, on the basis of the consistent
implementation of the principle ofselfdetermination.
79. But J ask y~iu, Mr. President, if this is the time and
place for a conversation of this nature. Here in the Security
Council it seems that nobody has openly opposed the idea
that the people of Namibia have an inalienable right to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the United Nations Charter and the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. The overwhelming majority of the Members of the
United Nations have no doubts about this. In fact, only
South Africa denies this right, not only in word, but also in
deed and in practice.

tion and self-government, that they were “economically
backward”, and so on. As we now see, history is repeating
itself. The rulers of South Africa have completely failed to
think up anything new. They are advancing the same
unfounded arguments in an attempt to delay the granting
of independence to the people of Namibia. Practice has
shown, however, that those peoples which received their
independence in the post-war period have not only successfully dealt with the task of constituting their own independent national States and thus proving their ability to govern
themselves, but are also playing a very active and Jncreasingly important role in international affairs and are making
a constructive contribution to the solution of urgent
international problems. In this way historical experience
and practice fully refute the arguments we have heard here
concerning the unpreparedness of the people of Namibia
for self-government, Sitting around this table are representatives of many nations which, until comparatively
recently, were deprived of the right to self-determination
on the pretext that they were still unprepared to exercise
that right. It is interesting to see how many brilliant
diplomatic representatives from countries whJch were also
regarded until recently as unprepared to exercise the right
to self-determination are present in this room.
82. The Soviet delegation has not the slightest doubt that
the day is near when diplomats from Namibia, too, will be
present as representatives in this room and perhaps even
take their lawful place at this table.
83. But how can anyone talk seriously of the people of
Namibia hcing able freely to express their wili and desires
when that country finds itself, according to our own
detinition, the definition of the United Nations, under
foreign occupation and in a state of forcible annexation,
and when the regime of racism and apartheid, which has
been repeatedly condemned and stigmatized by the United
Nations, is rampant in its territory?
84. In order to give the people of Namibia an opportunity
to exercise this right, this inalienable right to self-determination, it is essential to create the necessary conditions in
NamibJa to throw out the South African administration and
amred forces from that Territory, in other words to
implement the decisions of the United Nations on Namibia.
There lies the essence of the question; there lies the key to
its solution. Only then will the Namibians be able to solve
ail the problems relating to their ultimate destiny.

80. The concept of self-determination implies above all
the unconditional right of every people to decide its own
destiny, including the right to constitute a sovereign State
and to choose a social and political structure in accordance
with its freely expressed will and desire. It was precisely by
following this principle and by implementing it in the past
two or three decades that many nations, which had
previously been under colonial rule, won their independence after a stubborn, and in many casesbloody, struggle,
constituted their own national States and are now Members
of the United Nations. Ambassador Sen of India has just
spoken brilliantly of this. The question is, why should we
deny this right to the people of Namibia?

85. Consequently, the Soviet delegation believes that the
Security Council should not shrink from the problem it was
convened to solve, namely the problem of finding practical
ways and means of enforcing the past decisions of the
United Nations and, in particular, of the Security Council
relating to Namibia, a question on which there is also an
unequivocal and authoritative advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice.
86. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): I should like, if I may, to make a few
preliminary comments in regard to the statement made
yesterday [1594th meeting] before the Council by the
representative of South Africa, in which he defined what
his Government conceives to be the principle of selfdetermination for the nation of Namibia.

81. If we recall the history of the conquest of independence by former colonial countries we see that, as a rule,
the administering Powers always tried to justify their
colonial policy by putting forward the standard arguments
that these countries were “unprepared” for self-determina9

87. Ambassador von Hirschberg referred to selfdetermina.
tion of peoples, linking it closely with the concept of
nationhood. His words certainly deserve the greatest
respect, as do all the opinions of others. However, we
cannot agree with them. Apart from the fundamental fact
that not all casesare identical, we believe that in absolute
terms it is not possible indissolubly to link the factor of the
will of the people freely expressed with the idea of
nationhood in the case of territories that are still in the
colonial state, and this. precisely because peoples who have
not yet fully attained the state of independence do not
constitute real nations as such within the meaning usua]ly
given that term by the jurists who, in numerous works, have
considered the matter.
88. Peoples which are still subject to foreign domination
have a unique characteristic, which is that, because of that
very circumstance, they have not been able to develop the
spirit which leads to national unity, in many casesbecause
they were not allowed to do so. As a rule the dominating
Power itself has absolutely no interest in the emergence and
consolidation of this spirit. On the contrary it is an
accepted fact as old astime itself that anyone who exercises
colonial or hegemonic domination strives to the utmost ,to
prevent its emergence. The maxim of “divide and rule”
means, in its colonial application, accentuating and even
encouraging local differences for the purpose of maintaining domination.
89. Although we do not like the intentions which inspired
this, obviously with that purpose efforts are made to keep
human conglomerates in a tribal state. But if what is really
desired and sought is to constitute a true nation, one which
will be politically and economically viabte to meet the
requirements of the modern world, other methods would
have to be used. There would have to be a multiplicity of
contacts between the various populations. Education and
persuasion must bear witness to the advantages of every
kind which unity will bring and the desirability of
overcoming very relative and superficial differences, Homogeneity of language would Qve to be achieved. Finally, any
artificial or natural barrier that might exist would have to
be eliminated so as to prepare a territory adequately for
independence.

not easy; in many casesa high price was paid for national
unity; but ultimately common sense prevailed and the
American peoples became wholly integrated, setting aside
sectarian or any other division so as to form States which
were definitely independent. E pfuribus unum, symbolically
enshrined in the seal of the United States of America, is
proof that union can be formed from diversity.
92. The idea of territorial integrity cannot be ignored
either. Raymond Aron said: ‘Every international order so
far as been essentiaIIy a territorial order.” That affirmation
is to be strictly applied to Namibia. Indeed, what would
Namibia represent if it were to be arbitrarily partitioned
into various countries under the pretext that the peoples
which comprise it have Iittle in common or that, as we were
told, they might at present wish to separate?
93. That is why ,in the statement I made on the 13th of
this month /1593rd meerhgJ I emphasised that, at all costs
and at ali times, the territorial unity of Namibia must be
maintained, That is also why in my statement I suggested
the desirability of placing Namibia under the regime of a
Trusteeship administration. Because in a Trusteeship agreement there can be contractual bases and conditions under
United Nations control which will make it possible to lead
Namibia to future independence, while safeguarding its
geographical entity.
94. South Africa’s responsibility in that respect is great
and unavoidable. It must see to it that the Territory is
preserved as it received it under Mandate from the League
of Nations.
95. 1 believe that no one can validly dispute the fact that
the trend in the world today is towards conglomerations,
not only of peoples of the same nation, but even among
independent nations. To support division and separation is
to go against history; and, in so far as Namibia is concerned,
that would be to attempt solutions which would be rejected
by the international community. Particularly after the
weil-known evolution which has taken place in Namibia,
the interpretations which attribute some very special
designs to South Africa in regard to the future of the
Territory would not be excessively captious or groundless.
96. It is for the Government of South Africa more than
anyone else to show that its intentions are pure. For our
part, we consider that the best way for it to do so is to
contribute from the abundant resources available to it to
promoting unity among the Namibians and to making sure
that, in a common brotherhood of destiny and common
wishes,they will be able to inhabit a common Territory as a
free people, If that undertaking is carried out, there can be
no doubt as to what will be the result of the selfdetermination of the people of Namibia.

90. It is quite likely that if the people of Namibia were to
be consulted today regarding their wishes they might
choose to preserve their local entities. But we wonder
whether the same thing would not have occurred had the
French people been consulted before the time of Louis XI,
or the Italian states before Cavour. And yet those peoples,
setting aside circumstantial reasons, preferred unity, and
constituted those two powerful nations which are today
France and Italy.
91. History abounds with similar examples on all continents, including the American continent. American
peoples, whether from the North, the Centre or the South,
were the fust to reject colonial domination. At that time
there was no United Nations to assist us in the process; no
one guided us-only the irresistible desire for independence.
At the beginning we all encountered our difftculties. We alI
had to rise above the same localisms which the representative of South Africa believes he perceives in Namibia. It was

97. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): This has been an important
and interesting debate so far.
98. When the Council began this series of meetings on 27
September, my delegation called attention to the fact that
several resolutions had been adopted by this Council, ail
reaffirming the illegality of South Africa’s continued
presence in Namibia, and pointed out that those resolutions
10

called upon South Africa either to comply with their terms
or to respond in a manner which would enable the United
Nations to fulfil its responsibility.

continue to enrich themselvesby the saleof armsto South
Africa will not recognize their responsibilities to the
oppressedpeoplesof southern Africa, their responsibilities
under the Charter and, Perhaps, their own national con99. The Council, in its resolution 283 (1970), decided to
science and dignity? If those States could only be
go a step further than previousresolutionswhen it called
concerned enough and sincere enough in their quest and
uponall Statesto take specificaction that would ernphasize support for justice and humanity, and would act according
the illegality of South Africa’s position and assertthe
to their conscience and not wait until a mandatory
authority of the United Nations.Of course,in an Orgaaniza- resolutionof the Security Council waspassedto implement
tion of this size and nature, with a membershipof diverse, an armsembargo,much could be done.
and competinginterests,it becameapparent that there were
someStates which were not clearabout the exact nature of
104. During the courseof consultationswithin the memtheir obligations towards the people and Territory of
bcrship of this Council it had been hoped that the draft
Namibia,despite GeneralAssemblyresolution 2 145 (XXI),
resolution before the Council would contain a paragraph
the various Security Council resolutionson the subjectand
calling upon all States to honour the armsembargoin its
the provisionsof Article 25 of the United Nations Charter.
entirety, particularly in view of the confrontation building
up between the United Nations and South Africa. Unfor100. Therefore, to clarify the minds of all concerned on
tunately it has not been possibleto find a formula that
would satisfy all members.
this matter, the Security Councilaskedfor and received a
legal opinion from the International Court of Justice. Of
necessitythat opinion becamethe point of departure of
105. In consideringthe question of Namibia the Council
must not overlook the fact that if General Assembly
this debate on the question of the legalconsequencesfor
States of the continued presenceof South Africa i.n
resolution 2145 (XXI) and the relevant resolutionsof the
Security Council are to be respected, the United Nations
Namibia.
today constitutes the sole legal authority for the welfare
101, It has on various occasions
beenemphasisedin this
and administrationof the people and Territory of Namibia
Council and in other forumsof the United Nations that the
until that people assumesits responsibilities within the
southernAfrican problemsof Namibia,Southern Rhodesia, framework of the United Nations Charter, the Universal
Angola and Mozambique and thoseproblemspresentedby
Declaration of Human Rights and the pertinent resolutions
the application of aparrheid are not the responsibiIity of
of the GeneralAssemblyand the Security Council.
the Afro-Asian Group alonebut the collective responsibility
of all States Membersof the United Nations. That isa fact q I Ob. Having made thosebrief remarks,I have the privilege
which I think should be given due recognition by the
to present the draft resolution contained in document
Council. Every United Nationsresolutionon Namibia so far
S/l0372 of 15 October lY71. It is sponsored by the
hasaffirmed the inalienablerlgbt of the people of Namibia
delegationsof Burundi, Sierra Leone, Somalia and the
to self-determinationand independence.
The main responsi- Syrian Arab Kepublic. The text of the resolution is quite
bility of the United Nations is to help the Namibians to
straightforward and requireslittle elaboration. In its preamachievethosegoals.
bular paragraphsit reaffirms the inalienable right of the
people of Namibia: if recognizesthe fact that the United
102. The United Nations hasa central role to play in
Nations hasdirect responsibility for the Territory; it notes
creating conditions that would make those objectives
the fact that South Africa has refused to comply with
realisable.This debate has madeit abundantly clear what
resolutionsof the Security Council on this question and it
this Council means by sclf-cteterminationand how it
recognizesthe legitimacy of the movement of the people in
conceivesof its exerciseand applicationin the Territory of
Namibiaagainstthe illegaloccupation of their territory.
Namibia. This Council has rejectedin the course of this
107. In its operative paragraphsit speIJsout in detail the
debate the idea of fragmentingthe Territory into tribal
position of this Organization on Namibia: it emphasizesthe
reservesand denying the peopleof Namibia the right to
necessityof preserving the national unity and territorial
unite and to form a singlepolitical unit within the national
integrity of the Territory; it opposesenergetically South
framework. Recognition hasbeengiven to the importance
African moves to destroy that unity through devious
of the arms embargo againstSouth Africa within the
means, including the establishment of Bantustans; it
context of the situation in Namibia.A few days ago, asthe
declaresthat South Africa’s continued presencein Namibia
representativeof India has pointed out, this Council was
is an internationally wrongful act and a breach of internaseized with a complaint by the Government of Zambia
tional obligations.
(S/10352] against violations of its territorial integrity by
South African paramilitary units operating from Namr%ian
108. Paragraph5 takes note of the Advisory Opinion of
territory, South Africa already standscondemned before
the International Court of Justice, in particular the parathe international community for its brutal policy of
graphs declaring that the presence of South Africa in
apartheid, for its refusal to comply with Security Council
Namibiais illegal and that South Africa is under obligation
resolutionson Southern Rhodesiaand, now, for its conto withdraw from the Territory, that
tinued illegal occupation of Namibia.
6‘. . . States Members of the United Nations are under
obligation to recognize the illegality of South Africa’s
presencein Namibia and the invalidity of its acts on

103. Its defianceon all scoresisleadingto a confrontation
between this Organization, on the one hand, and South
Africa, on the other. Why is it that those States that
11

behalf of or concerning Namibia, and to refrain from any
acts and in particular any dealings with the Government
of South Africa implying recognition of the legality of, or
lending support or assistance to, such presence and
administration;”
and that
“
it is incumbent upon States which are not Mem.
bers ‘of the United Nations to give assistance, within the
scope of subparagraph (2) above, in the action wJ&h has
been taken by the United Nations with regard to
Namibia”.
109. Paragraph 7
“Calls ome again upon South Africa to withdraw from
the Territory of Namibia;“.

wide publicity given to. the contents of this particular
paragraph will meet with a measure of success.
114. Paranraph 12 is imnortant in that it relates in
particular to ?he need to provide for the effective protection of Namibian interests at the international level and to
study appropriate measures for the fulfilment of the
responsibility of the United Nations towards Namibia. We
know that all too often matters which directly affect the
interests of Namibia, whether they relate to its mineral
resources, or to its fishing resources, or to its sea limits, and
so forth, are discussed in forms at which they are
represented by South Africa. The interests of South Africa
are not necessarily the interests of the Namibian people. It
is important that the international community should
devise ways and means by which Namibian interests are
fully protected.
115. Paragraph 13

In this respect I should like to make known the fact that
the co-sponsors envisage an additional paragraph which
could well be introduced at the next meeting of the
Security Council, on Tuesday, and which would follow up
the action suggested in operative paragraph 7.

“Requessts that the Ad Hoc SubCommittees on
Namibia review multilaterar treaties in order to ensure
that States do not enter into agreements which recognize
South Africa’s authority over Namibia;“.

110. Paragraph 8

116. Paragraph 14

“Declares that any further refusal of the South African
Government to withdraw from Namibia could create
conditions detrimental to the maintenance of peace and
security in the region;“.

“Calls zqzj)trall States to support and promote the rights
of the people of Namibia and to this end to implement
fully the provisions of this resolution;“.
1J7. J’aragraph IS, which is the last paragraph,

11 1 . Paragraph ;J
“Reaffirms the provisions of resolution 283 (I 970) and

in particular paragraphs I-8 and 1 I c’.
Resolution 283 (1970) sets out in great detai1 a number of
measures which the international community could and
should take to bring pressure to bear upon South Africa to
comply with the resolutions of the Security Council.
*
112. Paragraph 10 tends to elaborate upon those measures, and in doing so takes into account the wording of the
Advisory Opinion of the Jnternational Court of Justice. The
measures are broad in character, and if Member States are
honest and sincere enough with respect to their obligations
under the Charter, their implementation could have some
impact upon the situation.
113. Paragraph 11
‘LDecImx that franchises, rights, titles or contracts
relating to Namibia granted to individuals or companies
by South Africa after the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI) are not subject to protection or
espousal by their States against claims of a future lawful
Government of Namibia;“.

“LRcyrreststhe Secretary-General to report periodically
on the implementation of the provisions of paragrapli IO
above “.

118. Considerable consultations have taken place in the
formulation of this draft resolution. We trust that the
Council will adopt it unanimously.
119. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
Council now has before it the joint draft resolution to
which the representative of Somalia has just referred. We
dlall consider it in due course, together with the additional
paragraph which-he mentioned,
120. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): One of the
difficult tasks of any speaker is to follow a colleague in
presenting a draft resolution, especially when the draft is so
ably presented as in the present case. Here 1 must pay a
tribute to the hard work done by the Ambassador of
Somalia in elaborating the draft.
,121. My contribution will be first to add to the voice of
Africa a voice from Asia. As an Asian representative I am
one of the co-sponsors of this draft resolution which has
just been presented by Ambassador Farah of Somalia. In
fact, my voice is not the only voice from Asia to add its
support. Today we heard a very brilliant, a very moving and
touching statement by the Ambassador of India, At
previous meetings other spokesmen from Asia also added
their voices, This shows that this matter is of great concern
not only to the continent directly concerned, which is the

It is important that the contents of this particular paragraph should be brought to the attention of the international trading community, because we know that it.+
members rely to a great extent upon their Governments to
protect their financial interests abroad. It is hoped that
12

continent of Africa, but also to Asia and, to judge by other
statements which we heard today and at previous meetings,
to the continents of Europe and Latin America. This is so
because, to repeat what I said yesterday/1594th meetingj,
the cause of human rights is not an individual, a separate
cause that can be divorced from the whole cause of
humanity. It is a cause to which all of us are committed;
and we are committed with all our humanity, with all our
being, because the future of humanity is one.
122. However, in presenting the draft resolution today we
have come back after long discussions, necessary sometimes
and very useful at other times, to the starting-point from
which these meetings began, namely, the letter submitted
by the African Heads of State, urging
“the immediate summoning of a special session of the
Security Council to discuss ways and means of enforcing
the past decisions of the United Nations in the light of
the legal obligation imposed on the world community by
the decision of the International Court of Justice”
/S/10326/.
So in presenting the draft resolution today we have really
responded to this call for a discussion of the practical ways
and means of enforcing, putting into effect and implementing the Security Council resolutions concerning Namibia.
123. I should like to say that this draft resolution,
thorough as it is, does not represent all the elements, all the
factors and all the practical steps that we would have liked
to include in it. But in a spirit of compromise and with the
collective will that the Council should take a unanimous
decision, we have agreed to have this draft presented.

126. The demand that South Africa sl~oulcl remain
accountable to the international community is certainly a
step forward in dealing with this problem, because the
principle of collective security is involved in this matter.
And why is that so? Because if we look around the world
we cannot deny the fact that the problem of Namibia and
the problem of apartheid have been declared, in resolutions
adopted at the twenty-fifth
session of the General Assembly, the commemorative session,to be among the
hotbedsof international insecurity and trouble.
127. AmbassadorFanh hasreferred, and I alsowish to do
so, to paragraph7, which reads:
“CWS o~rceuguin upon South Africa to withdraw from
the Territory of Namibia;“.
That is in implementation of all the previous relevant
resolutions adopted by the Security Council and the
General Assembly. But the matter doesnot remain in the
context of wishful thinking, because if we go on to
paragraph14 we read:
“Calls upon all States to support and promote the rights
of the people of Namibia and to this end to implement
fully the provisionsof this resolution;“.
128. 1 realize that selecting a few operative paragraphs
does not do justice to the whole draft resolution. I was
precededby my colleague,AmbassadorFarah of Somalia,
and I think I shail merely conclude by joining him in
expressingthe hope that the draft resolution will meet with
the unanimousapproval of the Security Council.
139. Mr, ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (inferprrtatio~~
fiunl Spanish); First and foremost, I shouldlike to express
my most profound gratitude to the delegationsof Burundi,
Sierra Leone, Somaliaand the Syrian Arab Republic which
have just submitted the draft resolution contained in
document S/10372. Those four delegations,to be strictly
fair, were the most active in the AdHoc Sub-Committeeon
Namibiain promoting and submitting different alternatives
which could be considered so as to be submitted to the
Security Council. It was in large measurebecausethose
delegationswere so active that the report of the Ad Hoc
Sub-Committeeon Namibia wassubmitted in the form we
know. Already during the specific study OFthe question
AmbassadorFat-ahof Somalia,aswe all know, was-among
the 15 membersof the Council-probably the most active
in trying to reconcile views in connexion with the document which has now taken concrete form in this draft
resolution.

124. Nevertheless, there are certain factors which my
delegation feels we should emphasize in our presentation of
the draft. In particular I wish to refer to operative
paragraph 3, which reads:
“Cortdemns all moves by the Government of South
Africa designed to destroy that unity and territorial
integrity such as through the establishment of Bantustans;“.
I need not dwell at length on the importance of that
paragraph, because it is a bone of contention. To us the
territorial integrity and unity of Namibia is a matter of
paramount importance and therefore we condemn all
moves towards destroying the unity of the people and the
territorial integrity of the country.
125. I do not want to go into all the paragraphs to which
my colleague Ambassador Farah has referred. But with
your indulgence, Mr, President, and that of the Council, I
should like to mention paragraph 4 which reads:

130. Hence mv delegation wouId like to be the first to
congratulate Ambassador Farah and AmbassadorTomeh
who have just respectively introduced and supported the
draft resolution as well as the representativesof Burundi
and SierraLeone, who contributed somuch to the text.

“Dee/ares that South Africa’s continued illegal presence
in Namibia constitutes an internationally wrongful act
and a breach of international obligations and that South
Africa remains accountable to the international community for any violations of its international obligations
or rights of the people of the Territory of Namibia;“.

131. I have only the English text of the draft, but
nevertheless,since prior consultationswere quite intensive,
I wish to makea few brief and perhapspreliminary remarks
with regard to the draft. Firstly, I shall refer to the first
13

paragraph of the preamble.This is perhaps ;1 minor remark
rCg:trd to its form. It reads:

with

“‘Rerzdhing the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to freedom and independencerecognized in
GeneralAssemblyresolution 1.514(XV) of 14 December
1960,“. ’
132. Resolution 1514 (XV) on the endingof colonialism
is ~~11 known. It doesnot refer to a specificcasebut to all
existingcolonial situations.Therefore I would suggest that,
sincethat resolution isnot directed specificallyto Namibia,
we add in the draft resolution the word “as” between
“independence” and “recognized”: “indcpcndence as
recognized”. We would thereby, in my opinion, refer to
Namibiawithin the generalcontext of the resolutionon the
endingof colonialism.

Glut the Enghsh-spcakingrcprescntativeswill perhapsfind a
better term to crnphasizc the sjgnifkance of ,thc resolution
without usingthe word “stressing”.
137. 1 believe that the statementsof fact in no way affect
the substanceof a resolution and that in the preambleof
this draft resolution we should somehowmention Ihe fact
that we have heard the statementof the ForeignMinister of
South Africa. This is a factual statement which in no way
ahers either the contents or the purpose of the draft
resolution and, in my opinion, would make it more
complete because it meansthat we have listened to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa and, having
listened to him, we still take the measureswhich are
detailedhere.
138. I now proceed to two points in the operative part.
The first is a question not of form but of substance.In the
initial drafts which we have been studying these last few
days we have seen that during consultationswhich were
held it was thought to include after operative paragraph7 a
paragraphwhereby South Africa would be invited immediately to enter into discussionswith the Secretary-General,
or with an appropriate United Nations organ,with a view to
estabIishinga new international rrlgime and to make sure
that the people of the Territory would be able to exercise
its right to self-determination, as defined in General
Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV), and in particular the
prescriptionin regard to the principle of equality of rights
and the self-determination of peoples.

133. Then, the fourth paragraphof the preamble recalls
resolution 284 (1970) of the Security Council, which
requestedthe International Court of Justicefor an advisory
opinion. In my statementtwo daysage/1593rd meefirgj I
saidthat, at any rate sofar asthe delegationof Argentina is
concerned,it seemedto me that we had contracted a debt
of gratitude towards the Court, not only becauseof the
sound work it submitted, but alsobecauseof the alacrity
with which it did so. I said that that gratitude should be
expressedboth to those jurists who subscribed to the
advisory opinion and to thosewho dissented.I repeatwhat
I saidthen, that is, I think the Council shouldintroduce a
paragraphin its draft resolution taking note with apprccia139. My dclcgation was not in complete agreementwith
tion of the Advisory 0pinion. Tllis could be done by
introducing a new fifth paragraphof tlrc prcambloor else that wording, which appearedin the initial drafts, because
making an addition to opcrativc paragraph5 as foll~~ws:
WCthought it necessaryto define more specifically what
“Tukrs note \vith appwhliun
of the advisory
was meantby the term “international re’gime”.An internaopinion. . . .”
tional rdgimc may be one which is voluntariIy established
between two or more States. When two or three States
134. I think the first duty of a diplomatis to observethe
participate then it becomesan international rCgime,but
formalities and that in this chamber what we have to
that international rc’gimemight not necessarilybe satisfacexpressis our appreciation to the judgesat The Hague for
tory to the United Nations. At any rate, my delegation
their work, whatever views States here represented may
would have been mtich more satisfied if the international
*
haveon its content.
rdgime had been under the United Nations and, to be
consistentwith my own statement,I would have wishedthe
135. The sixth paragraphof the preamblebegins“Takirrg
international regime to be establishedunder the United
note of its resolution . . .” I wonder whether it is approNationsand in accordancewith ChapterXII of the Charter.
priate for the Security Council to take note of a resolution
In any event, we believe that this invitation to South Africa
of its own? I think it should read “Recalhg its resolushouldappeartin the operative part. I3ecausethe Security
tion . . .“, not “‘Taking note of its resolution . . .” If we
Councilwithout in any way abandoningits objective which,
I repeat, is to lead Namibia to independence,as with so
adopted this resolution, naturally we took note of it. In
that case,so asnot to alter the meaningof the paragraph, many colonial and Trust Territories, may perhapsfor the
last time leave the door open for negotiations. If South
what shouldbe done is to emphasizethe significanceof the
Africa lets slip this opportunity which is now offered to it,
resolution.It would therefore readasfollows:
it wiII then assumethe burden of responsibility before the
entire international community. But if South Aftica, after
“Recallirrgits resolution282 (1970) of 23 July 1970 on
its experience of the last 25 years in the United Nations,
the arms embargo against the Government of South
changesits mind and decidesto enter into negotiations so
Africa and stressirigthe significanceof that resolution
as to lead Namibia to independenceunder a contractual
with regardto the Territory of Namibia,. . ,“I 1
rbgime,it shouldnot be deprived of that opportunity.
136. If you do not wish to usethe word “stressing” in
140. We could adopt resolutions which would create
English you can use any other word. As you know,
headlinesin the newspapersand representgreat dialectical
Mr. President,my own languageis Spanishnot English, asis
yours, and we are the only oneswho useit in the Council.
successes,
but which would in fact continue to maintain
Namibia under colonial dependence,under foreign depen..
11Quotedin 1:nglishby the speaker.
dcnce. What I think we all wish-at least it is what my
I4

delegation wishes-is that Namibia should accede to independence; that it should do so by the quickest and most
efficient means, and that it should obtain the international
control of the United Nations. If we offer this invitation to
South Africa the Securitv Council loses no authority. On
the contrary, it stands to gain authority. If we believe ihat a
resolution, however radical, means a triumph, then J
wonder where we arc going if the road leads to a resolution
which it will be impossible to implement. How is it possible
to force South Africa to grant independence td Namibia?
Are States prepared to form amlies, to provide battleships,
to carry out military expeditions to compel South Africa to
do this?
141. Is the time ripe to form such an expedition? Is not
this a verbal escalation which in any case will have no
consequence for the people of Namibia? And I insist once
more that what really matters here is the fate of the
Namibian people. That is why I think that the paragraph
which “invites” South Africa and which appeared in one of
the initial drafts should be inserted.
142. Therefore, paragraph 8 could remain as now worded
as follows:
“Declares that any further refusal of the South African
Government to enter into these negotiati\lns or to
withdraw from Namibia could create conditions . .”
and so on. That is to say that, having firmly stressed the
point of view of the Council, we would for the last time
leave open that course for negotiation and understanding. If
the South African Government does not wish to heed that
invitation, then the Security Council would have all the
facts before it to formulate a conclusion as to what it wants
and how it wants to get it. We consider this paragraph to bc
fundamental and, for the reasons l have stated, it should
appear in the draft resolution.
143. Lastly, in order not to dwell on the subject at greater
length, I should like to make a remark with regard to
paragraph 13, which reads as follows:
“Requests that the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Namibia
review multilateral treaties in order to ensure that States
do not enter into agreements which recognize South
Africa’s authority over Namibia;“.
I believe that the Ad Has: Sub.Comrnittee will not have an
opportunity to review the treaties in order to ensure that
States do not enter into agreements which recognize the
authority of South Africa over Namibia. States may enter
into agreements and these become known to the SubCommittee only after they have been concluded. That
being so, the most the Sub-Committee can do is to report
to the Security Council that such States have entered into
agreements in contravention of the provisions of this
paragraph. Therefore I think the paragraph should be
worded in such a way that the terms’of reference of the Ad
Not Sub-Committee would be to review those treaties
which have been signed in violation of the resolution and
report thereon to the Security Council-or something along
those lines. It goes without saying that States which intend
to contravene the resolution will not previously consult the

Sub-Committee on Namibia, and therefore the Ad HOC
Sub-Committee will not be in a position to ascertain
whether or not the agreements in question are contrary to
what is laid down in the resolution. This is simply a matter
of drafting which can easily be settled by changing a few
words.
144. In concluding my statement in regard to the draft
resolution, I come back to my point of departure. I
congratulate the delegations of Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Somalia and the Syrian Arab Republic for having prepared
this document. In general, my delegation considers that it
represents a very positive contribution and that it can win
unanimous support in the Security Council, as we hope it
will.
145. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): As
President l should like to join in the congratulations
addressed by the representative of Argentina to the
representatives of Burundi, Sierra Leone and Somalia and
the Syrian Arab Republic. The text they have submitted to
us bears witness to the efforts they have made during the
past few days in order to present this important document.
146. Mr. FARAJ-J (Somalia): I should like to thank the
representative of Argentina for his generous remarks addressed to rn!’ delegation and to the delegations of Burundi,
Sierra Leone and the Syrian Arab Republic. We know that
for a time the representative of Argentina was himself
Acting Chairman of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on
Namibia in the absence of the Chairman, and we certainly
benefited by his guidance.
147. The representative of Argentina has proposed several
constructive amendments to the draft resolution. Those he
suggested in connexion with the paragraphs of the preambIc
would raise no objection on the part of the co-sponsors of
the draft resolution. His proposal relating to paragraph 7
requires some further consideration. He will no doubt have
noted from my statement that it was the intention of the
co-sponsors to give further thought to this particular
paragraph in order to see whether we could arrive at a
formula which would perhaps keep the door open for some
progress in solving this question. However, it would be of
help to the co-sponsors to know whether any delegation
other than that of Argentina and those of the co-sponsors,
has any comments to make on the substance of the
amendments proposed by the representative of Argentina.
For instance, we should like to know whether there is any
objection to his proposed amendment to paragraph 5:
“Takes note with appreciarion” and so on, I wonder
whether any delegation would disagree with such a formula.
I do not see any indication of objection, and that helps.
148. However, concerning paragraph 7, it would help the
co-sponsors to have the proposed formula, which could
serve perhaps as a starting-point for consideration,
149. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): During the
course of this debate the representative of Argentina has
twice paid a compliment to my delegation. There is an Arab
tradition that we cannot leave a good deed unrewarded.
Unfortunately, so far in the debate no occasion has arisen
in which I could reciprocate the sentiment with which he

15

made his very kind and courteous remarks, but I wish to
assure him that we are very grateful for those remarks and
for his constructive approach to the draft resolution which
we have presented today,
150. If I may resort to another aspect of Arabic culture, J
would say that we have in Arabic jurisprudence a basic rule
which says that if the faithful exerts his mind and makes an
error, he deserves one reward, but if he reaches the truth,
he deserves two rewards.
151. Perhaps we have deserved only one reward. But with
the suggestions and the constructive approach made by the
representative of Argentina-which,
I am sure, when we
study them very carefully, will contribute to the improvement of the draft resolution--perhapswe deservethe two
rewards.
152. 1 would not end, Mr. President,without thanking
for your very kind and courteousremarksin connexion
with our delegation.
YOU

153. Mr. TERENCE (Burundi) (interpretation from
French): It is with a senseof deepsatisfactionand a feeling
of relief that I speak at this juncture, following the
statementwhich we havejust heardfrom the representative
of Argentina, Ambassadorde Rozas.
154. J had the honour to be the Chairmanof the ,4d Hoc
$ub-Committeeon Namibia,and 1haveall the more reason
now to believe that the responsibilitiesassignedto the
representative of Argentina as Vice-Chairman of that
Sub-Committeeare fully warrantedandjustified; for he is a
manwho representsa country that hasshownits solidarity
with the,African countries.
15.5. We welcome the fact that the representative of
Argentina hasmadevariousconstructive proposalswhich I
am sure will assistus in advancingour work, taking into
account the principle that we have defended here many
times that though the territory of Namibia,is a territory
that the Africans are the ffrst to be interested in, we did
stressin the past that this questionwas the collective
responsibility of the United Nations and that in this
particular connexion all the membersof the Security
Council shouldsharein this responsibilityon an equal basis.
156. Guided and moved by theseprinciples,I would wish
to proposethat it might be possiblefor Ambassadorde
Rozas to join us,perhaps,before the vote and assistus to
present a text basedcertainly upon the suggestionthat he
has made about paragraph7, a suggestionwe have already
noted, and which meets with the full support of my
deIegation.
157. This proposal deservesthe support of all the members of the Council. The Council will have undoubtedly
noted the importanceattachedby the Africans to coaperation even with a colonial Power, if the colonial Power
recognisesits errors and acceptsas irrevocablethe trend to
decolonization. We have had occasion to refer to this
matter in the past, in the GeneralAssembly,and to repeat
it here this afternoon; and we believethat the question of
Namibiafor us Africans is linked to this over.all processof
16

co-operation and also is a preliminary condition for the
security of the area in question. It is not ohly the interests
of the Africans which are at stake; it is the question of
interdependenceand cooperation which we want to stamp
on all our relations and all our policies towards other
continents and, of course, towards all the membersof the
Security Council and all the Members of the United
Nations.
158. Mr. TAYLORXAMARA
(Sierra Leone): I would be
remissin my duty if I did not addressa few words of
thanks, particuIa& to the representativeof Argentina who
has voiced his appreciation of the humble efforts which
Burundi, Sierra Leone, Somalia and the Syrian Arab
Republic have put forth in trying to produce this draft
resolution. I say this in all sincerity; but there have been
other representativeswho have contributed no mean share
towardsproducing the draft resolution. Wefailed, but it is a
duty incumbent upon us to servein this particular manner.
As we do not monopolize all the intelligence and knowledge, we appreciate all that the representativeof Argentina, by way of suggestions,has passedon to us. We know
that since his suggestionsare very sincere and genuine,
when we leave here, we shall meet againand see to what
extent we can possibly incorporate those ideasin the draft
resolution.
159. So far as paragraph 7 is concerned, that has been
madeabundantly clear by the representativeof Somalia.
But ast’imegoeson with the discussion,an amendmentwill
be made which we hope will fit in and meet with the
amicableconsensusof all representatives.
160. I thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to say
thesefew words. I am very grateful to the representativeof
Argentina who has so sincerely and honestly advanced all
thesesuggestions.
IGi . Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics) (inrerpretation from Russian): The Soviet delegation
has listened with great attention to the statement of the
Ambassadorof Argentina, and would like to say that he has
madea substantial contribution to the work of the Ad Hoc
Sub-Committeeon Namibia, a contribution which we duly
appreciate.We have only just receivedthe draft resolution
on the question-under discussionsubmittedby the delegations of four membersof the Security Council. We would
be prepared to study it and to vote on it at the next
meetingof the Security Council, but I now understandthat
certain additions and amendmentsto this draft resolution
are being introduced. We must point out that the Ambassador of Argentina was not the only one in a difficult
position, when he made these amendmentswithout the
Spanishtext. When he spokewe had no Russiantext. Thus
he spoke in Spanish, making amendmentsto the English
text, and we had no Russiantext. This madeit particularly
difficult to grasp all the nuancesof his comments and
proposals,particularly with regard to paragraph7 of the
draft resolution. As far as I could understand-what he had
in mind-and I beg your indulgencein advanceif I have
misunderstood in any way-we have before us a very
important proposalto which we shalldoubtlessgive our full
attention when you, Mr. President, direct that the text of
this formal arnendment be distributed in the proper

manner. It is, of COIJ~SC,
only then that WC shall be able to
determine our position with regard to this proposal.
162, Mr, K()SCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (itderpreruriun
I just wish to say that I shall make known
my opinion of this important document when I have been
able to examine the text in French; the same applies to the
amendments submitted by our colleague from Argentina.

from fienc/l):

163. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): I have asked for the floor on a point of
clarification, in regard to what the representative of the
Soviet Union has just said, I have not submjtted amendments, I have made suggestions, as the representative of
Sierra Leone has just recognized correctly. I have not
submitted amendments for the simple reason that, in the
spirit of coapcration which has characterized the four
co-sponsors, I feel sure that they will be receptive to
considering not only my suggestions but also any other
suggestions that may be made here. J think that it is in this
way that we should also consider the thoughts expressed
and the request made by Mr. Farah of Somalia, so that
other members of the Council can pronounce themselves.
Thus, 1 want to make it clear that these are not amendments but suggestions, and I shall be very happy in private
consultations to give the co-sponsors of this important draft
resolution any further clarification.
164. NOW, lastly, if I may abuse your patience and
kindness, Mr. President, I should like to thank the reprcsentatives of those four friendly delegations for their very
generous words in regard to the delegation of Argentina.
Our cnaperation is not surprising because our interests, as
the representative of Burundi has said, although they are in
Latin America, are wholly in accord with those of the
African delegations. That is to say, what we wish above all
is to lead the people of Namibia to independence, and to
that effort we commit ourselves and in that effort we shall
give our complete co-operation to the four deIegations.
165. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, I take the floor,
first of all, to associate myself with the expressions of
sincere appreciation which the representative of Argentina
and you yourself have conveyed to the four co-sponsors of
the draft resolution. Since Italy has one of the two
vicechairmanships
of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on
Namibia, I can bear witness to the fact that all that has
been said by Mr. Ortiz de Rozas is perfectly correct. Suffice
it to say that the appreciation that has been expressed by
you, Sir, and others is highly deserved by the Ambassadors
of Burundi, Sierra Leone, Somalia and the Syrian Arab
Republic. Having said that, I should like to add that I am
confident that the two rewards to which Mr. Tomeh has
referred will be granted, because the truth wti be reachedand, rather than the moment of truth, I hope it will be the
truth itself, Having heard also the statements made by the
co-sponsors, especially by the representative of Burundi, I
hope that the hand that has been so generously outstretched by the African countries to South Africa will not
be scorned,
166. Now I come to amendments proposed by the
representative of Argentjna. I think that some of the
amendments do not change substantially the draft resolu-

tion as jt now stands. So far as my delegation is concerned,
I would
say that with regard to the first and sixth
preambular paragraphs we are ready to accept those
amendments.
4
167. Where operative paragraph S is concerned, beginning
“Tukes note of the Advisory Opinion of the International.
Court of Justice, in particular the following conclusions . . .“, as I understand it, Mr. Ortiz de Rozas has
proposed either to keep this paragraph in the operative
part, inserting the words “‘with appreciation”, or to transfer
this paragraph to the preamble. So far as my delegation is
concerned, we should prefer to have the paragraph inserted
in the preamble, but we do not feel strongly about it.
However, having heard the reservations made here on the
Advisory Opinion by some delegations, including my own, I
think that if we insert the words “wirh appreciarion” we
should also insert after the words “International Court of
Justice” the words “concerning the specific question of
Namibia”. It should be quite clear that it is restricted to
that part of the Advisory Opinion, so that we do not raise
difficulties for any delegation.
168. With regard to paragraph 7, we heard the suggestion
made by the representative of Argentina, and we have been
gratified by the response that has been received by the
co-sponsors. We too arc ready to co-operate in that last
effort which will make it possible for the Council to come
to a unanimous decision in favour of the final text. I would
add only one last comment. If, as we are confident, an
addition is made to the present wording of paragraph 7,
paragraph 8 may have to be brought into harmony with
paragraph 7, but 1 think that could be done very quickly
and without any difficulty once we agree on paragraph 7.
169. Mr. ORTlZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (iriterprerariotz
frotn Spatzish/: I apologize for speaking again, 1 just wish to
make it clear to the rcprcsentativc of Italy that, in regard to
paragraph 5 : “Tulles not? of the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice”, I suggested two possibilities: either to introduce a preambular paragraph which
would take note with appreciation of the Advisory Opinion
or, if there were no desire to introduce the paragraph in the
preamble, to insert this in paragraph 5. I think it should be
ti the operative and not in the preambular part; the second
possibility would be to say in paragraph 5 “Takes note with
appreciation”. For my part, I have no objection to the
clarification requestedby the representativeof Italy.
170, As for paragraph 8, I myself said that it should be
adjustedalongthe following lines. If the paragraphwhich I
suggestedis introduced and South Africa is invited to
negotiate, paragraph8 would read: ‘Declares that any
further refusal of the South African Government to enter
into thesenegotiations or to withdraw”, and so on. That
wording would justify the introduction of the new paragraph.
171I Mr. VINCI (Italy): I would point out to Ambassador
Ortiz de Rozas that I did not mean that the whole of
paragraph5 shouId be transferredto the preamble,but only
the preliminary words. I think that we are in full agreement
on that point.

172. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): It has been brought to my
attention that three paragraphs of the preamble were
inadvertently omitted when the draft resolution was being
processed. They relate to the presence of the delegation of
the Organization of African Unity led by the President of
Mauritania, take note of the statement of the President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, and take note of
the report of the Ad Hoc SubCommittee on Namibia.
Therefore, a revised draft12 will be issued on Monday
containing those paragrapha.
12 Subsequently

circulated

II document

173. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next meeting of the Security Council will be held on
Tuesday, 19 October, at 3.30 p.m., to continue our
examination of the situation in Namibia and the joint draft
resolution submitted by the representatives of Burundi,
Sierra Leone, Somalia and the Syrian Arab Republic. At the
next meeting we shall consider the revised draft resolution
together with the amendments and comments that have
been made, and any further suggestions and ideas.
7’he meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

S/10372/Rev,l.

18
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

82150-August

197%2,050
